CHAPTER 1 Introductio
                                                                               CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
This is the first comprehensive update of the Simi Valley General Plan since 1988, and it is the result of many
hours of research, analysis, and the collaborative efforts of the City’s elected and appointed decision-makers,
City staff, individuals, and agencies. It also included ongoing feedback throughout the planning process from
residents and members of the public.
Simi Valley is a distinct place that is geographically separated from the continuous sprawl of the San
Fernando Valley (Los Angeles County) and from other communities of Ventura County by the surrounding
hillsides. Its valley setting and rolling hills are framed by the ridgelines and hillsides that physically separate
the City from neighboring jurisdictions, as shown in Figure 1 (Regional Location). The City’s physical form is
largely defined by the natural hillsides and canyons on the City’s periphery that give shape to the built
environment. The suburban development pattern on the valley floor generally follows the east/west
alignment of the Ronald Reagan (118) Freeway, Los Angeles Avenue, and the Arroyo Simi. Existing
                                                                development is characterized by a diversity of
                                                                stable,     attractive     neighborhoods       with
                                                                commercial services and job centers at various
                                                                locations throughout the City.
                                                                Development of the City over the years has
                                                                resulted in substantial buildout of properties on
                                                                the valley floor with most new residential
                                                                communities in the recent past being built in the
Simi Valley and the 118 Freeway
                                                                hillside and canyon areas surrounding the City. In
spite of the predominant suburban development pattern, several large areas of Simi Valley continue to retain
the semi-rural character reminiscent of the City’s past.
This General Plan continues the expansion of Simi Valley by redirecting new growth inward rather than
continued outward expansion into the surrounding hillsides and natural open space areas. Simi Valley’s
aspirations for future growth and development are grounded in a shared vision to protect the City’s existing
natural environment and to maintain and enhance the character and quality of life in its diverse
communities. The goals and policies of the updated General Plan are intended to guide this transformation
through a comprehensive set of updated goals and policies that began with a review of the previous General
Plan’s goals and policies, which were updated based on technical assessment and evaluation of land use,
traffic, and fiscal data. This General Plan is based on a critical analysis of what types of land uses will be
allowed, where development will occur and in what amounts, and what it will look like in order to achieve
the community’s vision.
Through the many public meetings and workshops during development of the plan, the community
expressed support for an environmentally sustainable approach to planning that balances the need for
adequate infrastructure, housing, and economic vitality, while maintaining and preserving the natural areas
surrounding the City. This vision is addressed in the Plan’s emphasis on reuse and infill development within
the existing footprint of development in the City and focusing growth in areas around transit stations and
along corridors where transit is available or is anticipated to be available in the future. This sustainable
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       1-2                                   GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                              Regional
                                                                                                SANTA CLARITA
                                                 PIRU
                        E
                        å
                        A                                                                   §
                                                                                            ¦
                                                                                            ¨
                                                                                            5                                                                 Location
             FILLMORE                                              Lo
                                                                 Ve
                                                                                    n
                                                                                ou                                                             Legend
                                                                            s C
                                                                        ele      ty
                                                                     ng       un                                                                      City of Simi Valley
                                                                 s A      Co
                                                                       ra                                                                             County Boundary
                                                                   ntu
                                                                                ty
                        M O O R PA R K
                                                                                                                 §
                                                                                                                 ¦
                                                                                                                 ¨5
                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                         ¦
                                                                                                                         ¨210
                                                                    E
                                                                    Ý
                                                                    A
                                                         SIMI
                                                        VALLEY
                                                                                            SAN FERNANDO
                                                                                                VALLEY
CAM ARILLO                               E
                                         í
                                         ?                                              E
                                                                                        ó
                                                                                        ?
                                 THO US AN D O AK S                                                                                         BURBANK
                                                                                £
                                                                                ¤101                                             £
                                                                                                                                 ¤
                                                                                                                                 101
                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                ¨
                                                                                                                405
                                                                                                                         BEVERLY HILLS
                                                                                  E
                                                                                  Ô
                                                                                  ?                     SANTA M O NICA
                                              MALIBU
                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                         ¦ LOS
                                                                                                                         ¨10
                                                                                                                                  ANGELES
                                                                                                                                               Source: ESRI, 2006
                 Pacific Ocean                                                                                                                 Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                               D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Regional Location.mxd
                                                                                                                                                [
                                                                                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                                                                                                          0    1    2           4        6
                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 1


THE PURPOSE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
approach fosters stewardship of the community’s natural resources and results in a General Plan that
respects the growth boundaries and limits established by the City’s Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB).
The updated General Plan is intended to provide a meaningful guide for the future growth and development
of Simi Valley over the next twenty years and fulfills statutory requirements. It is a comprehensive framework
for the City’s physical, economic, and social development that sustains natural environmental resources. It is
also long range—looking ahead to 2030 and beyond—while at the same time presenting policies to guide
day-to-day decisions.
THE PURPOSE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The General Plan is a policy document that establishes a comprehensive and consistent framework for local
land use decision-making. The California Government Code (Sections 65300 et seq.) requires each city and
county in the state to prepare and adopt a comprehensive long-range general plan for its physical
development. The general plan and its maps, diagrams, and development policies form the basis for the city’s
zoning, subdivision, and public works actions. Under California law, no specific plan, area plan, community
plan, zoning, subdivision map, or public works project may be approved unless the city finds that it is
consistent with the adopted general plan. The State General Plan Guidelines recommend that general plans
be updated regularly to ensure that they remain
                                                                            Police Power
relevant and reflective of changes in a
community and its vision for its future. This is                         GENERAL PLAN
important not only to reflect local physical and                           Community Plans
demographic changes, but also broader changes                                Specific Plans
in culture, technology, legislation, and                                        Zoning
development practices.                                                 Redevelopment Plans
Per California Government Code Section 65302,                       Develop-   Conditional               Capital
                                                       Subdivision
the General Plan must address seven topics                Maps        ment        Use      Variances    Improve-
                                                                     Permit     Permits                 ment Plan
referred to as “elements” consisting of land use,
circulation, housing, open space, conservation, The General Plan serves as the “constitution” for all policies and
safety, and noise to the extent that these topics regulations pertaining to Simi Valley’s physical development
are locally relevant. The General Plan may also include other topics of interest or concern to the local
jurisdiction (California Government Code Section 65303). This General Plan includes each of the state-
mandated topics and the optional elements in Simi Valley’s prior General Plan including recreation,
community services, economic development, and air quality. The goals and policies in each chapter of the
General Plan, whether they cover mandated or optional topics, have equal legal validity, and the City’s
obligations for their equal enforcement and implementation are required by statute and case law.
A local jurisdiction may adopt a general plan in the format that best fits its unique circumstances (California
Government Code Section 65300.5). In doing so, the jurisdiction must ensure that the general plan and its
component parts comprise an integrated, internally consistent, and compatible statement of development
policies. In updating the General Plan, the City of Simi Valley consolidated some of the mandatory elements
and re-organized the content by related topics. Important themes, such as community livability,
sustainability, and global warming, are woven throughout the Plan rather than structured as independent
GENERAL PLAN                                            1-5                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                                     CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
topics. Correlation between the Simi Valley General Plan and the required general plan elements is shown in
the following matrix:
             Table 1               General Plan Topics
                                                   Legally Required General Plan Topics/Elements
                                                                                                                                    Optional Elements
                                                  Land Use    Circulation   Housing   Conservation   Open Space
              Simi Valley General Plan Chapters                                                                   Noise   Safety
             Community Development
             Land Use                             
             Economic Development                                                                                                   
             Historic and Cultural Resources                                                                                        
             Housing                                                        
             Mobility and Infrastructure
             Mobility and Circulation                         
             Infrastructure and Utilities                     
             Natural Resources
             Open Space                                                                              
             Biological Resources                                                     
             Visual Resources                                                         
             Water Resources                                                          
             Energy Resources                                                         
             Air Quality                                                              
             Community Services
             Parks and Recreation                                                                                                  
             Community Services                                                                                                     
             Arts and Culture                                                                                                       
             Community Education                                                                                                    
             Libraries                                                                                                              
             Safety and Noise
             Emergency Preparedness                                                                                       
             Police Services                                                                                              
             Geologic and Seismic Hazards                                                                                 
             Fire Services                                                                                                
             Urban and Wildland Fire Hazards                                                                              
             Flood Hazards                                                                                                
             Hazardous Materials                                                                                          
             Noise                                                                                                
             Implementation Program                                                                                          
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          1-6                                                                   GENERAL PLAN

HOW TO USE THE GENERAL PLAN
HOW TO USE THE GENERAL PLAN
The Simi Valley General Plan is intended for use by all members of the community, as indicated below for
various groups, depending on their interests and objectives.
If you are a Simi Valley resident, the General Plan identifies the long-range plans and land uses permitted in
the area around your home, changes that may affect your neighborhood, and the policies the City will use to
evaluate development applications that might affect you and your neighbors.
The Plan includes goals that indicate how the City will attract businesses that provide goods and services to
meet your daily needs, while contributing revenue to help fund police, fire, recreation, street maintenance,
and other services that sustain the quality and livability of your neighborhood. It defines how the City will
attract new jobs and create housing opportunities for you to work near where you live.
The Plan also informs you how the City plans to improve mobility infrastructure; proposes to work with
independent agencies to meet the needs for adequate parks and schools; and continues to provide police,
fire, and other public services; protect valued open spaces and environmental resources; and protect you
from the risks of excessive noise, earthquakes, fires, and other natural hazards. Cumulatively, the Plan
identifies the actions the City will take to ensure that the City as a whole, as well as your neighborhood,
retains its economic value and remains a great place to live.
Finally, the Plan specifies how the City plans to organize land uses, infrastructure, and community amenities
to improve community livability and public health through the development of complete neighborhoods.
These neighborhoods enhance walkability and promote enhanced air quality through reduced roadway
congestion and fewer vehicle trips that result in less air pollution.
If you are a Simi Valley business owner, the Plan outlines the measures the City will take to protect your
investment and support your future success. It addresses the areas of business retention and attraction;
establishes the City’s goals for enhancing the economic vitality of existing business districts; and
accommodates the expansion of local employment opportunities in business parks, industrial areas, and new
mixed-use developments. Expectations for the City’s business districts are established, and policies are
included that ensure business operations will be compatible with other businesses and nearby residential
areas.
If you are interested in developing land within the City or moving your business to the City, the Plan will
introduce you to the community through the City’s Vision, as well as the goals and policies in each chapter
that identify the community’s key objectives. To familiarize yourself with the General Plan, the Land Use and
Economic Development goals and policies are useful starting points. However, it is important to review maps
and policies throughout this document and the Simi Valley Municipal Code to get a complete perspective on
how and where development may take place.
The General Plan is also a tool to help City staff, and elected and appointed officials such as the City Council
and the Planning Commission, make land use, public service, and capital investment decisions. It establishes
the framework for the City’s zoning and other implementing regulations. It identifies economic development,
mobility and infrastructure improvements, community services, and environmental programs needed to
GENERAL PLAN                                            1-7                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                             CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
sustain the quality of life that residents of Simi Valley have come to expect. Future development decisions
must be consistent with the Plan. Finally, the Plan is intended to help acquaint other public agencies, from
Caltrans to the Simi Valley Unified School District, with the community’s Vision and expectations for its
future, as they contemplate actions in Simi Valley.
While the Plan’s narrative text and maps frame the key proposals, the essence of the Plan lies in its goals,
policies, and implementation measures. As manifestations of the community’s Vision, these statements set
forth the City’s approach to various issues, and are defined as follows:
    ■ Goals describe ideal future conditions for a particular topic, such as traffic congestion or sustainability.
        Goals are general expressions of community values and are broad and typically not quantifiable or
        time-dependent.
    ■ Policies provide guidance to assist the City as it makes
        decisions relating to each goal. They indicate a City’s
        commitment to a particular course of action. Policies tend to
        be action-oriented, and they must be clear and unambiguous
        in order to be useful in judging whether local development
        decisions are consistent with the General Plan. Some policies
        address guidelines or standards against which development
        decisions can be evaluated, such as local noise standards or
        traffic level of service standards.
    ■ Implementation Programs identify the specific steps to be
        taken by the City to implement the policies. They may include
        revisions of current codes and ordinances, updates to capital
        improvement plans and programs, and identification of new
        programs and actions the City will undertake. The programs
        identify the timeframe and the City department responsible
        for carrying them out after the General Plan is adopted.        City staff working at the planning counter
The diagram on the following page serves as a “reader’s guide” to the goals and policies of the General Plan.
A simple numbering system facilitates use of the General Plan and enables the reader to distinguish each
topic’s goals, policies, and implementation programs. Each Plan topic is assigned a letter(s). For example,
Land Use is “LU,” Mobility is “M,” and so on. Goals are assigned a second order number, i.e., the first goal for
Land Use is numbered as “LU-1” and the second is “LU-2.” Policies are assigned a third order number, with
the first policy relating to the first Land Use goal being numbered as “LU-1.1” and the first policy relating to
the second goal numbered as “LU-2.1.” Each goal and policy is given a title that synthesizes its focus. These
titles are bolded so that the reader can easily scan the page in a particular section of the plan to search for
goals or policies regarding a particular topic.
All General Plan policies are followed by a set of numbers in parentheses. These numbers reference
applicable measures that will be undertaken by the City to implement the policy. The implementation
program at the end of each chapter is organized as a table that contains all the measures, processes, or other
activities to be used by the City to implement the policies for each topic included in the chapter.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     1-8                                     GENERAL PLAN

HOW TO USE THE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                        SECTION HEADER
                                                                        The header identifies the chapter (if
                                                                        on an even-numbered page) or topic
                                                                        (if on an odd-numbered page).
                                                                        PHOTOGRAPHS AND DIAGRAMS
                                                                        Graphical illustration of an
                                                                        example of the intent of the
                                                                        goals and policies.
                                                                        GOAL NUMBERING
                                                                        Each goal number starts with the
                                                                        element acronym and is followed by
                                                                        the number of the goal (e.g., M-8 =
                                                                        Mobility Element, eighth goal).
                                                                        GOALS
                                                                        Each goal has one or more policies
                                                                        associated with the goal.
                                                                        GOAL TITLE
                                                                        Each goal contains a leading title in
                                                                        bold for a quick reference to the goal
                                                                        text.
                                                                        POLICIES
                                                                        Each policy is associated with a
                                                                        specific goal.
                                                                        POLICY TITLE
                                                                        Each policy contains a leading title in
                                                                        bold for a quick reference to the
                                                                        policy text.
                                                                        IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM TAG
                                                                        Each policy is followed by a set of
     POLICY NUMBERING                   PAGE NUMBER                     numbers in italics/parentheses that
     Continuing from the goal           Shows the chapter and page      identifies the tool or action the City
     numbering, the policy number is    number (e.g., 5-13 = Chapter 5, will use to implement the policy.
     shown as the last number,          page 13).                       These measures are detailed in
     supporting the goal it follows                                     Chapter 5.
     (e.g., Policy M-8.5 = fifth policy
     under the Mobility Element,
     eighth goal.
GENERAL PLAN                                       1-9                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                          CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
THE PLANNING PROCESS AND PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
 How the Updated General Plan Was Prepared
The preparation of the Simi Valley General Plan involved the following key steps.
  1. Existing Conditions. Background data regarding the existing conditions, trends, and projected future
      conditions for the City’s physical, economic, social, and environmental resources were compiled and
      analyzed. This data has been compiled as a Technical Background Report (TBR), and is summarized in
      a Community Profile. The TBR serves two purposes:
         ■ As the basis for articulation of the planning issues to be
             addressed by Plan policy, incorporating all studies required
             by state law
         ■ As the statutory “existing setting” section of the General Plan
             Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
      While documenting existing conditions, “Issue Papers” were
      prepared for key topics of concern to be addressed in the updated
      General Plan. The issue papers included detailed discussion of the
      issues and possible policy approaches to address the issue and the
      implications of each. The issue papers were used to inform the
      preparation goals and policies and as part of the planning process.
      Issue papers were prepared on the following topics:
         ■   Affordable Housing
         ■   Infill Development
         ■   Transportation                                                 Community Profile
         ■   Economic/Fiscal Trends
  2. Vision and Guiding Principles. This step involved establishing a planning framework for the updated
      General Plan. The Vision is defined as the overarching framework for the formulation of updated goals
      and policies and addresses the role, character, and quality of the City’s built and natural environment.
      The Vision was crafted to reflect the collective input of Simi Valley residents, elected and appointed
      officials, and the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) that was appointed by the City Council to
      guide the General Plan update process. The Guiding Principles define a framework of the expected
      outcomes of the updated goals and policies and articulate specific measures to attain Simi Valley’s
      Vision.
  3. Alternative Land Use/Growth Plans. Areas of conservation and transition were first identified as a
      means to maintain and enhance the character and quality of life in the areas that would not be subject
      to change. As Simi Valley is approaching buildout with limited undeveloped land on the valley floor,
      the land use alternatives considered focused on infill development opportunities for reuse and
      improvement of economically obsolete and physically declining commercial and industrial districts,
      opportunities to intensify residential development on corridors with access to transit, and limited new
      development in key areas of vacant land. Importantly, existing single-family neighborhoods and the
      natural open space areas and hillsides surrounding the City were identified for conservation in
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  1-10                                   GENERAL PLAN

THE PLANNING PROCESS AND PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
       consideration of the environmental, economic, fiscal, and community service objectives consistent
       with residents’ vision for long-term growth in Simi Valley.
       Twelve community subareas and districts were identified as areas of transition, and alternative land
       uses were identified for these areas based on technical analysis and GPAC input. An environmental
       scan was conducted to determine if there were critical effects associated with any of the alternatives
       considered. Cumulative effects on the fiscal balance of the City were assessed as well as traffic impact
       analyses for the land uses and development scenarios considered.
   4.  Preferred Land Use Plan. A preferred growth and land use plan was selected in consideration of the
       comparative traffic, fiscal, and environmental impacts, as well as consistency with the vision and
       guiding principles. A key consideration in the selection of the preferred plan was the City’s desire to
       maintain an acceptable level of service on its roadway network.
   5.  Plan Goals and Policies. Existing goals and policies in the General Plan were updated based on their
       consistency with the established community vision, consideration of current issues and community
       needs, understandability, practicality and feasibility, embodiment of best planning practices, and
       consistency with current legislation including climate change, and their reflection of community
       values.
   6.  Draft General Plan. The Draft General Plan was published incorporating an overview of its content and
       the planning context in which it was prepared. The Draft General Plan was available for public review
       and comment at a public workshop and subsequent Planning Commission and City Council study
       sessions and public hearings.
   7.  Draft EIR (DEIR). The DEIR was prepared in accordance with the requirements of the California
       Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). From the date of publication, the DEIR was circulated for a 45-day
       period for public review and comment. Responses to all comments were prepared and incorporated
       into the Final EIR, which was reviewed and certified by the City Council.
   8.  Public Review/Public Hearings. The Planning Commission and City Council conducted a series of study
       sessions and public hearings on the Draft General Plan and EIR. In consideration of the public input,
       the Commission made recommendations to the City Council regarding the Plan’s content and
       certification of the Final EIR. The City Council considered the Commission’s input and conducted
       additional public hearings. Based on these, the City Council made its final recommendations and
       adopted the General Plan and certified the Final EIR.
   9.  Updated General Plan. The adopted Simi Valley General Plan was published and the goals, policies,
       and programs contained therein are now ready to be implemented.
 Public Involvement in Updating the General Plan
The planning process to update the General Plan involved a broad spectrum of community input including
elected and appointed officials, residents, and public agencies during key phases in the development of the
document. The public and stakeholders were involved throughout the planning process from the initial
documentation of the existing conditions and issue identification to selection of the alternative land use
plans, and development of preliminary goals and policies for the updated General Plan. From the outset of
the General Plan update, an outreach and engagement plan was established to continually involve members
of the public and other interested parties in the planning process to obtain valuable community feedback.
GENERAL PLAN                                           1-11                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                          CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
A General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) was appointed by the City Council to assure the continuity of
community involvement in the update process. The GPAC conducted 17 meetings throughout the process to
provide feedback to City staff and the consultants, and was instrumental in the development of the updated
General Plan. The 17-member GPAC was comprised of City Council appointees, a representative of each
                                                              Neighborhood Council, at large residents, and
                                                              representatives of a broad range of public
                                                              agencies and civic and community service
                                                              organizations that have an interest in the
                                                              future of Simi Valley.
                                                              The opportunities for public involvement and
                                                              the methods used for outreach and
                                                              information sharing over the course of the
                                                              preparing the updated General Plan included
                                                              17 publicly noticed GPAC meetings. An
                                                              additional 15 publicly noticed meetings,
                                                              including public workshops, joint Planning
General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC)
                                                              Commission and City Council meetings, study
sessions, and public hearings, were conducted for the purpose of informing and engaging the public in the
preparation of the updated General Plan.
The opportunities for public involvement are summarized below along with their dates of occurrence:
Public Involvement Opportunities: Meetings/Dates on the General Plan Update
   ■ General Plan Advisory Committee appointed (June 2007)
   ■ The GPAC conducted seventeen meetings to establish ongoing direction and feedback for the
      preparation of the updated General Plan. (July 2007–June 2009)
   ■  Community Visioning Workshop for input on the Vision and Guiding Principles (November 2007)
   ■  Joint Planning Commission/Council Meeting to confirm the Vision/Guiding Principles (November 2007)
   ■  Community Workshop to review land use alternatives (May 2008)
   ■  Joint Planning Commission/City Council meeting to review land use alternatives (July 2008)
   ■  Community Workshop to allow public input on a preferred land use plan (July 2009)
   ■  Joint Planning Commission/Council meeting to select a preferred land use plan (September 2009)
   ■  Planning Commission review of the draft goals and policies (November/December 2009)
   ■  Housing Forum to receive input from developers and service providers (December 2009)
   ■  Scoping meeting for the Environmental Impact Report (December 2009)
   ■  City Council/Planning Commission Review of the Draft Housing Element (August 2010)
   ■  Planning Commission public hearing on the Draft General Plan and EIR (March–April 2012)
   ■  City Council public hearing to adopt the General Plan (including Housing Element) and EIR (May–June
      2012)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  1-12                                GENERAL PLAN

HOW THE GENERAL PLAN IS ORGANIZED
Public Outreach and Information Sharing
Methods used to furnish ongoing information on the
General Plan update throughout the planning process
included the following:
   a. General Plan Update Website:
          ■ Described a General Plan, its purpose and
             content, and the legal requirements for
             its preparation.
          ■ Described the planning process used to
             update the General Plan.
          ■ Provided dates and information for
             upcoming meetings and activities in the
             planning process.
          ■ Included a downloadable version of all Residents participating at General Plan Workshop
             documents produced and meeting proceedings since inception of the planning process.
          ■ Allowed direct email contact with City staff for additional information regarding the General Plan
             update process, upon request.
   b. Mailing List. Staff in the Simi Valley Environmental Services Department maintained a mailing list that
       was used to notify interested parties of meetings and document availability via email contact.
       Interested parties were included on this mailing list by contacting City staff via the web page contact
       link or by completing the sign-in sheet available at all General Plan meetings and workshops.
   c. Community Profile. A summary of existing conditions in the community was included on the General
       Plan website.
HOW THE GENERAL PLAN IS ORGANIZED
The General Plan is organized into nine chapters. The first chapter is the Introduction, which presents
information about the Plan’s purpose, legislative requirements, organization, the process for its preparation,
and the public involvement that was involved in its development. The second chapter presents the Vision and
Guiding Principles that reflect the overarching themes that guide all goals, policies, and programs in the
General Plan and the specific measures to attain the Vision. The next six chapters comprise the Plan’s
“elements.” Each presents an overview of its scope and a brief discussion of a specific topic followed by goals
and policies regarding that topic. Each of these six chapters includes an implementation program that
identifies the measures the City will use to implement the goals and policies specified for each topic
addressed in that chapter. The final chapter is a glossary of the technical terms used in the General Plan.
An overview of the Plan’s chapters is presented below.
   1. Introduction. This chapter includes the purpose and legal basis for the General Plan. It describes the
       process for preparing the plan, and it identifies the community vision which is reflected in the broad
       themes, such as livability, sustainability, and climate change, that are woven throughout the
       document.
GENERAL PLAN                                           1-13                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                             CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
  2. Vision and Guiding Principles. This chapter contains the Vision that is the foundation upon which the
      General Plan actions are measured, and the Guiding Principles that define the expected outcomes of
      the goals and policies.
  3. Community Development. This chapter defines goals and policies regarding how existing
      neighborhoods, commercial districts, employment centers, and public spaces are to be maintained and
      enhanced, as well as where and how new development is to occur.
      a. Land Use (LU) defines where lands are to be conserved and where growth will be targeted, and
         specifies the types, densities, and design characteristics of uses to be permitted.
      b. Economic Development (ED) specifies strategies for business retention and attraction and fiscal
         balance.
      c. Historic and Cultural Resources (HR) defines processes for the preservation of the City’s historic and
         cultural buildings and sites as the identification and treatment of potential archeological and
         paleontological resources.
  4. Housing. The Housing (H) Element contains strategies and programs to address the City’s fair share of
      regional housing needs for all income groups and household types in the community as required by
      state law. (Note: Because of the shorter update cycle and special requirements associated with the
      Housing Element, the Draft 2008–2014 Simi Valley Housing Element is bound separately from the Draft
      General Plan. Upon its adoption, Housing Element policies will be incorporated into this General Plan.)
  5. Mobility and Infrastructure. This chapter presents goals and policies for the provision of infrastructure
      and services that support residents and businesses.
      a. Mobility (M) allows for the movement of people and goods, including autos, transit, bicycles, and
         other modes. It addresses key issues such as trip reduction, parking, traffic safety, and
         neighborhood traffic calming.
      b. Infrastructure and Utilities (IU) addresses the provision of public infrastructure, including water,
         sewer, storm drainage, solid waste, electricity, natural gas, and telecommunications.
  6. Natural Resources (NR). This chapter discusses the management and conservation of Simi Valley’s
      open space and natural environment, including biological, mineral, water, energy, visual resources,
      and air quality.
  7. Community Services. The Community Services (CS) chapter addresses a range of public services to
      meet the needs of residents, including parks and recreation facilities and programs, arts and cultural
      services, education, and library services.
  8. Safety and Noise. This chapter prescribes strategies for the protection of the public health and safety
      and the control of excessive noise impacts to residents, businesses, and visitors to the City.
      a. Safety (S) addresses police and fire protection; emergency preparedness for natural and man-made
         disasters such as flooding, geologic and seismic hazards; and hazardous materials.
      b. Noise (N) presents policies to mitigate the potential impacts of excessive noise in the community.
  9. Glossary. This final chapter defines the terminology used in the General Plan.
RELATED DOCUMENTS, PLANS, AND INITIATIVES
The General Plan has been prepared in consideration of research compiled in the Technical Background
Report (TBR), which contains relevant data and analysis regarding existing conditions, trends, and
development issues for the City of Simi Valley. Additionally, the TBR serves as the existing conditions section
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   1-14                                   GENERAL PLAN

RELATED DOCUMENTS, PLANS, AND INITIATIVE S
for the Environmental Impact Report (EIR). Other documents related to the General Plan include local plans,
such as the General Plan EIR and Climate Action Plan (CAP), and several regional plans that were utilized in
the preparation of the General Plan, as follows:
   ■ Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An EIR has been prepared for the General Plan in accordance with
       the substantive and procedural requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The
       EIR is a separate document that describes environmental conditions in the City, assesses the possible
       effects of the General Plan, identifies actions that will be undertaken to reduce these impacts, and
       evaluates the comparative impacts of alternatives to the General Plan. Most of the EIR’s mitigation
       measures have been incorporated as policies into the General Plan and, consequently, the Plan is
       generally considered to be “self-mitigating.” The General Plan EIR is a program level EIR, meaning that
       it examines the general nature of impacts at a citywide scale. The findings of the EIR help determine
       the appropriate level of environmental review that should be performed when subsequent projects
       consistent with the Plan are proposed. Although the EIR will be certified by the City Council, it is not
       adopted as a policy document.
   ■ Climate Action Plan (CAP). A CAP was prepared concurrently with preparation of the General Plan. The
       CAP identifies strategies and emission reduction targets and measures to achieve compliance with
       recent climate change regulations including AB 32 and SB 375. This legislation requires local and
       regional coordination in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions through land use and
       transportation planning initiatives. The strategies in the CAP are supported by policies in the General
       Plan.
   ■ Sphere of Influence (SOI). There are 48.7 square miles of land area within the Simi Valley SOI located
       in pockets around the City’s perimeter and within its boundaries. State planning law states that the
       General Plan must cover the entire area within the City limits and any land outside its boundaries that
       “bears relation to its planning.” This provides cities with an opportunity to indicate their concerns for
       adjacent unincorporated areas that may someday be annexed. The vast majority of the City’s SOI is
       located in the northwest portion of the City in and around the Simi Valley Landfill. Other SOI locations
       include the Bard Reservoir area at the far southwest portion of the City and a number of “county
       islands” within City boundaries, the largest of which is in the vicinity of Sinaloa Lake. All areas within
       the SOI are candidates for annexation, though the timing of any specific annexation application will
       generally occur at the City’s discretion.
   ■ Simi Valley City Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB). The Simi Valley electorate adopted an initiative
       that established an urban growth boundary or CURB, in November 1988, which is effective until
       December 2020. The CURB is the result of a regional initiative, Save Open-Space and Agricultural
       Resources (SOAR), which has been adopted in eight of the ten cities in Ventura County and cannot be
       altered or amended except by a vote of the people. The targeted areas of growth in this General Plan
       are within the Simi Valley CURB.
   ■ Simi Valley Area of Interest (AOI). The Simi Valley Area of Interest extends past the City’s CURB and
       SOI into areas currently under the jurisdiction of the County of Ventura. The purpose of the Area of
       Interest is to allow the City to examine land uses under the jurisdiction of adjacent agencies that may
       have an impact on the City. The Ventura Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) established
       these areas in Ventura County in the late 1960s.
   ■ Guidelines for Orderly Development. The Guidelines for Orderly Development, originally adopted in
       1969, are unique to Ventura County and state that urban development should occur within
       incorporated cities. Urban development is defined as the need for a new community sewer system or
       expansion of an existing sewer system, the creation of residential lots less than two acres in area, or
       the establishment of commercial or industrial uses, not related to agriculture or the production of
GENERAL PLAN                                           1-15                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                            CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
     mineral resources. The result of the implementation of these guidelines has been that the County and
     the City do not compete for urban development, and the County does not allow urban development to
     occur in the City’s SOI unless it is annexed to the City.
  ■ Simi Valley Growth Management Plan. The City adopted a Growth Management Plan to ensure that
     growth does not exceed the population limits in the Ventura County Air Quality Management Plan,
     which is intended to achieve federal mandates to improve air quality. In Simi Valley, the Growth
     Management Plan is specifically designed to reduce air pollution while providing for orderly
     development, protecting the City’s hillside areas, and promoting affordable housing.
  ■ Regional Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP). The RTIP is the transportation improvement
     plan for the Southern California region that includes federal, state, and locally funded transportation
     projects, including the 2006 State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) projects. RTIP projects
     Simi Valley may be funded from federal, state, local, or private sources.
  ■ Global Climate Change. In recent years, the issue of global climate change has received much
     attention from governments around the world. Global climate change refers to the change in the
     average weather of the earth that may be measured by changes in wind patterns, storms,
     precipitation, and temperatures.
     Human activities associated primarily with the use of carbon-based fossil fuels have led to changes in
     the composition of the atmosphere. The combustion of carbon-based fossil fuels creates greenhouse
     gas (GHG) emissions, such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O), which have
     caused the earth’s atmosphere to absorb more heat from the sun. The concentration of GHGs in the
                                            atmosphere has significantly increased as a result of the
                                            combustion of fossil fuels associated with automobile use and
                                            energy production. Scientists have already observed some of the
                                            negative effects of climate change, and expect more changes in the
                                            future. Governments, organizations, and private citizens all over
                                            the world are looking for ways to reduce GHG emissions.
                                            In 2006, the California State Legislature took a proactive role in
                                            addressing the challenges of climate change with the adoption of
                                            the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, Assembly Bill
                                            32 (AB 32). AB 32 focuses on reducing GHG emissions in California.
                                            AB 32 requires the California Air Resources Board (CARB), the state
                                            agency charged with regulating statewide air quality, to adopt rules
                                            and regulations that would achieve GHG emissions equivalent to
     statewide levels in 1990 by 2020. Subsequently, the legislature adopted Senate Bill 375 (SB 375), which
     coordinates land use and transportation planning and allows for the development and adoption of a
     regional sustainable communities strategy designed to achieve regional goals for the reduction of GHG
     emissions.
     With sustainability as a key theme of the Simi Valley General Plan, its goals and policies take steps to
     address the challenging issue of climate change by reducing GHG emissions, improving energy
     efficiency, reducing the urban heat island effect, recycling, and managing the use of water. The
     General Plan will reduce GHG emissions primarily through land use patterns that enhance and support
     the use of public transit, increased opportunities for pedestrians and bicycles, alternatives to single-
     occupant vehicle use, and requirements for “green building” practices and alternative energy systems.
     Policies also address adaptation to climate change, such as increased flood protection strategies.
     Concurrent with the General Plan update, the City prepared a Climate Action Plan (CAP), which further
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    1-16                                 GENERAL PLAN

IMPLEMENTING AND AMENDING THE GENERAL PLAN
       details the strategies and initiatives to achieve GHG reduction targets consistent with state and
       regional requirements and the broader environmental sustainability objectives of this General Plan.
       Since the sources and impacts of GHG emissions and solutions for climate change are complex and
       interrelated among the topics covered in the General Plan, climate change and GHG emissions
       reduction have been addressed through policies and programs in multiple chapters rather than in a
       single section. Appendix A (General Plan Policies Addressing Global Climate Change) includes a table
       that summarizes, by topic area, the policies that address climate change and adaptation to climate
       change.
IMPLEMENTING AND AMENDING THE GENERAL PLAN
After the General Plan is adopted, it will be implemented through a variety of measures, such as ordinances
programs, and activities including ongoing measures, as well as new ones to be developed. These measures
are described in the implementation program at the end of each chapter. Each policy references an
implementation measure that will be undertaken by the City to ensure that action is taken to address the
policy. Because local land use and development regulations are required by law to be consistent with the
General Plan, it is important that they be reviewed by the City as part of the implementation process. As
necessary, the Zoning Map, Development Code, and specific plans must be reviewed and updated to be
                                                                      consistent with the density/intensity
                                                                      established for the land use categories,
                                                                      and the development policies included
                                                                      in the General Plan.
                                                                      The General Plan is designed to be a
                                                                      dynamic document, and it must be
                                                                      periodically updated to respond to
                                                                      changing community needs and
                                                                      concerns.    The     state’s  reporting
                                                                      requirements for General Plans assist in
                                                                      ensuring that the document remains
City Council meeting                                                  relevant. An annual report, which must
                                                                      be submitted to local decision-makers
as well as the state, is required to include the status of the Plan and progress towards its implementation,
specifically its share of meeting the regional housing need and the degree to which the plan complies with
state planning law. Further, planning legislation states that any of the Plan’s mandatory elements may be
amended up to four times a year and any amendment may include more than one change to the Plan.
Requests for amendments may be submitted by individuals or City-initiated to address policy, text, or map
changes, though amendments to the land use map to facilitate a proposed development project are typically
the most common. Any proposed amendment must be reviewed by the local legislative body who must find
that the change is in the public interest, is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare, is
otherwise consistent with the General Plan, and that the appropriate environmental review has been
completed, before acting on any request.
GENERAL PLAN                                          1-17                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                            CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
The measures to be undertaken by the City to implement the General Plan can be grouped into the twelve
categories listed below, which correspond to the topics covered in each chapter as follows:
    ■   General Plan Administration (A)
    ■   Land Use and Community Design (LU)
    ■   Economic Development (ED)
    ■   Historic and Cultural Resources (HR)
    ■   Housing (H)
    ■   Mobility (M)
    ■   Infrastructure and Utilities (IU)
    ■   Natural Resources (NR)
    ■   Parks and Recreation (PR)
    ■   Community Services (CS)
    ■   Community Safety (S)
    ■   Noise (N)
The Implementation Program
includes all measures and
activities the City will undertake
to achieve the goals and policies
in the General Plan. The programs
are presented in a table at the
end of each topic covered. For
each measure the table includes
an         individual      program
description, a reference to the
policy or policies that it
implements, and a timeframe for
its completion.                         Simi Valley City Hall
If the General Plan is to serve its purpose effectively, it must be reviewed, maintained, and implemented in a
systematic and consistent manner. Thus, the measures listed below address how the General Plan is
maintained and how development and other programmatic actions by the City are used to achieve the
General Plan’s goals and policies.
  Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Administration
Implementation Program, presented in Table 2 (Administration Implementation Program), describes the
measures or actions to be taken by the City to ensure that development is consistent with a current and
updated general plan.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        1-18                             GENERAL PLAN

IMPLEMENTING AND AMENDING THE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
Table 2              Administration Implementation Program
                                                                                            2011                           Annual
A-1    Consistency with the General Plan. The City shall ensure that all development
       proposals and projects included in the City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
       are consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan.                           
     Implements
                     All policies
 Which Policy(ies)
A-2    Periodic Review of the General Plan. The City shall periodically review the
       General Plan, including the Housing Element, and process amendments or
       comprehensive updates, as necessary, to reflect changing community conditions.            
     Implements
                     All policies
 Which Policy(ies)
A-3    General Plan Annual Progress Report. The City shall prepare an annual status
       report to the City Council on the implementation of the General Plan for submittal
       to the state Office of Planning and Research (OPR) and the state Department of
       Housing and Community Development (HCD) relative to the progress in
       implementing the Housing Element.                                                         
                     LU-1.3~LU-1.8, LU-2.1~LU-2.5, LU-3.3, LU-4.1, LU-4.10,
     Implements
                     LU-6.1~LU-6.4, LU-8.1, LU-9.1, LU-9.4, LU-10.1, LU-10.4, LU-10.7,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     LU-17.2, LU-17.3, LU-24.2, ED-1.1~ED-1.3, ED-4.4, M-1.5, M-6.1
GENERAL PLAN                                                1-19                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY


CHAPTER 2 Visio
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2: VISION
VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES: A FRAMEWORK
FOR PLANNING
The Vision is the overarching framework used to guide the formulation of updated goals and policies for the
General Plan to address the role, character, and quality of the City’s built and natural environment. The
Vision and Guiding Principles provide the foundation upon which the General Plan goals, policies, and
implementation actions are measured. Crafted from the collective input of Simi Valley residents, elected and
appointed officials, and the General Plan Advisory Committee, the Vision represents the community’s
aspirations for its future, and it is reflected in the goals and policies throughout the General Plan. The Vision
is supported by Guiding Principles that more specifically define the expected outcomes of the updated goals
and policies, and articulate specific measures to attain Simi Valley’s Vision.
  Simi Valley Vision
VISION STATEMENT
       To provide a safe, functional, healthy, and environmentally sustainable
       community while expanding to meet the needs of the future where people
       can live, work, and recreate in peace and tranquility.
Nestled in a scenic valley, the quality of life in Simi Valley is closely linked to its natural setting, which
physically separates the community from adjacent jurisdictions and contributes to its distinct identity.
Maintenance of the attributes of its unique valley location and quality lifestyle are diligently pursued in order
to maintain the character and identity of our community and its key resources, which include:
    ■ Our      hillsides     and      natural
       environmental setting
    ■ Our distinct valley identity
    ■ Our variety of neighborhoods in a
       safe, family-oriented and close-
       knit community
    ■ Our support of a strong local
       economy
    ■ Our investment in high-quality
       public services, infrastructure, and
       an accessible local government
    ■ Our commitment to the City’s
       history and culture
    ■ Our community pride through Sinaloa Lake
       citizen       involvement          and
       volunteerism
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      2-2                                  GENERAL PLAN

VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES: A FRAMEWORK FOR PLANNING
WE BALANCE GROWTH WITH PROTECTION OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES
We value our scenic natural setting with its open spaces, views, wildlife areas, and waterways, and will
conserve and restore this environment as a key determinant of Simi Valley’s unique identity and quality of
life. We will manage growth and protect our hillsides from incompatible man-made encroachments.
WE ARE STEWARDS OF OUR NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND
RESOURCES
We recognize the need to practice sustainable development for our future generations through land use
planning, community and site design, and the provision of community services and infrastructure systems.
We will locate housing, jobs, and services close to one another to reduce automobile traffic, congestion, and
pollution, decrease resource consumption, increase the viability of businesses, and increase social
interaction. The conservation and efficient use of energy and natural resources is a priority.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN REINFORCE OUR
STRONG COMMUNITY IDENTITY
The identity and lifestyle of Simi Valley is vested in the quality of its neighborhoods, community gathering
places, job centers, corridors, public facilities, and open spaces. These are vibrant, safe, well-designed places
that invite social interaction and foster a sense of pride. Our community places are accessible by various
modes of transportation. Importantly, new development is sensitive in its design and respect for existing land
uses and compatible in scale and character with its surroundings.
OUR SAFETY IS A PRIORITY
Simi Valley is rated among the
safest cities in the nation, and
we value this asset. The City’s
safety record contributes to the
desirability of this family-
oriented community as a place
to live, work, and play. We
proactively enforce public safety,
exercise sensitive and safe
community        planning      and
construction techniques, and
provide emergency response
services and facilities (such as
hospitals and fire/police stations) Simi Valley Police Department
that contribute to the overall safety of our community. Feelings of safety and security enhance property
values and residents’ enjoyment of a wide range of community resources.
GENERAL PLAN                                             2-3                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                       CHAPTER 2: VISION
WE MAINTAIN FISCAL STRENGTH AND ECONOMIC VITALITY
Simi Valley will build, support, and maintain a strong and sustainable local economy. We will develop and
strengthen local businesses and services. We will develop infill uses that are sensitive to adjacent land uses.
We will plan for the housing needs of the community and provide affordable workforce housing.
WE PROVIDE QUALITY COMMUNITY SERVICES AND SOUND
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SUPPORT STRONG INTERAGENCY
PARTNERSHIPS
The City’s infrastructure has historically provided a wide range of high-quality public services within the
community. The City’s infrastructure promotes smooth traffic flows, and access to transit as well as available
water and sewer services to accommodate the City’s continued growth and prosperity.
WE SUPPORT THE COMMUNITY’S PHYSICAL, SOCIAL, AND
CULTURAL WELL-BEING
We take pride in our City’s history and culture and promote the continued enjoyment of a healthy lifestyle
for our residents. We value the extensive recreational and open space opportunities available to residents to
promote active lifestyles that include walking, biking, and other leisure activities. We value our rich cultural
heritage and promote creative and performing arts as well as our historic resources. A range of volunteer and
civic opportunities are available to residents who desire social interaction and civic engagement. The City
enjoys high educational attainment and supports the local educational systems in the community.
 Guiding Principles
                                                                       In support of the Vision Statement,
                                                                       Guiding       Principles   provide     a
                                                                       framework for planning and define the
                                                                       expected outcomes of implementation
                                                                       of the goals and policies in the General
                                                                       Plan. They direct how and where
                                                                       growth will be distributed throughout
                                                                       the City within the context of natural
                                                                       resource protection and neighborhood
                                                                       conservation. Importantly, Guiding
                                                                       Principles are non-negotiable criteria
                                                                       that will guide the formulation of an
Arroyo Simi                                                            updated General Plan. The Principles
                                                                       guided development of the Land Use
                                                                       Plan and update of the goals and
                                                                       policies.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   2-4                                    GENERAL PLAN

VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES: A FRAMEWORK FOR PLANNING
  1. Natural and Environmental Resources
       ■ Preserve the natural hillsides setting surrounding the City for their valuable aesthetic and visual
          qualities intrinsic to Simi Valley’s landscape and identity.
       ■ Maintain the City’s hillside preservation standards as a means to protect natural environments
          and open spaces surrounding Simi Valley.
       ■ Enhance the Arroyo Simi as a
          natural resource that serves as a
          scenic recreational resource as
          well as a public safety resource
          for flood protection.
       ■ Improve air quality through
          development patterns that
          reduce the need for automobile
          travel and minimize congestion.
       ■ Achieve sustainable levels of
          energy         and         resource
          consumption through efficient
          land      use,       transportation,
          building design, construction
          techniques, waste management,
          and efficient infrastructure Wood Ranch
          design and operation.
       ■ Strengthen the City’s water recycling program to reduce water consumption and lessen the need
          for imported water.
       ■ Partner with the Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District to promote open space attainment.
  2. Community Identity, Character, and Design
       ■ Provide a diversity of neighborhood environments.
       ■ Focus higher density developments and mixed-use projects in areas adjacent to transit stations,
          along transit corridors and commercial corridors, near job centers, and in strategic opportunity
          areas throughout the City.
       ■ Promote neighborhood design for development that is compatible with the scale and character
          of existing adjacent development.
       ■ Promote livable and well-designed neighborhoods with a mix of uses and services that are
          walkable to support improved health and the needs of families, youth, seniors, and a growing
          population.
       ■ Create vibrant public areas that serve as gathering places, town centers, and villages for the
          community.
       ■ Locate and design buildings, streetscapes, and public spaces that are pedestrian-friendly.
       ■ Promote developments that foster accessibility and connectivity between areas, and safely and
          efficiently accommodate a mixture of cars, transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
       ■ Guide new development with design standards that promote well-designed properties that are
          context sensitive.
GENERAL PLAN                                          2-5                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                    CHAPTER 2: VISION
  3. Land Use and Growth Management
       ■ Utilize infill development and reuse, while maintaining important qualities of community
          character.
       ■ Prioritize the reuse of obsolete or underutilized commercial centers.
       ■ Promote land uses that achieve the City’s regional fair share of housing and strengthen its
          economic and jobs base.
       ■ Utilize sustainable development and land use planning practices that provide for the needs of
          existing residents and businesses while preserving choices for future generations.
       ■ Maintain the City Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB) as a means to maintain the City’s distinct
          identity and to limit inefficient urban development in the natural areas surrounding Simi Valley.
       ■ Prioritize infill development and redevelopment within areas currently developed consistent with
          community character objectives.
  4. Neighborhood Security and Housing Choice
       ■ Foster public safety through good community design and the use of Crime Prevention through
          Environmental Design (CPTED) concepts.
       ■ Maintain the City’s rating as one of the safest cities in the nation by continuing to provide a high
          level of public safety services.
       ■ Minimize the City’s vulnerability to natural and manmade disasters and strengthen the City’s
          emergency response systems.
       ■ Provide a mix of housing to meet the needs of current and future residents, including an
          equitable distribution of affordable housing, throughout the City.
       ■ Encourage a mix of housing types within neighborhoods to promote a diversity of households for
          residents of all ages and income levels.
  5. Economic Vitality and Security
       ■ Maintain a broad range of jobs that are accessible to all residents.
       ■ Attract highly skilled and professional jobs in finance, professional services, and biotech
          industries to match residents’ education and skills.
       ■ Promote strategic reinvestment in underperforming commercial centers as potential for job
          centers and mixed-use neighborhood centers.
       ■ Promote clean industries and businesses that provide job opportunities, enhance the local
          economy, and encourage new businesses to locate adjacent to existing and planned business
          parks and transit corridors.
  6. Public Services, Infrastructure, and Mobility
       ■ Promote a high level of public services to maintain the quality of life that Simi Valley residents
          have come to expect through good traffic circulation systems and other infrastructure including
          water and sewer.
       ■ Reduce the City’s need for imported water through increased water conservation practices and
          recycling.
       ■ Partner with the Simi Valley Unified School District to promote quality education and continued
          high levels of educational attainment in Simi Valley.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  2-6                                  GENERAL PLAN

VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES: A FRAMEWORK FOR PLANNING
       ■ Pursue additional commuter transit service to the west end of the City by Metrolink as a means
          to decrease roadway congestion and enhance regional mobility for residents and visitors to the
          City.
       ■ Provide a range of transportation choices to residents that promote alternatives to automobile
          use including walking, biking, and public transit.
  7. Health, Social, and Cultural Well-Being
       ■ Recognize and preserve areas of Simi Valley that contribute to the City’s history and culture.
       ■ Recognize the need to provide a variety of recreation and leisure activities for the diverse
          population of Simi Valley as a means to support active and healthy lifestyles for residents of all
          ages and income groups.
       ■ Support community health by promoting the availability of organic and whole food choices to
          residents.
       ■ Recognize that trails are an important recreational asset that may be integrated with
          transportation systems to encourage mobility within the City.
       ■ Promote ongoing volunteer opportunities and civic engagement as a means to provide social
          opportunities and enhance community life.
GENERAL PLAN                                         2-7                       CITY OF SIMI VALLEY


CHAPTER 3 Community Developmen
                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Community Development chapter consists of three sections: Land Use and Community Design, Economic
Development, and Historic and Cultural Resources. Goals and policies to direct the physical development and
economic growth anticipated to occur in the City, as well as to preserve and protect its historic and cultural
legacy, are presented in this chapter. Each section is followed by an implementation program that includes
the actions, strategies, and processes that the City will undertake to implement the General Plan in the
review of new development proposals and the performance of day-to-day City operations.
The Land Use section provides a framework to accommodate future development in an efficient and
sustainable manner that is compatible with the established character of the community and the protection of
its surrounding natural environment. Though the City is anticipated to experience continued population
growth, the supply of land available for development has been substantially exhausted with limited
undeveloped land remaining outside of the hillsides surrounding Simi Valley. In accommodating this growth
the Land Use Plan encourages substantial infill development within the existing footprint of the community’s
built environment, and limited new development in the hillsides and canyons surrounding the City. This
growth strategy allows the City to provide diverse housing choices while protecting the established character
                                                            of existing neighborhoods, maximizing existing
                                                            infrastructure, providing efficient service delivery,
                                                            and strengthening existing districts in the community
                                                            while preserving the natural landscape that helps
                                                            define Simi Valley.
                                                            The land use goals and policies direct the ultimate
                                                            pattern of development in Simi Valley at build out
                                                            and apply to the incorporated areas of Simi Valley
Simi Valley's scenic natural landscape                      and its Sphere of Influence (SOI) as depicted in
Figure LU-1 (Planning Area). The Planning Area comprises all properties located within the existing SOI for
Simi Valley, including all properties within the current City limits. Though the lands within the Area of Interest
surrounding the City are not subject to this General Plan, it is the City’s desire to preserve the scenic natural
landscape around the City as reflected in the community’s vision.
The Land Use Plan is based on and reflects the Vision and Guiding Principles presented in the Introduction to
this General Plan, and correlates the goals and policies from each of the topical chapters into a coherent set
of development policies, which serve as a central organizing element for the General Plan as a whole. As the
Land Use Plan serves as the final arbiter on how Simi Valley will evolve over the next 20 years, its policies are
connected to and supported by those in all other General Plan sections. Policies for the conservation of
natural resources and protection of residents from the risks of hazards are reflected in the distribution and
densities of uses. The quantity and location of land uses are linked to the City’s objectives for economic
development, jobs generation, and fiscal balance, as well as its intentions for community design. Land use
capacities are, in turn, correlated with the provision of adequate housing and services to meet the needs of
residents, and transportation, parking, and infrastructure to support residents, employees, and visitors.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-2                                    GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Urban Restriction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Area of Interest
                                                                                                                                          Lost Canyo ns Dr
                                                                                                                                                    Townsh ip Av                              Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                    Avenida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ot  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                                                                                                                    Alamo St
                A       Los         eles Av
                    r roy A n g
                         oS
                            m
                              i                    as
                                                        y St
                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                           Ý
                                                                                                                                           A         Cochra n St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Yosemite Av   Kuehne r Dr
                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Stearn s St
                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo St
                                                                                                               Erringer Rd          Sycamo re Dr
                                                                                                                                                    Sequo ia Av          Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                          First St
                                                           Mader a Rd
                                                                                                                                                             U.P.R. R.
                            d
                       da R                                                                  Los An geles Av
               Re ja
           rra
     Tie
                                                                             Sinaloa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                             Royal Av
                                                                                                                   Fitzgera ld Rd
                                                                    Sinaloa
                                             Rd                      Lake
                                M   a d e ra
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O ls e                                 W oo d
                                         Ra
                                           nc
             Bard                             hP
           Reservoir                                                              Rd
                                                                             on
                                                ar k
                                                                        ny
                                                  w ay          Ca
                                                               Lo
                                                           ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: Ventura County, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Planning-Areas.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0   0.25   0.5     1     1.5   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure LU-1


LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
The land use and community design policies that follow are expressed in two forms: (a) a map that depicts
the geographic distribution of land uses in the City, and (b) text defining the set of action-oriented strategies
that carry out and support these uses consistent with Simi Valley’s intentions for the form and character of
the community and development. The policies are organized in the following sections: (a) Growth and
Change, (b) Citywide Land Use and Urban Design, (c) Citywide Land Use Neighborhoods and Districts, and
(d) Community Subareas and Districts.
Policies in the first two sections apply globally throughout the City, regardless of location or specific land use
category. The Citywide Land Use Neighborhoods and Districts section defines policies specifically related to
each category of permitted land use, as designated on the land use map. The Community Sub-Areas and
Districts section defines policies related to the unique issues or planning objectives for specific geographic
areas of the City, which supplement and build upon the general policies presented in the preceding sections.
Following the Community Development policies are the descriptions of the Land Use Designations, including
definitions, standards, and guidelines for each land use designation shown on the Land Use Map.
As Simi Valley is almost fully built out, the land use policies focus on how population and employment growth
can be managed to preserve the qualities that distinguish the City’s diverse neighborhoods, business districts,
and open spaces. The policies recognize that most of the City will be conserved for its existing type and
densities of land use, and provide direction for their long-term maintenance. At the same time, the policies
also recognize that change will occur in specifically targeted locations that (a) have been previously planned
to accept growth, (b) enable existing commercial centers and business districts to sustain or enhance their
economic vitality and evolve in response to a changing market, and (c) meet legislative mandates as well as
an expressed community desire for more sustainable forms of development that reduce reliance on the
automobile, consume less energy and water, and produce less pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. In
these locations, policies provide for contextual infill that builds upon existing development and is sensitive to
its environmental setting.
  Growth and Change
Commercial                              Residential                              Open Space
Policies in this section provide for strategic growth and change that preserve existing neighborhoods and
target new development to infill areas that are vacant or underutilized, and are scaled to complement
adjoining uses. Changes focus on enhancing the quality of life with a reduced need for automobile trips,
GENERAL PLAN                                             3-5                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                 CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
increased walkability, improved connectivity among neighborhoods and districts, and the completion of
cohesive and well-defined districts.
GOAL LU-1
Growth and Change. Sustainable growth and change, achieved through orderly and well-planned
development, meet the needs of existing and future residents and businesses, ensure the effective
and equitable provision of public services, and efficiently use land and infrastructure.
Policies
LU-1.1       Building Intensity and Population Density.1 Accommodate the densities and intensities of land use
             development in accordance with the designations and standards of the Simi Valley Municipal
             Code. Development shall not exceed 58,438 housing units, 8,764,000 square feet of retail,
             7,642,000 square feet of office uses, 5,743,000 square feet of business park uses, and 12,134,000
             square feet of industrial uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-5, LU-10, LU-18)
LU-1.2       Development Location. Limit development to lands within the Simi Valley City Urban Restriction
             Boundary (CURB), as shown in Figure LU-1, thereby protecting existing agriculture, open space,
             viewsheds, wildlife, and watersheds surrounding the City from development impacts and limiting
             urban sprawl. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-6, LU-10, LU-18)
            Existing development within the CURB                        Existing open space
LU-1.3       Development Priorities. Prioritize future growth as infill and redevelopment of existing developed
             areas re-using and, where appropriate, intensifying development of vacant and underutilized
             properties within the CURB. Allow for growth on the immediate periphery of existing development
             in limited designated areas, where this is guided by standards to assure seamless integration and
             connectivity with adjoining areas and open spaces. The Growth Diagram below illustrates the
             locations in which new development will be permitted. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-6, LU-10, LU-18)
LU-1.4       Growth Management. Manage growth to assure that it does not exceed the limits of Simi Valley’s
             Measure C, adopted in 2004, by the annual allocation of residential building permits, with
             priorities for the development of affordable housing. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-5, LU-18)
LU-1.5       Development and Services Concurrency. Work with applicable public entities and providers to
             assure that adequate public facilities are available at the time of occupancy. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3,
             LU-1, LU-2, LU-13, LU-18, ED-6, ED-8, M-1, NR-2)
1
  These limits represent the maximum development capacity analyzed in the General Plan Environmental Impact Report. Any
development that exceeds these limits may be subject to additional environmental analysis.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         3-6                                     GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
Growth Diagram. This diagram identifies the relative amount of change that is anticipated to occur in the City, through
buildout of the General Plan:
        Open Space. These areas are expected to remain in open space use as natural undeveloped hillsides,
            canyons, or waterways, preserved by either public ownership (Arroyo Simi), the terms of an adopted Specific
            Plan (e.g., Lost Canyons, Runkle Canyon, Wood Ranch), or as privately-owned land held by preservation
            groups (Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District, Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, Ventura County
            Greenbelt).
        Preserve and Enhance. These areas are expected to retain their current form and character, but will
            experience some minor infill and reuse consistent with their current form and character. These areas include
            most existing residential areas of the City.
        Infill. These areas are expected to improve and evolve through infill, reuse, and redevelopment including the
            addition of new land uses (e.g., Los Angeles Avenue Area, Tapo Street Corridor, West End Specific Plan Area).
        Transformation—New Growth. These existing vacant areas are expected to experience change as new
            development occurs over time (e.g., Ronald Reagan Presidential Library-Visitor Serving Area, Covington
            Avenue/Rudolph Drive Area).
LU-1.6      Fair Share Costs of Development. Require new development to contribute its share of the cost of
            providing necessary public services and facilities through equitable fees and exactions. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-14, LU-18, ED-5, ED-7, M-1, M-6)
LU-1.7      Annexation Coordination. Coordinate with the County of Ventura, landowners, and pertinent
            service agencies to assure that development within the SOI complements and does not adversely
            compete with existing land uses in the City of Simi Valley. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-1.8      Consistency of Annexations with General Plan. Ensure that annexations to the City are consistent
            with the overall goals and policies of the General Plan and do not adversely affect the City’s fiscal
            viability, environmental resources, infrastructure, services, or quality of life. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3,
            LU-1, LU-2, LU-13, LU-17, LU-18, ED-6, NR-2)
GENERAL PLAN                                                3-7                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-1.9      Complementary Land Uses. Require that existing and future land uses in proposed annexation
            areas complement adjoining City uses and character. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-17, LU-18)
 Citywide Land Use and Urban Design
Policies in this section articulate a vision for a sustainable city of livable residential neighborhoods and
distinctive and economically successful centers and corridors that incorporate more compact development,
energy- and resource-efficient buildings, and attractive pedestrian-friendly streets, while maintaining the
hillsides and open spaces that frame the City’s development envelope.
GOAL LU-2
Land Use Diversity and Choices for Residents. A mix of land uses is provided that meets the diverse
needs of Simi Valley’s residents, offers a variety of employment opportunities, and allows for the
capture of regional population and employment growth.
Policies
LU-2.1      Housing. Provide opportunities for a full range of housing types, locations, and densities to address
            the community's fair share of regional housing needs and to provide market support to
            economically sustain commercial land uses in Simi Valley. The mix, density, size, and location of
            housing shall be determined based on the projected needs specified in the Housing Element, as
            amended periodically. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-5, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-2.2      Retail Services. Provide for, and encourage, the development of a broad range of uses in Simi
            Valley’s commercial centers and corridors that reduce the need to travel to adjoining communities,
            and which subsequently capture a greater share of local spending. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3,
            LU-4, LU-16, LU-18, ED-8)
LU-2.3      Employment Opportunities. Provide for a broad spectrum of land uses that offer job opportunities
            for Simi Valley’s residents, including commercial, office, industrial, and business parks. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-15, LU-18, ED-8)
LU-2.4      Visitor-Serving Uses. Provide
            for visitor-serving commercial
            uses that respect and benefit
            from the presence of Simi
            Valley’s natural setting and
            cultural resources, including
            the        Ronald        Reagan
            Presidential     Library    and
            Strathearn Historical Park.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3,
            LU-4, LU-18, ED-8)
LU-2.5      Community Services. Provide
            a diversity of uses and services Simi Valley Library
            supporting Simi Valley’s residents such as facilities for civic governance and administration, public
            safety (police), seniors and youth, community gatherings, and comparable activities. Work with
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      3-8                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
          external agencies to encourage the provision of services and facilities not under the City’s
          jurisdiction, such as public schools, parks and recreation, fire protection, and quasi-public
          infrastructure. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-4, LU-13, LU-18)
GOAL LU-3
City Structure and Form. Land uses are located, designed, and scaled to respect Simi Valley’s
natural setting; maintain distinct and interconnected places for residents to live, shop, work, and
play; and reduce automobile dependence.
Policies
LU-3.1    Primary Contributor to Urban Form. Locate and design development to respect Simi Valley’s
          environmental setting, concentrating development on the valley floor and configuring
          development to respect hillside slopes, topographic contours, and drainage corridors, when
          located in hillside areas. Figure LU-2 (Environmental Setting) depicts the key environmental
          elements that shape the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-5, LU-7, LU-8, LU-11, LU-17,
          LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-3.2    Citywide Development Pattern. Provide for an overall pattern of land uses that promotes efficient
          development; minimizes the impact of traffic congestion; reduces transportation distances, energy
          consumption, air pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions; ensures compatibility between uses;
          protects the natural hillsides, major watercourses, and trees; enhances community livability and
          public health; and sustains economic vitality. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-5, LU-6,
          LU-7, LU-8, LU-9, LU-10, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-3.3    Connected Open Space Network. Maintain and, where incomplete, develop a Citywide network of
          open spaces that is connected to and provides access for all neighborhoods and districts
          incorporating greenbelts, drainage corridors, parklands, bicycle and pedestrian paths, equestrian
          trails, and natural open spaces and coordinate with other agencies, such as Rancho Simi
          Recreation and Park District and Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1,
          LU-4, LU-8, LU-10, LU-13, LU-18, M-13, NR-1)
LU-3.4    Organization of Places. Maintain a development pattern of distinct residential neighborhoods
          oriented around parks, schools, and community meeting facilities that are connected with
          neighborhood-serving businesses. Provide business park/employment uses in centers and along
          the freeway corridor to minimize traffic congestion. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-3.5    Development Scale. Encourage development on the valley floor to retain its low suburban profile.
          Limit structures taller than two stories to major commercial or industrial areas, mixed-use
          developments, or very high-density residential uses so as not to adversely impact the primary or
          daily activities of nearby residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-3.6    Building Scale and Design. Encourage the development of buildings whose scale and ground floor
          elevations and exterior spaces are designed to relate to and encourage pedestrian activity.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-9, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-3.7    Building Relationship to Public Places. Require buildings in principal commercial and mixed-use
          districts to be oriented toward the public realm through such features as location, incorporation of
          windows, avoidance of blank walls, articulation of building elevations fronting sidewalks and public
          spaces, and location of parking to the rear, side, or underground, as appropriate while minimizing
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-9                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                         CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
        parking in front of buildings. Priority shall be placed on locating parking underground or in
        structures. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-3.8  Plans for Cohesive Development. Encourage the use of specific plans for residential, commercial,
        industrial, and mixed-use developments to provide for the cohesive and integrated development
        of large areas, complex or multi-parcel sites, areas with multiple property owners, and/or areas of
        particular importance to the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-18)
GOAL LU-4
Development Shaped by Environmental Setting. Development is located to respect, work with, and
complement the natural features of the land.
Policies
LU-4.1  Preservation of Natural Features. Maintain significant natural landmarks, such as prominent
        ridgelines visible from the valley floor, and other natural scenic features in their natural state, to
        the extent feasible. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-8, LU-11, LU-18, NR-1,
        NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.2  Incorporation of Natural Features. Integrate natural scenic features, such as mature trees, rock
        outcroppings, watercourses, and views into project design, except where infeasible for public
        safety. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-8, LU-11, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.3  Open Space Character. Locate and design structures and open space areas to assure that open
        space qualities of a development are generally apparent from adjoining areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
        LU-2, LU-3, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-8, LU-11, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.4  Hillside Development. Locate and
        design development to maintain the
        existing visual character of the hillsides
        as a natural backdrop. (Imp A-1, A-2,
        LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-8,
        LU-11, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.5  Hillside Grading. Minimize terrain
        disruption and design grading using
        generally accepted principles of civil
        engineering with the objective to blend Hillside development
        the     project     into   the    natural
        topography. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-18, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.6  Hillside Development Density. Maintain land outside the valley floor having a slope of over
        20 percent as permanent open space. Commercial and industrial development shall be limited to
        slopes of 10 percent or less, unless otherwise allowed under the Hillside Performance Standards of
        the Simi Valley Municipal Code, or approved by a specific plan that justifies and provides
        appropriate design measures for the development of these areas, in which case development shall
        be limited to slopes of 20 percent or less. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-7, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1,
        NR-2, NR-3)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                 3-10                                  GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Environmental
                                                                                                                                             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Setting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Urban Restriction Boundary
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av                              Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                      Aven ida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Water Body
                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                       Alamo St
                         L o s A g e le s A
                 Ar             n           v
                    r o yo
                           Sim
                                                     as
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                               A       Cochr an St
                                                          y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                  Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                             First St
                                                             Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                               d
                   e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                aR
     T   ie r r
                                                                               Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                Royal Av
                                                                                                                      Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                      Sinaloa
                                               Rd
                                   Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                   Woo d
                                            Ra
                                             nc
                                                hP
                Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                               on
              Reservoir                          ark
                                                                          ny
                                                    way           Ca
                                                                 Lo
                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: City of Simi Valley, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Date Revised: July 13, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Environmental Setting.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure LU-2


LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
LU-4.7    Development Compatibility with Hillside Character. Ensure the compatibility of proposed
          structures with the surrounding terrain in hillside areas by using varying setbacks, building heights,
          building forms, and other applicable features. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-11,
          LU-18, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.8    Architecture and Building Design. Design buildings to be architecturally integrated into the terrain
          and blend with the natural environment. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-11, LU-18,
          NR-2, NR-3)
LU-4.9    Building Colors in Hillsides. Use earth tones or subdued colors for development in hillside areas
          with bright hues used only as accents so they will complement the natural setting. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-1, LU-3, LU-7, LU-11, LU-18, NR-3)
LU-4.10   Specific Plan Approval. Require the approval of a specific plan for commercial and industrial
          development in hillside areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-18, NR-3)
GOAL LU-5
Land Use Compatibility. New development is located and designed to assure a compatible
relationship with adjoining uses.
Policies
LU-5.1    Development Compatibility. Locate and design development to assure compatibility among land
          uses, addressing such elements as building orientation and setbacks, buffering, visibility and
          privacy, automobile and truck access, impacts of noise and lighting, landscape quality, and
          aesthetics. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-5.2    Development Transitions. Incorporate transitions of development mass and building heights
          where districts with differing permitted densities and intensities are located adjacent to one
          another. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.3    Residential Neighborhood Character. Respect the scale and character of the land uses and
          architecture within the neighborhoods when considering new development and renovation of
          buildings in existing neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.4    Integration of Nonresidential Uses in Neighborhoods. Buffer different land uses within a
          neighborhood from one another by walls, fences, and landscaped greenbelts. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.5    Development Adjacent to Single-Story Buildings. Locate single-story structures or extensive
          setbacks on the periphery of new development that is adjacent to existing single-story residential
          structures. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.6    Residential Privacy. Respect the privacy of existing residents in the design of new development
          that abuts existing residential neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18)
LU-5.7    Minimization of Noise Impacts. Protect noise-sensitive uses from the impacts of noise-generating
          sources by setbacks, building orientation, insulation, or other suitable techniques that maintain
          interior noise levels specified by the Safety and Noise Element. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3,
          LU-18, NR-2)
GENERAL PLAN                                          3-13                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-5.8    Lighting Impacts. Design, locate, and direct lighting and signs so that they do not result in
          excessive spillover, illumination, and glare for adjacent uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-18,
          NR-2)
LU-5.9    Freeway and Arterial Roadway Compatibility. Minimize the impacts of the noise, air pollution,
          and other noxious elements from the freeway and arterial roadways, and enhance the appearance
          of the freeway corridor through landscape, building design, and other elements for development
          located within the freeway and arterial roadway corridors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-11,
          LU-18, NR-2)
LU-5.10   Roof Equipment. Screen all roof equipment from view from adjacent parcels and rights-of-way,
          especially the freeway and elevated overpasses, by means that are architecturally integrated into
          the structure, where practical. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.11   Signage. Regulate signs to balance business interests and aesthetic concerns. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-11, LU-18)
LU-5.12   Mineral Extraction/Landfill Activities. Continue to monitor mineral extraction activities and
          sanitary landfill activities within the City’s Area of Interest to ensure that such uses are compatible
          with and minimize impacts on adjoining uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-17, LU-18)
GOAL LU-6
Open Spaces. Open space lands are preserved to maintain the visual quality of the City, provide
recreational opportunities, protect the public from safety hazards, and conserve natural resources
and wildlife.
LU-6.1    Scenic and Natural Areas. Provide for the preservation of significant scenic areas and corridors,
          plant and animal habitat, riparian areas, and significant geologic features within the City. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-8, LU-13, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-6.2    Mature Trees. Continue to sustain mature trees, which are an integral part of the City’s character.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-6.3    Creeks and Natural Drainages. Maintain and improve the form and health of resources and
          habitat in the City’s natural drainages. Explore restoration of those that have been degraded or
          channelized, such as the Arroyo Simi, as feasible, while continuing to maintain stormwater
          conveyance and property protection
          requirements. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1,
          LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-6.4    Night Sky. Reduce the impacts of
          ambient outdoor lighting on the darkness
          of the night sky. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-2,
          LU-3, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-6.5    Orientation towards Arroyo Simi. Orient
          new development located along the
          Arroyo Simi to take advantage of it as an
          asset and integral part of the project
          design. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-18) Arroyo Simi
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      3-14                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
GOAL LU-7
Viewsheds. Vistas of the hillsides, valley floor, City entrance areas, recreation areas, major open
space areas, and viewsheds from the hills are maintained for the general public.
Policies
LU-7.1   City Entries. Protect open vistas at freeway entrances to the community and along Madera Road
         and Tierra Rejada Road, by such means as enriched parkways, open space, height limits, and view
         corridors. The appearance of development along these throughways should be attractive,
         complement the vista, and not compete for attention. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-8, LU-11,
         LU-18, NR-1, NR-2)
LU-7.2   Development in View Corridors. Design structures and site improvements constructed in highly
         visible locations to minimize their impacts on natural vistas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-11, LU-18)
GOAL LU-8
City Sustained and Renewed. Land development practices that sustain natural environmental
resources, the economy, and societal well-being for use by future generations, while reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and impacts on climate change, are maintained.
Policies
LU-8.1   Regulating Sustainable Development. Implement the most current version of the California Green
         Building Standards Code with amendments and update periodically to reflect future amendments
         and require development projects, major renovations, and municipal structures to be consistent
         with these. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-9, LU-18)
LU-8.2   Sustainable Building Practices. Promote sustainable building practices that utilize architectural
         design features, materials, interior fixtures and finishes, and construction techniques to reduce
         energy and water consumption, human exposure to toxic and chemical pollution, and disposal of
         waste materials. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-9, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-8.3   Existing Structure Reuse. Encourage the retention, adaptive reuse, and renovation of existing
         buildings with “green” building technologies and standards. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-9, LU-11,
         LU-18)
LU-8.4   Sustainable Land Development Practices. Promote land development practices that reduce
         energy and water consumption, pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and disposal of waste
         materials incorporating such techniques as:
            a. Concentration of uses and design of development to promote walking and use of public
               transit in lieu of the automobile
            b. Capture and reuse of stormwater on-site for irrigation
            c. Management of wastewater and use of recycled water, including encouraging the use of grey
               water
            d. Orientation of buildings to maximize opportunities for solar energy use, daylighting, and
               ventilation
GENERAL PLAN                                         3-15                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                             CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
             e. Use of landscapes that protect native soil, conserve water, provide for wildlife, reduce green
                waste, and reduce the risk of wildfires
             f. Use of permeable paving materials or reduction of paved surfaces
             g. Shading of surface parking, walkways, and plazas
             h. Recycling and/or salvaging for reuse of construction and demolition debris (Imp A-1, A-2,
                LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-8.5    Revitalization of Obsolete and Underused Properties. Encourage use of redevelopment tools such
          as the consolidation of small parcels, joint public-private partnerships, and land clearance and
          resale, to facilitate revitalization of underused and obsolete commercial and industrial properties.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-10, LU-13, LU-18, ED-2)
LU-8.6    Building Rehabilitation. Encourage the rehabilitation of existing commercial facades and signage
          that are deteriorated or inconsistent with the intended character and quality of the City. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-4, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18, ED-2)
LU-8.7    Housing Maintenance. Encourage the continued high maintenance levels of the City's housing
          stock. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-12, LU-18)
LU-8.8    Affordable Housing. Target local funds to assist affordable housing developers in incorporating
          sustainable building and site design and features. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-9, LU-18)
LU-8.9    Green Buildings. Require all new construction and/or retrofitting of structures to be built to an
          identified green building standard. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-9, LU-18)
GOAL LU-9
Fair and Equitable Access. Fair and equitable access to employment, housing, education, recreation,
transportation, retail, and public services is provided for all residents.
Policies
LU-9.1    Equitable Distribution of Uses and
          Amenities. Strive to ensure that
          uses and amenities that foster
          livable          and          complete
          neighborhoods such as parks and
          community facilities are distributed
          equitably throughout the City.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-2,
          LU-13, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-9.2    High-Impact Uses. Avoid the
          concentration of uses and facilities
          required to support community
          activities, such as corporate yards,
          waste transfer sites, and electrical
                                                   Neighborhood park
          substations, in a manner that
          disproportionately affects a particular neighborhood or district to ensure that such uses do not
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-16                               GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
            result in an inequitable environmental burden being placed on any location or demographic group.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-13, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-9.3      Housing Type Distribution. Promote an equitable distribution of housing types for all income
            groups throughout the City and promote mixed-income developments. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-13,
            LU-18)
LU-9.4      Jobs-Housing Balance. Encourage a balance between job type, the workforce, and housing
            development to reduce the negative impacts of long commutes and provide a range of
            employment opportunities for all residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-4, LU-9, LU-18)
 Citywide Land Use Neighborhoods and Districts
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
Policies in this section provide for the protection, maintenance, and enhancement of Simi Valley’s residential
neighborhoods, assuring that new development complements and reinforces their unique characteristics
through sensitive infill and transitions in scale from adjacent centers and corridors.
GOAL LU-10
Livable and Quality Neighborhoods. A City composed of neighborhoods with a variety of housing
types, densities, and design, and that provide a mix of land uses, services, and amenities that
support the needs of its residents.
Policies
LU-10.1     Neighborhood Conservation. Maintain the
            uses, densities, character, amenities, and
            quality of Simi Valley’s residential
            neighborhoods,         recognizing        their
            contribution to the City’s identity,
            economic value, and quality of life for
            residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-10,
            LU-11, LU-12, LU-18)
LU-10.2     Housing Character and Design. Locate and
            design new and renovated housing within Single-family residence
            existing      single-    and      multi-family
            neighborhoods to maintain their distinguishing characteristics and qualities of the neighborhoods,
            including prevailing lot sizes; building form, scale, massing, and relationship to street frontages;
            architectural design; landscape; property setbacks; and comparable elements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
            LU-3, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-10.3     Senior Housing. Provide senior housing that is accessible to commercial services, health and
            community facilities, and public transit. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-13, LU-18)
GENERAL PLAN                                             3-17                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                         CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-10.4   Complete Neighborhoods.
          Maintain, improve, and,
          where necessary, expand
          parklands and community
          facilities to serve and
          provide easy access from
          Simi Valley’s neighbor-
          hoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3,
          LU-1, LU-4, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-10.5   Walkable Neighborhoods. Community park
          Maintain sidewalks, parkways, street tree canopies, and landscaping throughout the residential
          neighborhoods to promote walking as an enjoyable and healthy activity and alternative to
          automobile use. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-11, LU-18, M-13)
LU-10.6   Neighborhood Connectivity. Maintain sidewalks or other means of pedestrian and bicycle
          connections to neighborhood commercial centers, parks, schools, work places, and other
          community activity centers. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18, M-13)
LU-10.7   Complete Streets. Provide infrastructure consistent with the “Complete Streets” Program that
          accommodate multiple modes of transportation including the automobile, bicycle, pedestrian, and
          where appropriate, public transit. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18, M-4, M-8,
          M-10)
GOAL LU-11
Neighborhood Urban Form. Residential development is provided that respects Simi Valley’s natural
setting and suburban density and scale, while offering opportunities for more intensive use in key
activity areas that reduce automobile use and transition smoothly to existing neighborhoods, and
open spaces.
Policies
LU-11.1   Placement of Residential Structures. Encourage the siting of residential units to preserve open
          space and natural resources while maintaining the overall density. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-4,
          LU-7, LU-8, LU-11, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-3)
LU-11.2   Greenbelts. Promote the use of
          greenbelts around and within
          residential projects or between
          residential and other land uses.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18)
LU-11.3   Distribution of Density. Concentrate
          residential development on the
          valley floor, with overall densities
          decreasing in the outlying areas, in
          consideration of the following
          principles:                            Greenbelt through residential area
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                 3-18                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
             a. Density should decrease as distance from arterials and commercial shopping increases
             b. Overall density and intensity of development should decrease as the slope increases
             c. The minimum parcel size for areas designated as Open Space or over 20 percent slope shall
                be 40 acres (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-7, LU-10, LU-18, NR-3)
LU-11.4   Density in Outlying Areas. Require that residential development in outlying areas, which is defined
          as new development located on the periphery of existing developed areas, be limited to single-
          family, detached dwelling units with a maximum of 7 units per acre, except for the following types
          of projects:
             a. Housing projects for senior citizens
             b. Residential projects located on a parcel not visible from viewpoints from the valley floor and
                containing at least 25 percent of the units that are affordable for low-income and very low-
                income households that meet state housing law. In no event shall these exceptions allow
                development on the areas with over 20 percent slope. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-7, LU-18, NR-3)
LU-11.5   Density Transfer. Direct residential development in outlying areas to less-steep slope areas
          through the use of density transfers to preserve areas designated as Open Space in a largely
          undeveloped state. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-7, LU-18, NR-3)
LU-11.6   Neighborhood Focal Points. Promote the integration of noncommercial activity centers in
          residential neighborhoods to provide a focal point and facilitate neighbor interaction. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18)
GOAL LU-12
Neighborhood Identity. Residential neighborhoods are provided that are distinctly identified and
differentiated from one another in consideration of geography, character, and lifestyle.
LU-12.1   Contributing Elements for Neighborhood Identity. Locate and design new development in or
          abutting existing residential neighborhoods to respect boundaries defined by topography,
          drainage, landscape, or other natural elements that delineate and contribute to their distinct
          identity. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-12.2   Identity through Design. Promote the design of new development to provide a positive sense of
          uniqueness to aid neighborhood identity and also to be compatible with existing surrounding
          neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
GOAL LU-13
Neighborhood Quality. Residential neighborhoods are provided that are desirable places to live,
contribute to the quality of life, and are well maintained.
Policies
LU-13.1   Incompatible Uses. Prohibit the development of uses that are incompatible with and physically
          divide neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18)
LU-13.2   Safety. Require that residential developments, including multi-family, be designed to facilitate and
          enhance neighborhood surveillance for safety. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18, M-14)
GENERAL PLAN                                          3-19                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                            CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-13.3   Recreational Vehicles. Encourage adequate on-site storage areas for recreational vehicles in
          residential developments in relation to the need generated by each project. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-3, LU-18)
LU-13.4   Oil Facilities. Prohibit the development of oil pumping, storage, and processing facilities and
          exclude the development of new residential uses in or near areas containing existing and
          permitted oil pumping, storage, and processing equipment until such facilities have been relocated
          or discontinued. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-18)
LU-13.5   Code Enforcement. Preserve and enhance residential neighborhoods through enforcement of land
          use and property standards, ensuring that adjacent nonresidential uses are buffered from
          residences in harmonious and attractive ways. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-12, LU-18)
LU-13.6   Housing Maintenance. Maintain the City's housing stock as a high priority. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3,
          LU-11, LU-12, LU-18)
GOAL LU-14
Single-Family Neighborhoods. The characteristics and qualities that distinguish Simi Valley’s distinct
single-family residential neighborhoods, such as identity, scale, and character, are maintained.
Policies
LU-14.1   Neighborhood          Identity.     Maintain
          distinguishing characteristics, such as
          topography, parcel size, housing scale and
          form, and public streetscapes that
          differentiate Simi Valley’s single-family
          neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3,
          LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-14.2   Second Units. Allow second units in single-
          family residential districts as required by
          state legislation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-5,
          LU-9, LU-10, LU-18)                            Single-family residential neighborhood
LU-14.3   Parks and Open Space Amenities. Ensure that existing neighborhoods contain a diverse mix of
          parks and open spaces that are connected by trails, pathways, and bikeways and are within easy
          walking distance of residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-10, LU-11, LU-18)
GOAL LU-15
Multi-Family Neighborhoods. Multi-family residential neighborhoods that provide ownership and
rental opportunities are well designed, exhibit a high quality of architecture, and incorporate
amenities for their residents.
Policies
LU-15.1   Character and Design. Locate and design new and renovated housing within existing multi-family
          neighborhoods to achieve a high level of architectural design quality, in consideration of the
          following principles:
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   3-20                                      GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
            a. Design elevations of multi-family
               buildings facing public streets and
               pedestrian ways to exhibit a high
               level of visual interest
            b. Incorporate property setbacks,
               modulate building mass, and design
               multi-family buildings and projects
               in     consideration         of   the
               development patterns of the
               surrounding              neighborhood
               (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, Multi-family residential
               LU-11, LU-18)
LU-15.2  Amenities. Encourage new multi-family development to provide amenities for residents, such as
         on-site recreational facilities and community meeting spaces. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-11,
         LU-18)
LU-15.3  Development Transitions. Ensure sensitive transitions in building scale between buildings in multi-
         family residential areas and lower-scale buildings in adjoining residential neighborhoods and
         commercial districts. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-15.4  Streetscapes. Provide ample public spaces and tree-lined sidewalks or pathways furnished with
         appropriate pedestrian amenities that contribute to comfortable and attractive settings for
         pedestrian activity in multi-family neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18,
         M-13)
GOAL LU-16
Supporting Uses in Residential Neighborhoods. Neighborhoods are provided that integrate uses
supporting the needs of residents and are located and designed to be subordinate to, and
compatible with, the function and quality of the living environment.
Policies
LU-16.1  Home Occupations. Accommodate home
         occupation uses in residential neighborhoods
         provided that they have no significant traffic,
         parking, delivery, or other impacts associated
         with the business activity on the neighborhood.
         (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-3, LU-12, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-16.2  Daycare Centers. Maintain regulations for large-
         family daycare facilities (as defined by the State
         of California) and childcare centers to minimize
         impacts on residential neighborhoods, to the
         extent permitted by state law. (Imp A-1, A-2,
         LU-2, LU-3, LU-13, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-16.3  Religious Institutions. Regulate the location and
         use of religious institutions in and adjoining
                                                              Saint Rose of Lima church
GENERAL PLAN                                         3-21                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
           residential neighborhoods to prevent significant traffic, parking, noise, and other impacts.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-3, LU-18, NR-2)
COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS AND DISTRICTS
Goals and policies of this section of the General Plan provide for the maintenance and enhancement of
diverse, economically vital, and well-designed commercial districts that offer a diversity of goods and services
for residents; provide quality places to walk, shop, and be entertained; and contribute revenue to support
City services.
GOAL LU-17
Diverse Districts and Corridors. Vital and active commercial districts are provided that offer a
diversity of goods, services, and entertainment for Simi Valley’s residents.
Policies
LU-17.1    Diversity of Uses. Provide for, and encourage the development of, a broad range of uses in Simi
           Valley’s commercial centers and corridors that reduce the need to travel to adjoining communities,
           and capture a greater share of local spending. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-18)
LU-17.2    Economic Vitality. Promote the development of commercial centers that provide a strong fiscal
           base for the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18)
LU-17.3    Revitalization. Promote the redevelopment of older commercial areas, allowing upgrades with
           exceptions from current Development Code standards as deemed necessary to achieve an
           economically feasible project that benefits the community, as long as all health and safety
           requirements are met. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-18)
LU-17.4    Differentiation of Districts. Establish and maintain distinct identities for Simi Valley’s commercial
           districts differentiating neighborhood, shopping center, and retail service centers and corridors by
           use, scale and form of development, and amenities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-17.5    Cohesive Development. Discourage the piecemeal development of commercial sites. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-10, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-17.6    Traffic Impacts. Plan commercial development to minimize traffic impacts, encourage pedestrian
           flow, and increase sales from shared foot traffic. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-9, LU-18, M-2, NR-2)
Commercial uses                            Industrial uses                      Regional mall
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      3-22                                 GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
GOAL LU-18
Well-Designed and Attractive Districts. Well-designed and attractive retail centers and corridors are
provided that foster business activity by contributing to a positive experience for visitors and
community residents.
Policies
LU-18.1  Enhanced Design Character. Encourage the renovation, infill, and redevelopment of existing
         commercial centers and corridors to improve architectural design (e.g., façade improvements),
         reduce the visual prominence of parking lots, make centers more pedestrian friendly, reduce visual
         clutter associated with signage, and enhance the definition and character of the street frontage
         and associated streetscapes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-18.2  Architecture and Site Design. Locate and design new development and existing buildings that are
         renovated, expanded, or remodeled in existing commercial centers and corridors to complement
         existing uses, as appropriate, and exhibit a high quality of architecture and site planning in
         consideration of the following principles:
            a. Seamless connections and transitions with existing buildings, in terms of building scale,
                elevations, and materials
            b. Incorporation of signage that is integrated with the buildings’ architectural character and
                provides meaningful identification
            c. Landscaping contributing to the appearance and quality, and reducing the heat-island effect,
                of development
            d. Clearly delineated pedestrian connections between business areas, parking areas, and to
                adjoining neighborhoods and districts
            e. Incorporation of plazas and expanded sidewalks to accommodate pedestrian, outdoor
                dining, and other activities (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-18.3  Buffering Adjoining Residential Areas.
         Ensure commercial uses adjoining
         residential neighborhoods or in mixed
         residential        and        commercial
         developments be designed to be
         compatible with each other. (Imp A-1,
         A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18,
         NR-2)
LU-18.4  Retail Streetscapes. Maintain and,
         where deficient, improve street trees,
         plantings, furniture (such as benches,
         trash receptacles, newsracks, and
         drinking fountains), signage, public art,
         and other amenities that promote
         pedestrian activity in retail commercial
         districts. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4,
         LU-9, LU-11, LU-14, LU-18, M-13)
                                                     Residential streetscape
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-23                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-18.5    Connectivity to Neighborhoods. Link
           commercial districts to adjoining
           residential neighborhoods and other
           districts, where appropriate, by well-
           designed and attractive pedestrian
           sidewalks and corridors. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-1, LU-4, LU-9, LU-11, LU-18, M-8,
           M-13)
LU-18.6    Bicycle       Facilities.     Encourage
           developers of commercial centers to
           incorporate facilities that promote Commercial streetscape
           customer and employee access by
           bicycles, such as secured storage, and showers and lockers for employees. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
           LU-4, LU-9, LU-18)
MIXED-USE CORRIDORS AND DISTRICTS
Goals and policies of this section of the General Plan provide for the development of properties and buildings
that integrate a diversity of uses such as retail, office, restaurant, entertainment, and residential uses, which
are developed as quality places to live, work, shop, and be entertained. Mixed-use development is intended
to provide opportunities for an individual to participate in multiple daily activities at one location, thereby
reducing automobile trips, air pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, energy consumption, and noise.
GOAL LU-19
Mixed-Use Villages. Well-designed districts are developed containing an integrated mix of
commercial, office, entertainment, and/or housing that enable Simi Valley’s residents to live close
to businesses and employment, reduce automobile use, actively engage and enhance pedestrian
activity.
Policies
LU-19.1    Land Use Mix. Allow for mixed-use districts that integrate housing with retail, office,
           entertainment, and public uses where the housing may be developed on the upper floors of multi-
           use buildings or located in stand-alone buildings on the project site. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4,
           LU-9, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-19.2    Development Scale. Establish standards to assure that a sufficient scale and footprint of any single
           use is achieved in mixed-use areas to establish a cohesive environment that minimizes impacts
           attributable to the adjacency of differing uses. This may define minimum parcel and building sizes,
           number of housing units, and/or nonresidential square footage, as well as relationships and
           setbacks among the uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-19.3    Design. Design mixed-use development projects to enhance pedestrian activity, including the
           following elements:
              a. Expanded sidewalks along building frontages and incorporation of a public plaza containing
                  benches, landscaping, public art, directional signage, pedestrian-scaled lighting, and other
                  amenities
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-24                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
              b. Uses with outdoor seating, such as
                 restaurants
              c. Pedestrian corridors connecting parking
                 areas with buildings that are clearly
                 defined by paving materials, landscaping,
                 lighting, and well-designed directional
                 signage
              d. Site landscaping that contributes to the
                 aesthetic and economic value of the
                 center and provides a tree canopy
                 reducing the heat island effect and
                 greenhouse gas emissions                      Vintage Paseo Senior Apartments
              e. Buildings oriented toward the street with parking located to the rear of the buildings,
                 underground, or in structures (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-9, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-19.4    On-Site Amenities. Incorporate recreational areas and other pedestrian-scale amenities in mixed-
           use projects, such as benches, fountains, and landscaping, to support residents or contribute to
           their development within proximity of the project. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-16,
           LU-18)
LU-19.5    Design Integration. Integrate residential and nonresidential portions of mixed-use buildings
           through architectural design, development of pedestrian walkways, and landscaping. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-19.6    Compatibility of Residential and Nonresidential Uses. Design buildings that integrate housing
           with nonresidential uses to assure compatibility among uses and public safety, including separate
           accesses, fire suppression barriers, secured resident parking, noise insulation, and other similar
           elements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18, S-6, N-1)
BUSINESS PARKS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Goals and policies of this section of the General Plan provide for the maintenance and enhancement of
diverse, economically vital, and well-designed business parks and industrial districts that offer employment
opportunities for Simi Valley’s residents and contribute revenue to support City services.
GOAL LU-20
Quality Business Parks and Industrial Districts. A diversity of districts accommodating office,
business park, and light industrial uses are developed that provide a variety of job opportunities for
Simi Valley’s residents, reducing their need to commute to other communities, while not unduly
impacting the residential environment.
Policies
LU-20.1    Diversity of Uses. Provide for a variety of office, industrial, and research and development uses
           that offer job opportunities for Simi Valley’s residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18)
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-25                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                             CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-20.2   Supporting Uses. Encourage the integration of compatible uses in business park and industrial
          districts that serve the needs of employees and reduce their need to travel off-site during the
          workday, including such uses as financial services, business services, restaurants, and health clubs.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-20.3   Location. Locate industrial and business park areas near major transportation routes such as
          freeways, railways, or arterials to reduce traffic on residential streets while providing efficient
          transportation of supplies and workers. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-20.4   Childcare Facilities. Encourage major business park and industrial development projects to
          incorporate childcare facilities on site. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-20.5   Bicycle Facilities. Encourage major business park and industrial projects to incorporate facilities
          that promote employee access by bicycles such as secured storage, showers, and lockers. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-9, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-20.6   Site Planning and Design. Require new
          and renovated multi-tenant business
          and industrial park development
          projects       to      be    designed     to
          accommodate safe and convenient
          access by vehicles, pedestrians, and
          bicycles and exhibit a high-quality,
          attractive, and cohesive environment,
          which may be characterized by the
          following:                                    Business park
             a. Location of buildings around common plazas, courtyards, walkways, and open spaces,
                 including amenities for the comfort of employees, such as outdoor seating areas
             b. Incorporation of landscape that enhances a park-like setting along property edges, building
                 frontages, and to break the visual continuity of surface parking lots
             c. Common signage program for tenant identification and directions
             d. Readily observable site access, entrance drives, building entries, and pedestrian paths
                 through parking lots, to create a safe haven and access for pedestrians and minimize conflict
                 between service vehicles, private automobiles, and pedestrians (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3,
                 LU-4, LU-11, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-20.7   Buffering from Adjacent Properties. Ensure that business and industrial park developments are
          positive additions to the City’s community setting, incorporating adequate landscaped buffers to
          minimize any negative impacts to surrounding neighborhoods and development, and controlling
          on-site lighting, noise, odors, vibrations, toxic materials, truck access, and other elements that may
          impact adjoining non-business-park and non-industrial uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11,
          LU-15, LU-18)
INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC USES
Goals and policies of this section of the General Plan provide for the development and maintenance of civic,
park, school, utility, institutional, and other public and institutional uses to assure adequate distribution and
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-26                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
access for residents and businesses; consistency with the pattern, scale, and quality of development; and
prevention of adverse impacts on the community.
GOAL LU-21
Public and Quasi-Public Uses Supporting Resident Needs. Governmental, utility, institutional,
educational, recreational, cultural, religious, and social facilities and services are located and
designed to complement Simi Valley’s neighborhoods, centers, and corridors.
Policies
LU-21.1   Adequate Community-Supporting Uses. Seek to ensure that adequate public and private
          community-supportive facilities and services, such as schools, parks, and public gathering places,
          are located throughout the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.2   Location. Locate community service facilities in consideration of public safety, efficiency of service,
          and cost. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.3   Co-Location of Community Facilities. Promote the co-location of parks, schools, libraries, health
          services, recreation facilities, and other community facilities to support resident needs and
          leverage limited resources. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-9, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.4   Coordination with Non-City Public Service Providers. Coordinate, partner with, and encourage
          school and utility districts and other government and independent agencies that may be exempt
          from City land use control and approval to plan and improve their properties and design
          improvements to achieve a high level of visual and architectural quality that maintains the
          character of the neighborhood or district in which they are located. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.5   School Parking and Access. Work with schools to ensure that parking and student drop-offs are
          located to minimize impacts on adjoining residential neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-13, LU-18,
          M-14)
LU-21.6   Care Facilities. Encourage the development of senior daycare facilities, assisted living facilities,
          hospice, child care, and other care facilities in areas where they can be located, designed, and
          managed to assure compatibility with and the safety of adjoining uses and in accordance with
          state legislation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.7   Assembly Facilities. Encourage and support the development of assembly facilities for social,
          cultural, educational, and religious organizations in locations where they can be located, designed,
          and managed to assure compatibility with and the safety of adjoining uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-3, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.8   Parks and Open Spaces. Seek to expand the City’s parklands, greenways, and open spaces as land
          becomes available and coordinate with other agencies, such as Rancho Simi Recreation and Park
          District and Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-8, LU-13, LU-18, NR-1)
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-27                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                            CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LU-21.9  Design of Civic Buildings and
         Spaces. Lead by example,
         demonstrating design excellence
         in new buildings and properties
         developed by the City, such as
         civic facilities and public parking
         structures, by incorporating
         sustainable building practices,
         providing a high level of
         architectural quality, designing
         landscape areas that are water
         efficient, and including other
         features       that    demonstrate Simi Valley City Hall
         exceptional        standards       for
         development. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-9, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.10 Compatibility of Public Buildings and Sites. Ensure that City-owned buildings, sites, and
         infrastructure are designed to be compatible in scale, mass, character, architecture, and landscape
         with the district or neighborhood in which they are located, and minimize potential impacts such
         as traffic, noise, and lighting. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-3, LU-11, LU-18, NR-2)
LU-21.11 Design and Integration of Hillside Infrastructure. Require that major hillside improvements be
         located and designed to avoid a prominent appearance from urban areas, blend into the natural
         topography, and utilize attractive, low-maintenance, drought-tolerant materials. (Imp A-1, A-2,
         LU-3, LU-7, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18, NR-3)
LU-21.12 Landscaping of Infrastructure. Work with applicable City departments and external agencies to
         assure that major valley-floor improvements, such as the railroad, arroyo channels, major
         roadways, and the freeway, are well landscaped. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.13 Water Storage Tanks. Require that the visual impacts of water storage tanks be minimized by
         berming, landscaping, or other means, pursuant to the requirements of Ventura County
         Waterworks District #8. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.14 Stormwater Facilities. Require that structures to channel or retain water be designed and
         constructed of materials and colors so as to blend with the natural environment. (Imp A-1, A-2,
         LU-11, LU-13, LU-18)
LU-21.15 Integration of Utilities. Require utilities that cannot be feasibly placed underground be located
         and designed to produce the least visual and environmental impact on the community. (Imp A-1,
         A-2, LU-3, LU-11, LU-13, LU-18)
OPEN SPACES
GOAL LU-22
Open Space Buffer. A permanent open space buffer surrounds the City of Simi Valley to separate it
from and assure a transition with adjoining urbanized communities, while providing opportunities
protect and sustain natural resources.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    3-28                               GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
Policies
LU-22.1   Open       Space      Buffer.   Encourage
          agricultural or recreational uses in buffer
          areas between Simi Valley and adjacent
          communities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3,
          LU-6, LU-8, LU-17, LU-18, NR-1)
LU-22.2   Agricultural      Uses.    Require     that
          agricultural land uses devoted to the
          growing of crops be located and
          managed to ensure compatibility with
          adjacent land uses. Agricultural land
          uses devoted to the raising or
          maintaining of livestock should be Protected open space adjacent to development
          buffered from urbanized areas. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-6, LU-17, LU-18)
 Community Subareas and Districts
A number of residential, commercial, and industrial districts in Simi Valley are characterized by existing
conditions, are constrained by their natural setting and/or infrastructure, or offer opportunities that are
unique to their specific locations or use. During the General Plan Update process, twelve areas for land use
changes were identified. Policies in this section express specific intentions for use, design, character, and
implementation that uniquely apply to and differentiate the area. These supplement and do not supersede
the general goals and policies presented in earlier sections of the Plan. In some of these areas, only the land
use designation is changed, and no additional goals or policies are required to implement the proposed
changes. These areas include the Katherine Road Connection Area, the Parker Ranch Expansion Areas, and
the Covington Avenue/Rudolph Drive Area. These areas are not included in the following community sub-
areas and districts discussion; however, land use changes for these areas are included in the land use map.
GENERAL PLAN                                          3-29                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                   CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
TAPO STREET CORRIDOR
GOAL LU-23
Mixed-Use Corridor. Redevelopment of the Tapo Street corridor enhances the economic vitality of
its underutilized commercial properties through their re-positioning as a focal point of
neighborhood identity and activity and incorporation of a diversity of commercial, office, business
park, and residential uses developed in a pedestrian-oriented environment.
Policies
LU-23.1     Mixed-Use Development. Encourage the improvement and higher economic use of properties
            along the Tapo Street corridor as a series of distinct centers and nodes containing a mix of retail,
            office, and residential uses, as follows:2
2
  Any land use listed for each subarea may be developed within that area. Refer to Land Use Element, Section 5 (Land Use
Designations) for description of land use categories and permitted development densities (units per acre) and floor area ratio
(FAR) for each specified land use category.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          3-30                                       GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
          a. Area A
                ■ Vertical    mixed-use development,
                    with commercial on the ground floor
                    and residential on the upper floors
                ■ General Commercial
                ■ Office Commercial
                ■ Very High Density Residential
          b. Area D
                ■ Three-story       vertical    mixed-use Existing development on Tapo Street
                    commercial and residential
                ■ General Commercial
                ■ Office Commercial
                ■ Very High Density Residential uses (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-16,
                    LU-18)
LU-23.2 Business Park Node. Promote the infill and enhancement of properties in Area E, south of Los
        Angeles Avenue, for business park and supporting uses, as the southern anchor of the Tapo Street
        corridor. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-23.3 Mixed-Use Village. Promote the redevelopment of underutilized commercial properties east of
        Tapo Street in Area D as a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use “village environment,” where buildings
        are clustered along and front sidewalks, plazas, and open spaces. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9,
        LU-16, LU-18)
LU-23.4 Compatibility with Residential Neighborhoods. Require that the edges of the mixed-use and
        commercial properties be designed to minimize noise, lighting, odor, and truck delivery and
        unloading impacts on adjoining residential neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-4,
        LU-18, NR-2)
LU-23.5 Streetscape Improvements. Improve sidewalks and crosswalks with distinctive paving materials
        and pedestrian-oriented amenities, and develop bikeways, where feasible, to improve the
        connectivity of the properties with one another and adjoining residential neighborhoods. (Imp A-1,
        A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-11, LU-18, M-13)
GENERAL PLAN                                        3-31                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                             CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LOS ANGELES AVENUE AREA
GOAL LU-24
Enhanced Community Center. Improvement of the economic vitality and cohesive use of
underutilized commercial and industrial properties within the Los Angeles Avenue area, capitalizing
on the potential development of a new Metrolink station. This would reposition the area as a focal
point of community identity and activity, incorporating a diversity of commercial, office, business
park, and residential uses developed in a pedestrian-oriented transit village environment.
Policies
LU-24.1   Mixed-Use Development. Encourage the improvement and higher economic use of properties
          along the Los Angeles Avenue and First Street corridors as a series of distinct centers and nodes
          containing a mix of retail, office, business park, and residential uses, as follows:
             a. Area B
                  ■ Vertical mixed-use developments to include housing, commercial, and entertainment
                     uses
                  ■ General Commercial
                  ■ Very High Density Residential (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    3-32                                    GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
Existing development on Los Angeles Avenue
New mixed-use development               New commercial development            New multi-family development
LU-24.2     Transit-Oriented Development. Promote the development of a new Metrolink transit station to
            serve the western portion of Simi Valley and intensify development within its proximity to foster
            transit use and reduce automobile trips, energy consumption, air pollution, and greenhouse gas
            emissions. Incorporate retail uses in the ground floor of street-facing elevations of parking
            structures developed to serve transit riders and or office uses that are designed for continuity with
            development on adjoining parcels. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-3, LU-9, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18, ED-8, M-15)
LU-24.3     Mountain Gate Mixed-Use Village. Promote the redevelopment of the Mountain Gate commercial
            center as a pedestrian-oriented mixed-use “village environment,” where buildings are clustered
            along and front sidewalks, plazas, and open spaces, capitalizing on the development of a Metrolink
            station. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18, ED-1, ED-8)
LU-24.4     Donville Avenue Extension. Extend Donville Avenue to connect with Easy Street, to improve traffic
            movement in this area. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-14, LU-18)
LU-24.5     Streetscape Improvements. Improve sidewalks and crosswalks with distinctive paving materials
            and pedestrian-oriented amenities, and develop bikeways, where feasible, to improve the
            connectivity among properties. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-9, LU-14, LU-18, M-13)
LU-24.6     Planned Development. Develop a master or specific plan to guide development of the Los Angeles
            Avenue and First Street corridors as a distinct and cohesive district that integrates a diversity of
            uses, promotes architectural consistency, and provides for unifying streetscape amenities and
            improvements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-18)
GENERAL PLAN                                            3-33                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                          CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
PATRICIA AVENUE/HEYWOOD STREET AREA
GOAL LU-25
High-Density Residential Community. A neighborhood containing high-density multi-family
residential uses is developed offering a diversity of housing choices for Simi Valley’s residents that
complement mixed-use development along and north of Los Angeles Avenue and is linked to open
space amenities along the Arroyo Simi.
Policies
LU-25.1   Uses and Connectivity. Accommodate High
          Density and Very High Density Residential
          development projects in this area to be connected
          by sidewalks, crosswalks, and bikeways to mixed-
          use development along and north of Los Angeles
          Avenue and the Arroyo Simi. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3,
          LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-11, LU-14, LU-18)              Existing development on Patricia Avenue
LU-25.2   Relationship to the Arroyo Simi. Encourage multi-
          family housing development located along the
          Arroyo Simi to be oriented to take advantage of
          views and access to the Arroyo Simi, and to
          incorporate landscaped open spaces along its
          length. “Backdoor” uses such as carports and
          storage areas should be separated and not be
          oriented toward the Arroyo Simi corridor.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-11, LU-18)
LU-25.3   Lot Consolidation Incentives. Provide incentives
                                                               New multi-family development
          for the merging of lots to allow for more cohesive,
          better-designed projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-10, LU-18, ED-1)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  3-34                                    GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
WEST END SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
GOAL LU-26
Business Park. This property is developed for business park
uses, allowing a variety of office, research, industrial, and a
limited amount of commercial uses.
Policies
LU-26.1   Topographic Setting. Require that buildings, parking,
          and driveways are designed and located to respect the
          area’s natural topography and consider viewsheds from Existing development
          the freeway. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-4, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-26.2   Freeway Interchange. Support construction of a
          freeway interchange to improve access from the
          freeway to this area. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-13, LU-18,
          M-12)
                                                                   New business park
GENERAL PLAN                                         3-35                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                           CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
EASY STREET INDUSTRIAL AREA
GOAL LU-27
Business Park. Intensification of office and business park uses is allowed to offer job opportunities
for Simi Valley’s residents in the Easy Street Industrial Area.
Policies
LU-27.1   Office and Business Park Uses. Promote the development of vacant and underutilized properties
          for office and business park uses that provide job opportunities for Simi Valley’s residents, while
          capitalizing on its proximity to a potential Metrolink transit station. Consider locating the highest
          densities within walking distance of the transit station. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-10, LU-15, LU-18,
          ED-8)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   3-36                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
Existing business park                                          New business park development
LU-27.2     Lot Consolidation Incentives. Include incentives that result in the merging of lots to allow for more
            cohesive and better designed projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-10, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-27.3     Connectivity to Transit. Promote the development of sidewalks and bikeways connecting and
            providing direct access between the business park and a potential Metrolink transit station serving
            the western portion of Simi Valley. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-9, LU-14, LU-18)
OLD TOWN
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-37                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                            CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
GOAL LU-28
Historic Neighborhood. The enhancement of Old Town as a distinct residential neighborhood
reflects its role as the historic core of Simi Valley, offering a diversity of housing choices for
residents that are designed to reflect the City’s architectural traditions.
Policies
LU-28.1    High      Density      Residential      Corridors.
           Accommodate the development of High Density
           Residential uses, up to three stories in height.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-9, LU-10, LU-18)
LU-28.2    Specific Plan. Prepare a specific plan that guides
           development for this area as a distinct and
           cohesive neighborhood reflecting Simi Valley’s
           history. The plan should provide for unifying
           streetscape amenities and improvements (e.g.,
           trees, signage, sidewalk and crosswalk paving,
           pedestrian-oriented lighting, and other),
           discourage access to the east, unless it is New multi-family residential development
           required by the Fire District, and guide
           development of a mix of housing
           types,      including     Medium,
           Moderate, and High Density
           Residential uses. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-4, LU-18)
LU-28.3    Compatibility with Single-Family
           Residential Uses. Incorporate
           adequate buffers and transitions
           between         higher      density
           residential uses and existing Existing residential uses
           single-family residential uses for
           new development. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-18)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    3-38                            GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
RONALD REAGAN PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY VISITOR-SERVING
AREA
GOAL LU-29
Visitor-Serving Center. Development of properties adjoining the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library
as a visitor-serving center capitalizes on the Library’s presence, contributes tax revenue to support
City services, and provides gathering places for the Simi Valley community.
Policy
LU-29.1     Specific Plan. Prepare a specific plan to promote the development of a boutique or resort hotel,
            with restaurants, gift shops, spa, and conference/community event facilities to support the
            adjoining Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-18, ED-3)
Existing facility                                    New hotel/visitor service facility
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-39                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                            CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LOS ANGELES AVENUE TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
AND INDUSTRIAL AREA
GOAL LU-30
Transit-Oriented Mixed-Use Development. Development in the proximity of the existing Metrolink
rail transit station is concentrated and unified to foster transit use and reduce automobile trips,
energy consumption, air pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions.
Policies
LU-30.1    Business Park Enhancement. Promote the infill and enhancement of properties in Area A for
           business park development with improved pedestrian access to support the adjacent transit
           oriented development area. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18)
LU-30.2    Mixed-Use Development and Transit-Oriented Uses. Promote the development of a mix of
           business park, commercial, and multi-family residential uses in proximity to the Metrolink Station.
           Accommodate mixed-use projects in any of the following areas:
              a. Area B
                   ■ Vertical mixed-use with residential located above ground floor retail or office uses
                   ■ General Commercial
              b. Area C
                   ■ Vertical mixed-use with residential located above ground floor retail or office uses
                   ■ General Commercial
                   ■ Commercial Office (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18)
LU-30.3    Transit Village. Locate and design development adjacent to the Metrolink station in Area C to
           create a cohesive and distinctly identifiable transit village. Parking should be accommodated in a
           structure. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-11, LU-16, LU-18)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    3-40                                  GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
LU-30.4      Parking Structures. Encourage the development of parking structures to serve transit riders that
             contain ground level retail and/or office uses that are designed for continuity with development
             on adjoining parcels. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-4, LU-9, LU-18)
LU-30.5      Very High Density Residential Development. Promote the development of Very High Density
             Residential uses in Area D to support the adjacent transit-oriented development area and assist in
             the City’s efforts to achieve its regional fair share housing allocation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-9,
             LU-10, LU-18)
Existing train station             New mixed-use development              New mixed-use development
GENERAL PLAN                                             3-41                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                           CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SIMI VALLEY HOSPITAL/SYCAMORE DRIVE CORRIDOR
GOAL LU-31
Medical-Related Uses Corridor. Development of the Simi Valley Hospital/Sycamore Drive Corridor
as a distinctive district containing a diversity of uses that supports and capitalizes on the presence of
the Simi Valley Hospital and provides job opportunities for Simi Valley’s residents.
Policies
LU-31.1    Medical-Related Uses. Promote the development of offices, commercial services, care facilities,
           and other uses that are related to and support the activities of the Simi Valley Hospital. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-3, LU-9, LU-10, LU-18, ED-8)
LU-31.2    Overlay Zone. Prepare an overlay zone that guides development of the Simi Valley
           Hospital/Sycamore Drive corridor as a distinct and cohesive district. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-4, LU-18)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  3-42                                    GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
Existing Simi Hospital facility                             New office park, hospital uses
GOAL LU-32
General Plan and Zoning Consistency. Development proposals within the City are consistent with
the General Plan Policies and Land Use Designations identified on the General Plan Land Use Map.
Policies
LU-32.1     Consistency Guidelines. Require that new development proposals be consistent with General Plan
            policies, land use designations, and zoning as shown in Table LU-2 (General Plan/Zoning
            Consistency Matrix) and Table LU-2 (Zoning Districts). A development proposal shall be
            determined consistent with the General Plan if it meets applicable policies of the General Plan to
            the greatest extent possible, and complies with the following criteria and principles:
               ■ Applicable Policies—A development proposal is consistent with the General Plan if it meets
                  all applicable policies of the General Plan, to the maximum extent possible.
               ■ Land Uses—A development proposal is consistent with the General Plan if the existing or
                  proposed land uses are the same as, or consistent with, those identified for the land use
                  designation.
               ■ Number of Units—For residential development proposals, the existing or proposed number
                  of units per gross acre must fall within the range of units allowed for that land use
                  designation or the next lower one in order to be determined to be consistent with the
                  General Plan.
               ■ Proportion of Land Uses—If a development proposal includes parcels with multiple land use
                  designations, some flexibility is allowed in the arrangement of those uses within the total
                  project area; however, the proposed land uses must be in the same proportion as those
                  identified on the land use map in order to determine that the development proposal is
                  consistent with the General Plan.
               ■ HPS Designation—In some cases, land designated on the Land Use Map, as Open Space, Low
                  Density Residential, or another designation, may not meet the criteria for that designation
                  per the Hillside Performance Standards, based on actual topography. In such cases, the
                  predominant land use for adjacent properties may be considered for that property, which
                  will be determined to be consistent with the General Plan.
               ■ Parcels Less Than 1 Acre—A parcel of 1 acre or less may have a different zone than what is
                  allowed by the General Plan land use designation if the following criteria are met: (a) the
                  proposed use is consistent with the policies of the General Plan, and (b) the proposed use is
GENERAL PLAN                                             3-43                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                       CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
           consistent with the parcel size, zoning, and uses of adjacent properties. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
           LU-2, LU-18, NR-2)
                Table LU-1            General Plan/Zoning Consistency Matrix
                      Land Use Designation               Compatible Zoning Districts
                Open Space                        OS, (A), (H), (L)
                Residential Estate                RE, OS, (A), (H), (L)
                Very Low Density                  RVL, RE, (A), (H), (L)
                Low Density                       RL, RVL, (A), (H), (L)
                Medium Density                    RM, RL, (A), (H), (L)
                Moderate Density                  RMod, RM
                High Density                      RH, RMod
                Very High Density                 RVH, RH
                Mobile Home                       MH
                Neighborhood Commercial           CN
                Office Commercial                 CO, (MU)
                Recreation Commercial             CR
                General Commercial                CPD, CO, CR, CN, CI, (MU)
                Business Park                     BP, GI, LI, CPD, CI, (BP)
                Industrial                        GI, LI
                Mixed-Use                         CO, CPD, GI, LI, RVH, (MU)
                Public/Semi-Public:
                    Civic Center                  CC
                    Public Services Center        LI, GI
                    Hospital                      CO, CN, CPD
                    Regional Park                 P
                    Community Park                P
                    Neighborhood Park             P
                    Golf Course                   All Residential Zones, CR, CPD
                    Transportation                All Zones
                    Waterbodies                   All Zones
                    Cemetery                      OS
                Regional Facility:
                    Sanitary Landfill             OS
                    University                    All Residential Zones
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                              3-44                                 GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
                  Table LU-2          Zoning Districts
                   Zoning District
                   Abbreviations               Zoning District
                         OS        Open Space
                         RE        Residential Estate
                        RVL        Residential Very Low
                         RL        Residential Low
                         RM        Residential Medium
                       RMod        Residential Moderate
                         RH        Residential High
                        RVH        Residential Very High
                         MH        Mobile Home
                          W        Water Storage Facilities – Public
                         WP        Water Storage Facilities – Private
                          P        Park
                         CN        Commercial Neighborhood
                         CO        Commercial Office
                         CC        Civic Center
                         CR        Commercial Recreation
                        CPD        Commercial Planned Development
                          CI       Commercial Industrial
                         BP        Business Park
                          LI       Light Industrial
                          GI       General Industrial
                  Overlay Zones:
                         (A)       Farm Animal
                        (BP)       Business Park
                         (L)       Limited Farm Animal
                         (H)       Horse
                        (FC)       Freeway Combining
                        (HM)       Hospital-Medical
                        (MU)       Mixed-Use
                        (SB)       Sexually Oriented Business
                        (SP)       Specific Plan
                      (TAPO)       Tapo Area Planning Overlay
                     (LAAPO)       Los Angeles Avenue Planning Overlay
                       (NVD)       New Vehicle Dealer
GENERAL PLAN                               3-45                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                            CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
 Land Use Designations
For planning purposes, the Simi Valley General Plan Land Use Map designates five major categories of land
use with subcategories included under each major category. The five major categories include residential,
commercial, industrial, mixed-use, public/semi-public uses, and regional facilities/institutions. These land
uses are described below.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGNATIONS
C ATEGORIES AND D ENSITIES
Residential density ranges are defined in terms of dwelling units per net acre of the building site, excluding
existing public right-of-way. New right-of-way is given density credit that is transferred to the buildable
portion of the site.
Open Space (0–1 unit per 40 acres)
PURPOSE:     It is intended that land use patterns in Open Space areas will be dominated by recreational uses,
             agricultural uses, grazing, and very large lot estate or farm homes. To encourage the keeping of
             areas designated as Open Space in a largely undeveloped state, allowable dwelling units (i.e., 1
             dwelling unit/40 acres) may be transferred to portions of the subject parcel which are not
             designated Open Space. It is also intended that this designation (a) provide for a very low
             density farm and environment and housing/life style choice; (b) provide a buffer between Simi
             Valley and adjacent communities; (c) retain land with greater than 20 percent slope as open
             space; (d) provide for the controlled development of natural resources; and (e) hold some land
             from urban development until such time as the valley floor and the closer in canyon areas are
             approaching full development.
Residential Estate (0 –1 unit per acre; 1 acre minimum lot size)
PURPOSE:     To create a residential environment typified by lots of one acre and over and houses of an
             individual design. Residential Estate lots should be clustered to the extent possible so as to form
             an identifiable neighborhood and image.
Very Low Density (0 –2 units per acre; 20,000 square feet minimum lot
size)
PURPOSE:     To create a single-family residential environment typified by half-acre- or larger-sized lots that
             are not clustered. It is intended that this designation be used in areas proposed for animal
             keeping and similar semi-rural uses.
Low Density (2.1–3.5 units per acre; 10,000 square feet minimum lot
size)
PURPOSE:     To encourage a single-family suburban and rural residential environment with a wide range of
             lot sizes but a low overall density. Clustering of smaller lots in order to achieve both affordable
             housing and to minimize hillside grading is intended, especially within larger developments and
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    3-46                                   GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
             outlying canyon areas. The Low Density designation is intended for use in the peripheral areas of
             the valley floor as well as in outlying canyon areas that are under 20 percent slope.
Medium Density (3.6–5.0 units per acre; 8,000 square feet minimum lot
size)
PURPOSE:     To encourage a predominantly single-family residential environment with a wide range of lot
             sizes, but an overall density similar to the bulk of single-family developments on the valley floor.
             The Medium Density designation is intended for use on the valley floor as well as in the outlying
             canyon areas that are under 20 percent slope.
Moderate Density (5.1–10.0 units per acre; 5,000 square feet minimum
lot size)
PURPOSE:     To create residential areas composed of detached, single-family dwelling units on small lots and
             attached residential projects for senior or affordable housing units or to minimize design
             constraints of the site, such as traffic noise, flooding potential, or topography. The Moderate
             Density designation is intended for use mainly on the central portion of the valley floor with
             limited use in outlying canyon areas.
High Density (10.1–20 units per acre)
PURPOSE:     To encourage a residential environment typified by higher density townhouses, two- to three-
             story apartments and other, multiple unit developments. This designation is intended for use in
             the more central areas near shopping, near transit, and on arterial or collector streets.
Very High Density (20.1 –35 units per acre)
PURPOSE:     To provide for a higher density residential environment. Very High Density areas are intended to
             result in garden apartments or similar structures, usually of three stories in height or more. It is
             intended that this designation be limited in its use to (a) the central portion of the valley floor,
             (b) on arterial streets, and (c) near shopping, transit, and other public facilities.
Mobile Home (0–8 units per acre)
PURPOSE:     To provide areas set aside specifically for mobile home subdivisions or parks. It is intended that
             this designation will result in well-designed mobile home projects at densities typical of most
             recent mobile home developments.
D ESCRIPTION OF P ERMITTED D ENSITY R ANGES
Residential Density Ranges
State planning law requires general plans to establish “standards of population density and building
intensity” for the various land use designations in the plan. The density expressed in the residential
categories above are the legal standards for these uses and are expressed as an allowable range (i.e.,
minimum and maximum) of dwelling unit per net acres. These density ranges describe the range of zoning
densities that are considered to be consistent with the General Plan land use designation.
GENERAL PLAN                                            3-47                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                      CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Development Range
The Development Range is defined as the range of
residential densities normally associated with a given
land use designation. When property is being zoned or
re-zoned without a specific project approval for
purposes of consistency with the General Plan, it will
normally be designated with a zone, which falls within
this range, depending on the circumstances affecting
the site and the density of surrounding development.
                                                                       This illustration shows different densities for residential
Property shall not receive a zoning designation in excess              development on a similarly sized lot. This graphic is
of the Development Range for the land use designation                  intended only to show the relative differences between
in which the property is located without a density                     residential developments at various densities and does
bonus.                                                                 not represent a density standard for this General Plan.
Hillside Densities
The following standards shall be used to calculate the allowable number of units on parcels that have slopes
of over 10 percent, unless otherwise exempted by the City’s Hillside Performance Standards:3
    ■ 0–10% Slope          Underlying General Plan designation at the top of the Development Range or 7 units
                           per acre, whichever is less
    ■ 10–15% Slope 2 units per acre or the top of the Development Range, whichever is less
    ■ 15–20% slope 1 Unit per 4 acres
    ■ 20%+ Slope           1 Unit per 40 acres
All dwelling units in hillside areas shall be constructed on areas of the site that have less than 20 percent
slope and in locations away from major natural drainage courses, which are less visible, and/or are more
stable. By providing such flexibility, it is intended that single-family detached housing in hillside areas will be
encouraged.
COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS
Commercial land use designations are divided into four categories, discussed below. Uses to be permitted in
these areas and their development characteristics shall be consistent with all pertinent policies stated in the
General Plan.
F LOOR A REA R ATIO (FAR)
Standards of building intensity for nonresidential uses such as commercial, industrial, and mixed-use, are
stated as a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR). In the case of mixed-use developments that include residential
uses, the FAR includes residential building square footage, and the density range is not applicable. The Floor
Area Ratio for a project is the ratio of gross floor area within the structure to total site area. Floor area does
3
  There are two exceptions to this: (a) housing projects for senior citizens; or (b) residential projects located on a parcel not
visible from viewpoints from the valley floor and containing at least 25 percent of the units that are affordable for low income
and very low income households and do not exceed a maximum density of ten (10) units per gross acre, including density
bonus and density transfer.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            3-48                                            GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
not include area within parking structures. Thus a single-
story structure that covers 25 percent of a site has an FAR
of 0.25. A two-story structure covering 25 percent of the
site has an FAR of 0.5.
C ATEGORIES
Neighborhood Commercial (FAR 0.20)
PURPOSE:     Neighborhood Commercial areas shall be
             designated to provide for small commercial
             centers that provide a limited range of
             products and services to the residents of the
             surrounding neighborhood. Typical uses in
             such centers would include professional
                                                              This illustration shows how various building configura-
             offices,    laundry     and     dry    cleaning tions represent different FARs of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 on a
             establishments, drug stores, beauty and similar sized parcel. This graphic is intended only to
             barber shops, and other personal services. show the relative differences in FAR and does not
             Because of their proximity to residential represent an intensity standard for this General Plan.
             areas, such centers should be specifically designed and operated to be compatible with the
             adjacent residential development. Limitations on design and operation would include building
             height and intensity, trip generation, architectural and signage controls suitable for a residential
             neighborhood, increased landscaping and stricter control of noise and glare compared to larger
             commercial centers, and controls on hours of operation and on delivery vehicles. Projects in this
             category would be limited to a height of one story.
Office Commercial (FAR 1.0)
PURPOSE:     Office Commercial areas shall be established to attract desirable and stable professional office
             development that will be in harmony with adjacent land uses. Typical office uses include law,
             real estate, investment, hospital and medical-related offices, and other services. Projects should
             typically not exceed two stories in height unless located near a major commercial or industrial
             area.
Recreation Commercial (FAR 0.10)
PURPOSE:     To provide sites for commercial activities of a low-intensity, recreational nature, such as drive-in
             theaters, miniature, 3-par, and regulation-length golf courses, camping grounds, athletic clubs,
             and other commercial recreation facilities. Because uses in this designation may vary
             significantly in terms of building density and intensity, the review of proposed projects should
             be carefully examined to ensure compatibility with surrounding development.
General Commercial (FAR 0.30)
PURPOSE:     General Commercial centers shall be designated to serve five purposes: (a) satisfy the daily
             shopping needs of a localized (1- to 2-mile radius) trade area, (b) a major center to serve the
             needs of the entire Simi Valley market region, (c) set aside land for a broad range of commercial
             offices, (d) allow the location of new automobile dealership(s) in specified overlay areas, and
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-49                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
              (e) encourage spending by travelers passing through Simi Valley on SR-118. The types of stores
              suited for localized shopping needs include supermarkets, drug stores, quick-stop markets, small
              restaurants, personal services and small specialty retail shops, the types of facilities which would
              serve travelers include coffee shops and restaurants, gas stations, specialty retail shops, and
              entertainment. Projects in this category should not exceed two stories in height.
INDUSTRIAL DESIGNATIONS
Industrial land use designations are divided into two categories. Allowable uses and designs of these areas
shall be consistent with all pertinent policies in the General Plan.
Business Park (FAR 0.50)
PURPOSE:      To provide desirable areas protected by performance, design and use controls regarding lot size,
              building size, appearance, land coverage, parking and loading facilities, noise, dust, fumes,
              internal circulation and other environmental and functional issues for a variety of office,
              research and development, and industrial uses, including a limited range of commercial uses
              located and designed to service the park and its industrial tenants. Projects in this category will
              typically have a building site coverage factor of 25 to 35 percent. A minimum of 20 percent of
              the site must be devoted to landscaping.
Industrial (FAR 0.32)
PURPOSE:      To provide areas for most Industrial uses. It is of special concern to the City that there be an
              adequate variety of sizes and locations of industrial parcels. Projects in this category should
              consist of one- to three-story buildings.
MIXED-USE DESIGNATION
The Mixed-Use designation allows properties to be developed for: (a) buildings containing housing on the
second floor and higher with ground floor General Commercial, and/or Commercial Office uses; (b) a mix of
differing land use categories distributed horizontally on a site; or (c) a single land use category, where the
permitted uses shall be determined by the policies specified for each area specified in the Community
Subareas and Districts section of this Element.
Mixed-Use (FAR 1.5)*
*(FAR 1.5 for buildings integrating General Commercial or Commercial Office with residential uses, where a
maximum FAR of 0.3 may be developed for nonresidential uses and a maximum density of 35.0 units per acre
for residential. Densities/intensities for single use buildings in a Mixed-Use district shall be determined by the
corresponding land use category specified for the applicable use in the community subarea.)
PURPOSE:      The Mixed-Use designation provides the opportunity for the development of housing with
              General Commercial and/or Commercial Office uses to enable residents to live in proximity to
              commercial services, entertainment, and employment. This is intended to reduce the number of
              vehicle trips generated, fossil fuel consumption, air pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions,
              while improving walkability and the quality of life for residents. All contribute to improving Simi
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-50                                    GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
            Valley’s environmental sustainability, while enhancing economic vitality by locating customers
            closer to businesses and improving public health by increased pedestrian activity. Permitted
            uses and densities/intensities for each category of use assigned to a Mixed-Use designation shall
            be consistent with those defined in the Community Subareas and Districts Section.
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC DESIGNATIONS
The Land Use Map designates existing and potential public and semi-public services and facilities as follows:
Civic Center
PURPOSE:    To provide a suitable location for a wide variety of governmental and public facilities in a
            campus atmosphere, including but not limited to federal or state offices, office and court
            facilities of the County of Ventura, city administrative offices, Senior Center, community centers,
            Cultural Arts Center and auditorium, and related commercial office and retail shops.
Public Services Center
PURPOSE:    To provide a suitable location for public activities of an industrial nature, such as vehicle and
            equipment maintenance, equipment and records storage, administrative offices, sanitation
            treatment plant, water quality testing facilities, cogeneration facilities, and related uses. This
            category also includes other public services such as police and fire stations that are located
            outside of the Civic Center campus.
Regional Park
PURPOSE:    Provide locations for larger parks that include a variety of recreational and open space uses and
            serving the entire Simi Valley area or larger areas.
Community Park
PURPOSE:    Community parks are major facilities designed to satisfy the widest spectrum of interests. In
            general, they are “drive-to” centers where families or organizations can find a sufficient variety
            of activities and opportunities, including community centers, to occupy several hours or an
            entire day. Community parks also provide specific or single-purpose recreational activities and
            amenities, such as a historical park, equestrian center, or dog park, and may draw users from
            surrounding communities. Community parks generally range in size from a minimum of 20 acres
            to 200 acres or more, depending on type and location. Themed community parks frequently
            entail greater space requirements than do urban, multi-purpose parks.
Neighborhood Park
PURPOSE:    These parks are designed to meet the need for open areas of aesthetic value within a
            neighborhood and to allow active or passive recreation, usually for comparatively short periods
            of time, to residents and visitors. Typically, they range in size from 6 to 10 acres, and are
            intended to serve from 2,500 to 5,000 residents living within a radius of approximately 0.5 mile.
            Important factors in the location of neighborhood parks include the specific location of the park
            in reference to the service area, and the presence of traffic on arterial streets, freeways, or
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-51                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                             CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
              railway rights-of-way, which may constitute obstacles or hazards to safe and easy access. Often,
              such parks are located adjacent to an elementary school with which they may share playing
              fields.
Open Space—Golf Course
PURPOSE:      To designate public and private golf courses within the City, as these properties represent a
              significant open space resource within the community.
Transportation/Rights-of-Way
PURPOSE:      To designate major regional transportation routes within the City and its sphere of influence
              including the Ronald Reagan Freeway (SR-118) and the Union Pacific Transportation Company
              rights-of-way.
Waterbodies
PURPOSE:      To designate bodies of water within the City or its sphere of influence, including, but not limited
              to, the Arroyo Simi, Sinaloa Lake, and Bard Reservoir.
Cemetery
PURPOSE:      To designate the location of cemeteries within the community, including, but not limited to,
              Assumption Cemetery, Mt. Sinai Memorial Park, and Simi Valley Public Cemetery.
REGIONAL FACILITY OR INSTITUTION
Sanitary Landfill
PURPOSE:      Provide for sanitary landfill operations, landfill-related gas recovery and collection systems, and
              ancillary electrical power generating and transportation facilities as well as equipment storage,
              administrative facilities and ancillary improvements related to a landfill, all of which are subject
              to government permits; provided, however, said designation shall not apply to landfills that
              receive hazardous wastes as defined in California Administrative Code, Title 22, Section 25117,
              as amended.
American Jewish University (AJU)
PURPOSE:      Provide for the unique multi-purpose American Jewish University, which provides educational,
              open space, recreation, conference, and retreat uses within its campus and land holdings.
  Land Use Map
The General Plan Land Use Map, Figure LU-3, is a graphic representation of the Goals and Policies of the Land
Use Element. This map depicts the general location and distribution of land uses described in this and other
elements and serves as a guide for the City Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map. Areas subject to flooding are
identified in Figure S-3 (Flood Hazards) in Chapter 8 (Safety and Noise). The Land Use Map is implemented in
concert with Policy LU-1.1, which establishes the maximum development permissible for housing,
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-52                                   GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Land Use Map
                                                                                                                                                                Los t Can yon s Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Urban Restriction Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                           Township Av                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence
                                                         Landfill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Water Body
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                             Avenida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Transportation System
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot
           Ar            Lo s
                                A n g el e s A v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aS
                r o yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Road/Freeway
                                                                                                                                                                             Alamo St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                         Sim
                            i
                                                                                                                                                                 118                                                                                                                                                                               Railroad
                                                     as
                                                     E
                                                          y St                                                                                                              Cochran St
                                                                                                    First St
                                                                                                                           Erringe r Rd
                                                                                                                                                  Sycamore Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tapo St
                                                             Madera Rd                                                                                                   Sequoia Av                                 d                                  Stearns St         Yose mite Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tapo C a n y o n R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kuehner Dr
                                                                                                          Los Angeles Av                                                              U.P.R.R.
                                                                                       Sinaloa Rd                                                                                                                                 AJU
                                                                                                       Royal Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AJU
                                                                                                                                  Fitzgerald Rd
                                                                         Sinaloa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Land Uses
                                           Rd                             Lake
23                              M   ade ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Residential                                       Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Open Space (1 unit/40 acres)                             Business Park (.5 FAR)
                                     Woo d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Residential Estate (0-1 du/ac)                           Industrial (.32 FAR)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mixed- Use
                                       Ra
                                         nc                                                                                                                                                                                                     Very Low Density (0-2 du/ac)
       Bard                                  hP                                                                                                                                                                                                 Low Density (2.1 – 3.5 du/ac)                            Mixed-Use (Up to 1.5 FAR)
     Reservoir                               ark
                                                                                       on
                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                    Medium Density (3.6 – 5.0 du/ac)         Public/Semi-Public
                                              w ay                                ny
                                                                             Ca                                                                                                                                                                 Moderate Density (5.1 – 10 du/ac)                        Civic Center
                                                                n        g
                                                             Lo                                                                                                                                                                                 High Density (10.1 – 20 du/ac)                           Public Services Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Very High Density (20.1 – 35 du/ac)                      Cemetery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mobile Home (0 – 8 du/ac)                                Regional Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commercial                                                        Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Neighborhood Commercial (.2 FAR)                         Neighborhood Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Office Commercial (.50 FAR)                              Golf Course                        Source: City of Simi Valley, 2010; Atkins, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Date Revised: August 27, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Commercial Recreation (.10 FAR)          Regional Facility or Institution                   D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Proposed_GP.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                General Commercial (.30 FAR)                             AJU (American Jewish University)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Landfill                                       0     0.25   0.5            1         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure LU-3


LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
commercial, office, business park, and industrial land uses. The amount of development permissible is based
on the development capacity analyzed in the General Plan Environmental Impact Report, and any
development that exceeds these limits may be subject to additional environmental review.
If the City builds out to the levels of development permissible in the General Plan Land Use Map, the
anticipated population in Simi Valley would be approximately 163,690 persons and employment would be at
approximately 70,095 jobs, as shown in Table LU-3 (Potential Development Population and Employment).
Though there is no timeframe associated with the build-out of the General Plan, these potential
development estimates are intended to provide broad estimates of potential population and employment in
the City for long-range planning purposes for the next 20 years.
             Table LU-3            Potential Development Population and Employment
                                                                                                           a
                          Land Use                          Dwelling Units                     Population
              Residential                                       53,669                          163,690
                                                                                                             b
                          Land Use                           Square Feet                      Employment
              Retail                                          7,980,000                          15,960
              Office                                          6,412,000                          25,648
              Business Park                                   5,940,000                           9,138
              Industrial                                     12,577,000                          19,349
                                      Total Employment                                           70,095
              a. Population is estimated by calculating the average persons per household of 3.05 in Simi Valley in
                 2006, the baseline year for existing development.
              b. Employee estimates are calculated using the following employee per square foot factors: 1/500
                 Commercial, 1/250 Office, 1/650 Industrial and Business Park (Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc.).
GENERAL PLAN                                                    3-55                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                     CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Land Use and
Community Design Implementation Program, presented in Table LU-4 (Land Use and Community Design
Implementation Program), describes the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals
and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                      2012–2015     2016–2035
 Table LU-4           Land Use and Community Design
                                                                                                                                Annual   Ongoing
                      Implementation Program
                                                                                               2011
 LU-1 Development Review Process. The City shall continue to regulate development
      for compliance with General Plan goals, policies, land uses, and development
      standards through the Development Review Process to ensure the following: not
      exceeding building intensity and population density levels; paying fair share costs
      for new development; providing broad range of housing types and commercial
      uses; establishing an efficient pattern and organization of land uses; providing
      development compatibility and transitions; providing fair and equitable access;
      locating industrial and business parks near transportation; providing adequate
      community-supporting uses; and establishing open space and agricultural buffers.
                      LU-1.1, LU-1.5~LU-1.9, LU-2.1~LU-2.5, LU-3.1~LU-3.7,
                      LU-4.1~LU-4.9, LU-5.1~LU-5.11, LU-6.1~LU-6.3, LU-6.5, LU-7.1,                 
                      LU-7.2, LU-8.1~LU-8.4, LU-9.1~LU-9.4, LU-10.1~LU-10.7, LU-11.1,
                      LU-11.2, LU-11.6, LU-12.1, LU-12.2, LU-13.1~LU-13.3, LU-14.1,
                      LU-14.3, LU-15.1~LU-15.4, LU-17.1, LU-17.2, LU-17.3~LU-17.6,
     Implements       LU-18.1~LU-18.6, LU-19.2~LU-19.4, LU-19.6, LU-20.2,
 Which Policy(ies)    LU-20.4~LU-20.7, LU-21.1, LU-21.2, LU-21.6, LU-21.7, LU-22.1,
                      LU-22.2, LU-23.1, LU-23.4, LU-23.5, LU-24.1, LU-25.2, LU-26.1,
                      LU-26.2, LU-27.3, LU-30.3, LU-30.4, LU-32.1, HR-2.1, M-3.3, M-3.5,
                      M-4.1, M-8.1~M-8.7, M-12.5~M-12.7, M-15.2, IU-1.2, IU-6.1,
                      NR-1.7~NR-1.9, NR-2.1, NR-2.2, NR-2.5~NR-2.8, NR-3.2, NR-3.3,
                      NR-9.2
 LU-2 Environmental Review. The City shall continue to ensure that all development
      proposals are reviewed per the requirements of California Environmental Quality
      Act (CEQA) to ensure that significant natural landmarks are maintained and
      integrated into project design; land uses are compatible; noise, lighting, and traffic
      impacts are addressed; scenic and natural areas are preserved; mature trees are
      protected; creeks and natural drainages are maintained and restored; and
      archaeological and paleontological resources are protected.                                   
                      LU-1.5, LU-1.8, LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-4.1~LU-4.8, LU-5.1,
                      LU-5.7~LU-5.9, LU-6.1~LU-6.4, LU-7.1, LU-8.4, LU-9.1, LU-9.2,
     Implements
                      LU-11.1, LU-16.1~LU-16.3, LU-17.6, LU-18.3, LU-21.10, LU-23.4,
 Which Policy(ies)
                      LU-32.1, HR-2.1~HR-2.4, M-15.2, NR-1.7, NR-1.9, NR-2.5~NR-2.7,
                      NR-3.1, NR-7.1, NR-8.3, NR-9.1, NR-9.2, NR-9.5, NR-9.6
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           3-56                                                GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
                                                                                                  2012–2015   2016–2035
Table LU-4           Land Use and Community Design
                                                                                                                          Annual   Ongoing
                     Implementation Program
                                                                                           2011
LU-3 Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall review and update the zoning
     districts, development standards, and zoning map of the Development Code to
     reflect the land use designations, development standards, policies, and land use
     map of the General Plan, including establishing new zoning districts for business
     parks and mixed-uses. Additionally, the City shall continue to implement the City’s
     Sign Ordinance, Tree Preservation Ordinance, and Green Building Code.
                     LU-1.1, LU-2.1~LU-2.4, LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-3.4~LU-3.7,
                     LU-4.1~LU-4.9, LU-5.1, LU-5.2, LU-5.4~LU-5.9, LU-6.1~LU-6.4,
                     LU-7.1, LU-8.4, LU-8.9, LU-10.2, LU-10.3, LU-10.5~LU-10.7,                 
                     LU-11.3~LU-11.6, LU-12.1, LU-12.2, LU-13.1~LU-13.4, LU-13.6,
                     LU-14.1~LU-14.3, LU-15.1, LU-15.3, LU-15.4, LU-16.1~LU-16.3,
     Implements
                     LU-17.1~LU-17.3, LU-19.1, LU-19.2, LU-19.4~LU-19.6,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     LU-20.1~LU-20.7, LU-21.1, LU-21.2, LU-21.6~LU-21.11, LU-21.13,
                     LU-21.15, LU-22.1, LU-22.2, LU-23.1~LU-23.4, LU-24.1~LU-24.3,
                     LU-25.1~LU-25.3, LU-27.1~LU-27.3, LU-28.1, LU-28.3,
                     LU-30.1~LU-30.5, LU-31.1, ED-1.1~ED-1.4, ED-3.1, ED-3.2, ED-5.1,
                     ED-5.2, HR-2.1, HR-2.4, M-3.6, M-12.7, M-14.7, PR-1.16
LU-4 Specific Plans. The City shall continue to implement adopted specific plans and
     shall require and implement new specific plans for the following areas:
     a. Los Angeles Avenue/First Street corridor
     b. Old Town
     c. Ronald Reagan Presidential Library Visitor Area
     d. Simi Valley Hospital/Sycamore Drive corridor
     e. Commercial or industrial development in hillside areas
                                                                                                
                     LU-2.1~LU-2.5, LU-3.1~LU-3.5, LU-3.7, LU-3.8, LU-4.1~LU-4.5,
                     LU-4.7, LU-4.8, LU-4.10, LU-5.1~LU-5.4, LU-6.1~LU-6.3, LU-6.5,
                     LU-8.4, LU-8.6, LU-9.4, LU-10.4~LU-10.7, LU-11.1, LU-11.3,
     Implements      LU-12.1, LU-12.2, LU-14.1, LU-14.3, LU-15.1~LU-15.4, LU-17.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-17.3~LU-17.5, LU-18.1~LU-18.6, LU-19.1~LU-19.6, LU-20.3,
                     LU-20.6, LU-20.7, LU-21.1, LU-21.2, LU-21.13, LU-23.1,
                     LU-23.3~LU-23.5, LU-24.1, LU-24.3~LU-24.6, LU-25.1, LU-26.1,
                     LU-28.2, LU-28.3, LU-29.1, LU-30.2, LU-30.3, LU-30.4, LU-31.2
LU-5 Managed Growth Plan. The City shall continue to implement the City’s Managed
     Growth Plan through the Residential Building Permit Allocation System to reduce
     air pollution, protect the hillsides, promote affordable housing, and ensure that
     population limits do not exceed the growth limits in the City’s Managed Growth             
     Plan (Measure C), adopted in 2004.
     Implements
                     LU-1.1, LU-1.4, LU-2.1, LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-14.2, ED-3.1
 Which Policy(ies)
LU-6 Citywide Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB). The City shall continue to
     enforce the CURB until December 31, 2020, or as extended, and review
     development proposals for consistency with the CURB to protect existing
     agricultural, open space, viewshed, and watershed lands surrounding the City.              
     Implements
                     LU-1.2, LU-1.3, LU-3.2, LU-22.1, LU-22.2
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                               3-57                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                 CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                                 2012–2015     2016–2035
Table LU-4           Land Use and Community Design
                                                                                                                           Annual   Ongoing
                     Implementation Program
                                                                                          2011
LU-7 Hillside Performance Standards (HPS). The City shall continue to regulate
     development per the HPS to preserve hillside areas and view corridors, retain
     scenic and recreational resources, and maintain open space surrounding and
     within the City.
                                                                                               
                     LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-4.1~LU-4.10, LU-6.1, LU-11.1, LU-11.3~LU-11.5,
     Implements      LU-21.11, M-3.4, NR-1.5, NR-1.7, NR-1.8, NR-2.1, NR-2.4, NR-2.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-4.3, NR-4.5, NR-4.6, NR-5.1, NR-5.4, NR-7.4, NR-8.4, NR-9.3,
                     NR-9.4
LU-8 Open Space Preservation. The City shall continue to require development
     agreements and conservation easements to preserve open space, as necessary.
     In addition, other tools, such as greenbelt agreements, easement acquisition,
     donations, and leaseback arrangements shall be used to preserve open space,
     when appropriate.                                                                         
                     LU-3.1~LU-3.3, LU-4.1~LU-4.4, LU-4.6, LU-6.1, LU-7.1, LU-11.1,
     Implements
                     LU-21.8, LU-22.1, IU-4.6, NR-1.1, NR-1.3~NR-1.7, NR-1.11, NR-3.1,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     NR-5.2, NR-5.5, S-8.7
LU-9 Climate Action Plan (CAP). The City shall establish a CAP to reduce or
     encourage reductions in Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions from all sectors within
     the City. The CAP will establish a baseline inventory of GHG emissions and
     include measures to reduce GHG emissions by at least 15 percent of 1990
     emission levels by year 2020.
                                                                                               
                     LU-3.2, LU-3.6, LU-8.1~LU-8.4, LU-8.8, LU-8.9, LU-9.4, LU-10.5,
                     LU-14.2, LU-17.1, LU-17.6, LU-18.1, LU-18.4~LU-18.6, LU-19.1,
     Implements
                     LU-19.3, LU-20.5, LU-21.3, LU-21.9, LU-23.1, LU-23.3, LU-24.2,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     LU-24.3, LU-24.5, LU-25.1, LU-27.3, LU-28.1, LU-30.2~LU-30.5,
                     LU-31.1, NR-7.1, NR-7.3, NR-7.4, NR-8.2
LU-10 Infill Strategy. To encourage infill development, the City shall develop and
      maintain a Citywide database of vacant and underutilized sites to provide
      information to developers and monitor the City’s growth and change. Annually, the
      City shall prepare a report on the number of vacant sites and underutilized sites
      that were developed during the previous year, and verify that the City has not
      exceeded the General Plan limits for residential units and maximum square               
      footages for commercial, industrial, and other uses.
                     LU-1.1~LU-1.3, LU-2.1, LU-3.2, LU-3.3, LU-8.4, LU-8.5, LU-10.1,
     Implements      LU-11.3, LU-14.2, LU-14.3, LU-17.5, LU-18.1, LU-23.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-24.1~LU-24.3, LU-25.1, LU-25.3, LU-27.1, LU-27.2, LU-28.1,
                     LU-30.2, LU-30.5, LU-31.1, ED-1.3, ED-1.4, ED-3.1
LU-11 Design Guidelines. The City shall continue to review development proposals per
      the City’s adopted Design Guidelines, including the Citywide Design Guidelines,
      Residential Design Guidelines, and Landscape Design Guidelines.
                     LU-3.1, LU-3.5~LU-3.7, LU-4.1~LU-4.4, LU-4.7~LU-4.9,
                     LU-5.1~LU-5.5, LU-5.9~LU-5.11, LU-7.1, LU-7.2, LU-8.2, LU-8.3,            
     Implements      LU-8.6, LU-10.1, LU-10.2, LU-10.5~LU-10.7, LU-11.1, LU-12.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-12.2, LU-13.6, LU-14.1, LU-14.3, LU-15.1~LU-15.4, LU-17.4,
                     LU-17.5, LU-18.1~LU-18.5, LU-19.3~LU-19.6, LU-20.6, LU-20.7,
                     LU-21.9, LU-21.10~LU-21.15, LU-23.5, LU-25.1, LU-25.2, LU-30.3
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       3-58                                               GENERAL PLAN

LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN (LU)
                                                                                                       2012–2015   2016–2035
Table LU-4           Land Use and Community Design
                                                                                                                               Annual   Ongoing
                     Implementation Program
                                                                                                2011
LU-12 Code Enforcement. The City shall encourage a proactive program to enforce the
      Municipal Code and other nuisance abatement programs that aim to keep the
      City’s neighborhoods attractive, safe, and free from public nuisances.                         
     Implements
                     LU-8.7, LU-10.1, LU-13.5, LU-13.6, LU-16.1, M-1.8, N-3.1
 Which Policy(ies)
LU-13 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
      appropriate public agencies and districts, including, but not limited to, Ventura
      County, the Ventura Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO), Simi Valley
      Unified School District, public utility districts, Rancho Simi Recreation and Park
      District, and Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy regarding issues addressing
      the availability of utilities for new development proposals; annexations; location
      and design of community facilities to complement the community and meet                        
      community needs; a connected open space network and organization of places;
      the fair distribution of amenities and services to the community; and no undue
      concentration of high-impact uses.
                     LU-1.5, LU-1.7, LU-1.8, LU-2.5, LU-3.3, LU-6.1, LU-8.5, LU-8.6,
     Implements
                     LU-9.1~LU-9.3, LU-10.3, LU-10.4, LU-16.2, LU-21.1~LU-21.9,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     LU-21.11~LU-21.15, LU-26.2
LU-14 Fair Share Costs of Development. The City shall continue to require developers
      to construct improvements to the public right-of-way along their site frontage to pay
      fees in-lieu of constructing improvements, and to construct other infrastructure
      improvements, as necessary to serve the development, as well as those
      improvements identified as mitigation measures for project impacts under the                   
      California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
     Implements      LU-1.6, LU-18.4, LU-24.4, LU-24.5, LU-25.1, LU-27.3, ED-4.3, M-1.6,
 Which Policy(ies)   M-8.2, M-8.3, IU-1.2, PR-1.19, PR-1.20, S-7.8
LU-15 Business Park Overlay Zoning District. The City shall amend the Development
      Code to include a Business Park Overlay zoning district, land uses and permit
      requirements, and development standards.                                                      
     Implements      LU-2.3, LU-3.4, LU-20.1~LU-20.7, LU-23.2, LU-26.1, LU-27.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-27.2, LU-30.1, ED-1.1, ED-3.2
LU-16 Mixed-Use Overlay Zoning District. The City shall amend the Development Code
      to include a Mixed-Use Overlay zoning district, land uses and permit requirements,
      and development standards.                                                                    
     Implements      LU-2.1, LU-2.2, LU-3.6, LU-3.7, LU-8.4, LU-19.1~LU-19.6, LU-23.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-23.3, LU-24.1~LU-24.3, LU-30.2, LU-30.3, ED-3.1, PR-1.16
LU-17 Area of Interest Activities. The City shall continue to monitor activities taking
      place within Simi Valley’s Area of Interest, such as landfill operations, mineral
      excavations, and oil extraction activities. Agricultural and recreational uses shall be
      encouraged in this area. Reclamation plans for the areas within the City’s                     
      jurisdiction shall be required when these types of operations are terminated.
     Implements
                     LU-1.8, LU-1.9, LU-3.1, LU-5.12, LU-22.1, LU-22.2
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                  3-59                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                    CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                                      2012–2015     2016–2035
Table LU-4           Land Use and Community Design
                                                                                                                                Annual   Ongoing
                     Implementation Program
                                                                                               2011
LU-18 General Plan Consistency Program. The City shall ensure that the zoning for all
      development proposals is consistent with the General Plan per the following
      General Plan Consistency Guidelines: (1) all applicable General Plan policies are
      met; (2) the existing or proposed land uses are the same, or consistent with, those
      identified for the land use designation; (3) for residential projects, the existing or
      proposed number of units falls within the range of units allowed for that land use
      designation (or the next lower one); (4) if project includes multiple land use                
      designations, the proposed land uses for the project are found in the same
      proportion; (5) in the HPS areas, land not meeting slope criteria for that
      designation may consider adjacent land use designations; and (6) parcels less
      than 1 acre in size may have a different zoning, if criteria are met.
     Implements
                     All policies
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          3-60                                                 GENERAL PLAN

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (ED)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (ED)
The City of Simi Valley recognizes the importance of economic development to the community’s economic
vitality and fiscal health as these factors contribute to the City’s ability to generate sufficient revenues to
provide quality public services and infrastructure, and a variety of community facilities and amenities. The
goals and policies in this section address the City’s ongoing commitment to maintaining a strong and
balanced economy that provides opportunities for employment, economic growth, and community services
that enhance quality of life in the community.
These goals and policies provide a blueprint for sustainable economic development that revitalizes and
strengthens existing commercial and industrial areas through new development activity and creates local
employment opportunities for Simi Valley residents
in a variety of sectors that correlate to the high
education and skill levels in the community through
proactive business retention and attraction
strategies. Also, this strategy includes expanding
visitor and tourist-related services and amenities to
increase the length of stay and expenditure of
visitors to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library
and shoppers at the Simi Valley Town Center mall,
two of the City’s largest visitor attractors.          Simi Valley Town Center
GOAL ED-1
Economic Vitality and Sustainability. A strong, diversified economic base is provided with a mix of
businesses that contribute to Simi Valley’s identity and culture, provide high-paying jobs for
residents, and generate revenue that sustains the level and quality of services expected by the City’s
residents.
Policies
ED-1.1     Identify and Attract Key Industries. Encourage a variety of environmentally friendly industries to
           locate in Simi Valley, including biotechnology, computer software, multimedia, and business,
           professional, and financial services that provide high-skill/high wage job opportunities. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, A-3, LU-3, LU-15, LU-18, ED-1, ED-8)
ED-1.2     Facilitate Expansion of Existing Businesses. Promote the expansion of existing businesses to
           increase their employment and sales capacity, and extend efforts at business retention. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, A-3, LU-3, LU-18, ED-1, ED-8)
ED-1.3     Increase Availability of Developable Nonresidential Land. Identify underutilized parcels of land in
           older urban areas and possibilities for reuse. Facilitate the use of incentives, such as “graduated
           density zoning” to increase the intensity of development in appropriate locations. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           A-3, LU-3, LU-10, LU-18, ED-8)
GENERAL PLAN                                          3-61                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                          CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
ED-1.4    Strengthen Commercial Corridors. Pursue opportunities along Highway 118 for retail, commercial
          office, business park, and tourism uses, as well as the creation of additional transit-oriented
          development nodes with higher density, mixed-uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-10, LU-18, ED-3, ED-8)
ED-1.5    Provide Timely Business Assistance. In collaboration with other public and private agencies,
          maintain a business attraction program to assist with site identification, incentive programs,
          permitting assistance, and other aspects of relocating or establishing a business. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-18, ED-8)
GOAL ED-2
Revitalization of Commercial and Industrial Areas. Commercial and industrial areas that serve as
job centers and mixed-use neighborhood centers.
Policies
ED-2.1    Revitalized Shopping Districts. Revitalize and reposition older retail centers and strip commercial
          by providing a competitive array of stores and mixed-use commercial/residential development.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-2)
ED-2.2    Revitalize Older Industrial Districts. Revitalize and recycle older industrial areas into a mix of
          higher intensity business park, research and development, and professional office developments.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-2)
GOAL ED-3
Improved Jobs-Housing Relationship. An economy exists that provides jobs that are better matched
to the City’s labor force skills, housing types, and prices and provides opportunities for the local
labor force to live and work in Simi Valley.
Policies
ED-3.1    Range of Housing. Ensure that a selection of both single-family and multi-family housing types is
          available, providing a variety of housing densities types and prices available to all income levels.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-5, LU-10, LU-16, LU-18, ED-1)
ED-3.2    Range of Employment. Provide a
          wide range of diversified employment
          opportunities     for    Simi    Valley
          residents including employment
          fields, job categories, required
          training, and skill levels. Create and
          attract a broad range of jobs that are
          accessible to all residents, and that
          could affect a better match between
          the City’s resident labor force and the
          job base. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-15,
          LU-18, ED-1)                            New business park
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  3-62                                  GENERAL PLAN

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (ED)
ED-3.3     Proactive Industry Strategies. Create proactive industry growth strategies with a focus on
           industries that provide a range of higher skilled professional and technical jobs to match the City’s
           highly educated workforce. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-8)
GOAL ED-4
Fiscal Strength and Stability. Prudent fiscal practices are provided that contribute to the generation
of a high volume of public revenues to pay for municipal operations and provide a high quality of life
for City residents.
Policies
ED-4.1     Fiscal Principles. Support and coordinate economic development by following “best practices”
           fiscal principles to maintain a balanced budget that has the flexibility to provide both sufficient
           ongoing operational revenues and maintain a prudent level of reserves to meet economic
           uncertainties. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-6)
ED-4.2     Public Facilities Phasing. Develop a Public Facilities Financing and Phasing Plan to set priorities for
           infrastructure and facilities phasing and financing that will implement the General Plan priorities
           and link the General Plan with the annual budget process and the Capital Improvement Plan.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-5)
ED-4.3     Expand Financing Options. Update the City’s development impact fees and consider other
           financing techniques, as appropriate, to implement the Economic Development goals and policies.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-14, LU-18, ED-7)
ED-4.4     Monitor Program and Economic Indicators. Based on the General Plan economic and fiscal
           studies, evaluate the City’s overall fiscal performance on a regular basis through a monitoring
           program that tracks key economic and fiscal indicators of performance, such as sales, hotel, and
           property tax revenues. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-18, ED-6)
GOAL ED-5
Expanded Retail and Visitor-Serving Opportunities. A variety of shopping, entertainment, lodging,
and visitor-oriented activities are provided that maintain a competitive edge and provide increased
transient lodging and sales taxes.
Policies
ED-5.1     Tourism and Visitor-Related Activities.
           Increase the opportunities to attract tourism
           related to the Ronald Reagan Presidential
           Library and Museum and highway-traveling
           visitors between Ventura and Los Angeles
           counties through visitor-oriented economic
           development, including lodging, dining,
           shopping, and entertainment establishments.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-18, ED-1, ED-3, ED-8)
ED-5.2     Retail Goods         and Services. Maintain
           competitiveness     through additional retail
                                                               Ronald Reagan Presidential Library
GENERAL PLAN                                           3-63                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                    CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
           development that provides a wide range of retail goods and services, creates local revenue
           sources, supports other business sectors, and provides service and convenience benefits to local
           residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-18, ED-1, ED-4, ED-8)
ED-5.3     Expansion of Automobile Dealerships. Explore the long-term opportunity of expanding auto
           dealerships to enhance their competitiveness and retail sales potential to Simi Valley. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-18, ED-8)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Economic
Development Implementation Program, presented in Table ED-1 (Economic Development Implementation
Program), describes the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies
defined in this section.
                                                                                                     2012–2015     2016–2035
 Table ED-1          Economic Development Implementation
                                                                                                                               Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                              2011
 ED-1 Development Permit Process Assistance. The City shall provide development
      permit processing assistance, including: assistance with locating sites; submitting
      entitlement applications; providing guidance through the permit review and
      approval process; scheduling construction inspections; updating the City’s
      development impact fees and consider other financing techniques; and obtaining               
      Certificates of Occupancy to encourage new businesses to relocate to Simi Valley,
      the expansion of existing businesses, and new employment opportunities.
     Implements
                      LU-24.3, LU-25.3, ED-1.1, ED-1.2, ED-3.1, ED-3.2, ED-5.1, ED-5.2
 Which Policy(ies)
 ED-2 Façade Renovation Programs. The City shall provide assistance to businesses
      to improve the physical appearance of existing commercial businesses through the
      Los Angeles Avenue Façade Renovation Program and the Tapo Street Façade
      Renovation Program. Matching grants are available to business owners and
      property owners in these areas for exterior building improvements, such as                   
      painting, installation of awnings or windows, and/or new lighting and landscaping.
     Implements
                      LU-8.5, LU-8.6, ED-2.1, ED-2.2
 Which Policy(ies)
 ED-3 Promotion of Tourism. The City shall encourage uses that promote tourism
      related to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum, the Strathearn
      Historical Park and Museum, and other visitor-related activities within the City,
      including lodging, dining, shopping, and entertainment establishments.                       
     Implements
                      LU-29.1, ED-1.4, ED-5.1
 Which Policy(ies)
 ED-4 Shop Simi Valley First Program. The City shall continue to encourage residents
      to shop in Simi Valley to generate additional City-derived sales taxes to fund public
      safety and services for the community.                                                       
     Implements
                      ED-5.2
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          3-64                                                GENERAL PLAN

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (ED)
                                                                                                    2012–2015   2016–2035
Table ED-1           Economic Development Implementation
                                                                                                                            Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                             2011
ED-5 Public Facilities Financing and Phasing Plan. The City shall develop a Public
     Facilities Financing and Phasing Plan to establish priorities for infrastructure and
     facilities phasing and financing through the annual budget process and Capital
     Improvement Plan (CIP).                                                                     
     Implements      LU-1.5, LU-1.6, ED-4.2, M-1.6, M-2.1, M-12.10, M-14.9, PR-1.19,
 Which Policy(ies)   PR-1.20
ED-6 Fiscal Performance Monitoring and Analysis Program. The City shall establish
     a monitoring program to evaluate the City’s overall fiscal performance by tracking
     key economic and fiscal indicators, such as sales, hotel, and property tax
     revenues.                                                                                   
     Implements
                     LU-1.8, ED-4.1, ED-4.4
 Which Policy(ies)
ED-7 Economic Development Financing. Maintain and periodically update a database
     regarding potential sources of funding supporting the City’s economic development
     programs. These may encompass a range of techniques to incentivize business
     development, including infrastructure improvements required for new development.
     These will evolve over time due to legislation and state and federal funding
     availability. Currently, they include such methods as developer impact fees,
     property owner/developer exactions, developer advances/reimbursement                         
     agreements, City’s Capital Improvement Programs (CIP), Community
     Development Block Grants (CDBG)/Section 108 loans, Infrastructure Financing
     Districts (IFDs), Proposition 1C, Proposition 84, Business Improvement (BIDs),
     Community Facilities Districts, Special Assessment Districts, and user fees.
     Implements
                     LU-1.5, LU-1.6, ED-4.3, M-1.6, M-12.10, PR-1.19~PR-1.21, S-7.8
 Which Policy(ies)
ED-8 Business Retention and Attraction. Design and implement programs to support
     the retention and expansion of existing businesses and attract new businesses to
     Simi Valley that offer quality jobs for residents and contribute revenue support City
     services. This may take several forms such as financial assistance, expedited                
     permit processing density incentives, and marketing campaigns.
     Implements      LU-2.2~LU-2.4, LU-24.2, LU-24.3, LU-27.1, LU-31.1, ED-1.1~ED-1.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   ED-3.3, ED-5.1~ED-5.3
GENERAL PLAN                                                 3-65                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                              CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES (HR)
The goals and policies in this section
address Simi Valley’s history and are
intended to recognize, protect, and
preserve the historic, archeological/
paleontological, and natural resources
that contribute to the City’s historic
legacy. These resources include physical
elements that define the City’s past,
enrich the present, and give Simi Valley a
unique identity and charm. When
preserved and well maintained, these
structures, sites, features, and points of Strathearn Park historic Simi Store
interest provide a sense of permanence that fosters civic pride, stewardship, and community identity among
City residents and businesses. The City’s diversity of resources engenders an appreciation of the City’s rich
heritage by residents and visitors alike and importantly, differentiates Simi Valley as unique from all other
communities.
GOAL HR-1
Historic Resources. Historically significant landmarks, sites, natural features, and structures are
recognized and protected.
Policies
HR-1.1     Historical Resources Inventory. Contribute to the maintenance of Ventura County’s recorded
           inventory of historical landmarks for properties, objects, structures, and monuments having
           importance to the history or architecture of Ventura County. Photo documentation of inventoried
           historic sites or structures shall be required prior to demolition. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-1.2     Preservation or ReUse of Historical Structures. Support the preservation of structures listed on
           the National Register of Historic Places, list of California Historical Landmarks, and/or the Ventura
           County List of Historic Landmarks. Provide incentives, such as waivers of application fees, permit
           fees, and/or any liens placed by the City, to properties listed in the National or State Register or
           the Ventura County List of Historic Landmarks in exchange for preservation easements. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-1.3     Historical and Cultural Landmarks Recognition. Support the placement of monuments,
           photographs, markers, signs, or plaques at areas of historical or environmental interest or value.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-1.4     Adaptive Reuse. Support alternatives to demolition of historical sites or structures by promoting
           architecturally compatible rehabilitation or adaptive reuse. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-1.5     Historical Elements within New Projects. If preservation and/or adaptive reuse are not feasible
           options, require that proposed alteration of a historical site or structure incorporates a physical
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     3-66                                   GENERAL PLAN

HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES (HR)
         link to the past within the site or structural design. For example, incorporate historical
         photographs or artifacts within the proposed project; or preserve the location and structures of
         existing pathways, gathering places, seating areas, rail lines, roadways, or viewing vantage points
         within the proposed site design. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-1.6   Offer for Relocation of Designated Historic Structure. Require that prior to the demolition of a
         designated historic structure, developers offer the structure for relocation by interested parties.
         (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, HR-1)
GOAL HR-2
Archeological and Paleontological Resources. Important archeological and paleontological
resources are identified and protected within the City.
HR-2.1   New Development Activities. Require that new development protect and preserve paleontological
         and archaeological resources from destruction, and avoid and mitigate impacts to such resources.
         Through planning policies and permit conditions, ensure the preservation of significant
         archeological and paleontological resources and require that the impact caused by any
         development be mitigated. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-3, LU-18, HR-1)
HR-2.2   Grading and Excavation Activities. Maintain sources of information regarding paleontological and
         archeological sites and the names and addresses of responsible organizations and qualified
         individuals who can analyze, classify, record, and preserve paleontological or archeological
         findings. Require a qualified paleontologist/archeologist to monitor all grading and/or excavation
         where there is a potential to affect cultural, archeological, or paleontological resources. If these
         resources are found, the applicant shall implement the recommendations of the
         paleontologist/archeologist, subject to the approval of the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-18)
HR-2.3   Cultural Organizations. Notify
         cultural organizations, including
         Native American organizations, of
         proposed developments that have
         the potential to adversely impact
         cultural       resources.      Allow
         representatives of such groups to
         monitor grading and/or excavation
         of development sites. (Imp A-1,
         A-2, LU-2, LU-18, HR-2)
HR-2.4   Paleontological or Archaeological
         Materials.         Require      new Santa Susana Train Station
         development          to      donate
         scientifically valuable paleontological or archaeological materials to a responsible public or private
         institution with a suitable repository, located within Simi Valley or the County of Ventura,
         whenever possible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-3, LU-18)
GENERAL PLAN                                          3-67                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                   CHAPTER 3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Historic and Cultural
Resources Implementation Program, presented in Table HR-1 (Historic and Cultural Resources
Implementation Program), describes the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals
and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                  2012–2015     2016–2035
 Table HR-1          Historic and Cultural Resources Implementation
                                                                                                                            Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                           2011
 HR-1 Cultural Heritage Ordinance. The City shall continue to implement the City’s
      Cultural Heritage Ordinance to preserve and protect historical landmarks, historic
      districts, sites of merit, and points of historical interest.                             
     Implements
                     HR-1.1~HR-1.6, HR-2.1
 Which Policy(ies)
 HR-2 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. Coordinate with appropriate
      agencies, such as the Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board and Simi Valley
      Historical Society, regarding issues of historical significance.                          
     Implements
                     HR-2.3
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         3-68                                              GENERAL PLAN

CHAPTER 5 Mobility and Infrastructur
                                                      CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
INTRODUCTION
The City of Simi Valley recognizes the importance of highly effective mobility and infrastructure systems. An
efficient transportation network that moves people and goods throughout the City and beyond while
minimizing impacts to the environment and local neighborhoods is a critical component of the community.
Utilities that distribute water and power, infrastructure that drains stormwater, treats sewage, and collects
solid waste, and systems that provide telecommunications services to residents and businesses are necessary
for commerce and a high quality of life for the community. The goals and policies in this section address
mobility and infrastructure systems in Simi Valley and provide direction to maintain and enhance these key
assets and services to keep pace with the growth and development anticipated to occur in Simi Valley over
the next twenty years.
MOBILITY (M)
Convenient and safe movement between home, school, work, and shopping is an important component of
the quality of life of the community. As Simi Valley reaches its development capacity, increasing traffic
volumes result in greater levels of congestion on area streets and highways, and expansion of existing
roadways becomes more difficult. The goals and policies in this Mobility section provide sustainable
strategies to meet the City’s requirement for safe and efficient travel at the level of development anticipated
to occur as the Land Use Plan is built out over the course of the next twenty years. The associated
implementation plan for these strategies provides for development of the Land Use plan in a way that is
economical and efficient, and minimizes the adverse impacts of traffic to the greatest extent possible.
Simi Valley has adopted several strategies to achieve a safe and efficient transportation system, including a
Land Use Plan that encourages mixed-use and transit-oriented development; the largest municipally owned
and operated transit system in Ventura County; and the expansion of an intelligent, multi-modal circulation
and mobility system. Strategies to reduce the reliance on automobiles include encouraging the use of
alternative modes of travel. An important component of this system is the planning and implementation of
complete streets.
Local roadway traffic              Bus stop at Simi Valley Town Center Pedestrian scene at Simi Valley Town Center
The Mobility plan also includes policies to encourage the use of intelligent transportation systems through
the use of adaptive traffic controls and smart street design standards along with providing real-time travel
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      5-2                                  GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
information to system users to encourage smart travel choices. Also included are policies that encourage the
adoption of travel demand management strategies, neighborhood traffic control measures, and land use
connectivity to manage traffic on local streets and encourage non-motorized travel alternatives.
Prevention or reduction of traffic congestion involves many different issues ranging from land use decisions
and funding sources to the coordination of public and private construction, which can best be achieved
through the implementation of the General Plan policies. The following goals and policies provide guidance
to ensure that future development within the City supports Simi Valley’s commitment to safe, efficient, cost-
effective, and high-quality transportation services in the City.
  Local and Regional Transportation System
The City of Simi Valley is served by various transportation facilities, including a regional freeway (SR-118), a
freight and commuter rail line, an extensive roadway network, and several bus transit lines. The City’s
Mobility plan acknowledges that though the City’s transportation system is integral to the regional network,
its local roadway system is designed to provide access for City residents and to protect the City’s facilities
from the potential impacts of regional traffic as a result of congestion on these regional facilities.
An important component of the City’s transportation system is the implementation of complete streets.
Complete streets create a true multi-modal transportation network designed and operated so they are safe,
comfortable, and convenient for all users including motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, children, seniors,
persons with disabilities, movers of commercial goods, and transit riders of all ages and abilities in a manner
that is suitable to the context of the community and the General Plan. By increasing transportation options,
complete streets have many societal and public health benefits by reducing congestion, improving public
health and air quality, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. When people have more transportation
options, there is less traffic congestion and an increase in the overall capacity of the transportation network.
The lack of key elements in the circulation system, or inadequate or inefficient design of transportation
facilities and programs places an additional burden on other streets in the network, reduces mobility options,
and increases the overall cost of the circulation system.
Bicyclist on arterial street              Metrolink commuter rail             Simi Valley Transit
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Goals and policies in this section are designed to provide a comprehensive and integrated transportation
system that serves all sectors of the community. They also address the City’s ongoing efforts to establish and
pursue sufficient funding sources to construct and maintain the facilities needed to achieve its mobility goals.
GENERAL PLAN                                            5-3                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                        CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
The City will continue to work with other public agencies and the private sector to provide the tools and
resources to plan, develop, and maintain a safe and high quality mobility system in Simi Valley.
GOAL M-1
Safe and Efficient Transportation System. The safe and efficient movement of people, goods, and
services is provided by encouraging the design, construction, and maintenance of an integrated
mobility and circulation system, including roads, transit, bike paths, sidewalks, and commuter rail.
Policies
M-1.1        Comprehensive Mobility System. Establish a diverse transportation system that provides mobility
             options for the community, including adequate roads, transit service, bike paths, pedestrian
             walkways, and commuter rail services. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1)
M-1.2        Integrated Multi-Modal System. Provide an integrated transportation system that supports the
             land use plan set forth in the Land Use Element. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-8, M-10, M-13,
             M-15)
M-1.3        Complete Streets. Accommodate and balance the needs of all users of the transportation system
             including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, freight, and motor vehicle drivers through all phases
             of transportation and development projects so that all users can travel safely within the various
             public rights-of-way. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-4, M-8)
M-1.4        Roadway Design Elements. Incorporate, where practical, complete streets design elements into
             projects including sidewalks and other measures to improve pedestrian safety, median and
             intersection curbing treatments, better bus stop placement, traffic-calming measures, bicycle
             accommodations, and treatments for disabled travelers to improve safety. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
             M-2, M-4, M-8, M-10, M-13, M-15)
M-1.5        Capital Improvements Program. Identify transportation improvement projects for inclusion in the
             City's Capital Improvements Program and develop prioritization and timing for each project based
             on the City's mobility needs. Encourage the identified mobility system to be provided in a timely
             manner to meet the needs of the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-18, M-1)
M-1.6        Fair Share Costs. Establish fees on new development for all transportation modes and
             Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs and amenities,4 and ensure that payment is
             collected for the fair share of the costs of new and enhanced facilities and programs. (Imp A-1, A-2,
             LU-14, LU-18, ED-6, ED-8, M-6)
M-1.7        Regional Funding. Work with the Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC) to increase
             the share of regional funding for pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and transportation systems
             management projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-7)
M-1.8        Impediments to Traffic Flow. Enforce prohibition of illegal vendors in public rights-of-way to allow
             for safe traffic flow. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-12, LU-18, M-16)
4
  Refer to Policy M-11.1 through Policy M-11.6.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        5-4                                   GENERAL PLAN
MOBILITY (M)
REGIONAL FACILITIES
The success of Simi Valley’s transportation system is directly connected to the efficiency of the regional
roadways. Goals and policies below express the City’s commitment to regional coordination and support for
enhancement of the regional transportation system.
GOAL M-2
Regional Facilities. A network of regional facilities and connections to those facilities is provided
that ensure the safe and efficient movement of people and goods from within the City to areas
outside its boundaries, and minimizes the use of City streets by regional through traffic.
Policies
M-2.1       State Route 118 Expansion. Support Caltrans in finding financial assistance for, and the
            expeditious construction of, additional permanent lanes in each direction of State Route 118
            within the City and for other local freeway improvements, and promote and support interim
            freeway improvements and management to alleviate congestion. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-5,
            M-12)
M-2.2       Integration of Transportation Systems with the Region. Maintain a working relationship with
            regional and surrounding local agencies, to implement systems that serve the needs of regional
            travelers in a way that minimizes impacts on Simi Valley’s local street network. (Imp A-1, A-2,
            LU-18, M-12)
M-2.3       Regional Consistency. Maintain consistency between the City of Simi Valley Master Plan of Streets
            and the Ventura County Regional Roadway Network. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
M-2.4       Regional Traffic Mitigation. Participate in programs (Congestion Management Program, Growth
            Management Program, etc.) to reduce regional traffic congestion. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
M-2.5       Intersection Improvements. Work collaboratively with regional agencies to help improve the
            capacity at intersections in the City that connect to regional facilities to improve traffic flows along
            major roadways. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-12)
ROADWAY DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS
The existing regional and local roadway network in Simi Valley is a hierarchical system of highways and local
streets developed to provide regional traffic movement and local access. The City has four street
classifications in addition to local streets. Figure M-1 (Roadway Cross Sections) depicts typical cross sections
for the roadway classifications. The street classifications for the major facilities in the City are shown in
Figure M-2 (Functional Street Classification). The description and cross sections for the City’s arterial and
collector roadways are listed in Appendix M (Description of Roadways). The following goals and policies
address street classifications and roadway design standards, the application of those standards to the various
facility types, the need to protect rights-of-way for the adequate development of future facilities, and the
planned expansion of existing streets as conditions warrant and resources are available.
GENERAL PLAN                                             5-5                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                      CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
GOAL M-3
Roadway Design. A safe and efficient roadway circulation system is provided within the City that
minimizes the impact on residential areas, maintains the suburban character of the community, and
accommodates conservative growth within the City of Simi Valley.
Policies
M-3.1      Street Character. Design roadways, pedestrian areas, walkways, street name signs, and utilities in
           applicable outlying areas to provide for low maintenance costs, safe and adequate drainage, and
           passage of vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists. Drought-tolerant natural landscaping should be
           used in parkways adjacent to open space areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-4)
M-3.2      Street Standards. Maintain a complete set of Public Works Street Standards that shall be updated
           on a regular basis. All public streets shall meet this standard. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-2, M-4)
M-3.3      Private Streets. Improve private streets to public street standards prior to dedication to the City.
           Private streets should provide for adequate circulation and emergency vehicle movement. Private
           roadways that carry 50 or more vehicles during the peak hour or that are utilized for on-street
           parking shall be designed to public street standards. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2, M-4)
M-3.4      Hillside Streets. Respect the natural contours of the land, minimize grading requirements, and
           minimize the percentage of land devoted to streets for new roadways in hillside areas. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-7, LU-18, M-4)
M-3.5      Street Improvements. As part of the development of vacant land or as part of an expansion of use
           on developed land, but not including the construction of room additions or other accessory
           structures appurtenant to an existing single-family dwelling, the property owner or developer shall
           dedicate, widen, extend, and construct street and parkway improvements, including necessary
           drainage structures, within and adjacent to that property, and any off-site improvements
           reasonably related to the project according to standards set forth in Appendix M (Description of
           Roadways) and City street standards. Where necessary, variations from Figure M-1 (Roadway
           Cross Sections) may be approved by the City Engineer if their purpose is to save mature trees,
           reduce ultimate scarring, provide enriched parkways, separate pedestrians, bicycle riders, and
           equestrians from vehicles, and meet other General Plan policies as long as safe and adequate
           passage of vehicles is ensured. The spacing of parkway trees may be modified to preserve
           viewsheds from the hillsides. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-1, M-2, M-4)
M-3.6      Protection of Rights-of-Way. Protect future and existing rights-of-way for designated future
           streets and highways to the extent possible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-18, M-2, M-4)
M-3.7      System Completion. Actively promote the completion of the arterial street system through the
           elimination of substandard width segments and through the construction of missing links.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-2)
GOAL M-4
Level of Service. Efficient movement of vehicles, people, and other modes of travel along City
streets is provided by maintaining acceptable levels of service at intersections.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      5-6                                   GENERAL PLAN
         EP           SP               36’-44’             14’-16’               36’-44’              SP             EP
           RW                                                                                                   RW
           Sidewalk                                        Raised                                          Sidewalk
                                                           Median
     Primary Arterial
     Limited/Controlled Access
              EP            SP           25’-32’             14’               25’-32’          SP              EP
                 RW                                                                                        RW
                Sidewalk                                   Raised                                    Sidewalk
                                                           Median
          Secondary Arterial
          Limited/Controlled Access
              EP            SP                             52’-68’                              SP              EP
                 RW                                                                                        RW
                Sidewalk                                                                             Sidewalk
          Secondary Arterial
          Limited/Controlled Access
          (may have painted median)
                      EP          SP         20’-25’          14’            20’-25’       SP              EP
                       RW                                                                             RW
                       Sidewalk                                                                 Sidewalk
                                                             Raised
                 Minor Arterial                            or Painted
                                                            Median
                 Limited/Controlled Access
                      EP          SP                        40’-52’                        SP              EP
                       RW                                                                             RW
                       Sidewalk                                                                 Sidewalk
                 Collector
                 Limited/Controlled Access
                 (may have painted median)
SP - Standard Parkway                                  Not to Scale
                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
EP - Enriched Parkway
R/W - Right-of-Way Line
Notes:
These cross sections are general in nature and are not intended to be used
                                                                                           General Plan Update
for design purposes.
Sidewalks may also meander outside of the Standard Parkway within the
                                                                                                       Roadway
Enriched Parkway or a separate sidewalk easement.                                                    Cross Sections
Where bike lanes are required, an additional 12 feet of right-of-way is necessary.
                                                                                                                      Figure M-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                        Lost Canyons Dr                                                                                                                                 Functional Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Classification
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Freeway
                                                   d
                                      Los Alamo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Primary Arterial
                                               s Ca
                                                                                                                                                                 Tow nsh ip Av                                Ka
                                                   nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d                                                                                       Secondary Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nD
                                                                                                                                                                 Aven ida Sim i                                                                     a
                                                      nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Secondary Arterial (Not Built)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fla n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aS
                                                                                                                                                                  Alam o St                                                                                                                                  Minor Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                             Lo s
                                    A n g e le s A v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minor Arterial (Not Built)
                                 D r
                             s a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Collector
                      mi                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                            Ý
                                                                                                                                                            A
                   Qui A r r                                                      Co c h                                                                          Coc hran St
                             o                                                             r a n St                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collector (Not Built)
                                 yo S                        as
                                                                  y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yosemite Av                Kue hne r Dr
                                        im
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Stea rns St
                                                           E
                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                                       Tap o C a n y o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                 Seq uoi a Av
                                                                                                                           Errin ger Rd          Syca mor e Dr
                                                                                                      Firs t St
                                                                     Mad era Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Urban Restriction Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                           U.P.R. R.
                           a Rd                                                                          Los Ang eles Av                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                a R e ja d
             rr
        T ie                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Water Body
                                                                                        Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Railroad
                                                                                                          Roy al Av
                                                                                                                               Fitz gera ld Rd
                                                       d                      Sinaloa                                                                                                                                                                      Blac
                                                 era R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Box Canyo
                                     Mad
                                                                               Lake                                                                                                                                                                        kC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               on R d
            Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              any
E
í
?
                                                 Woo d
     n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
    O lse
                                                   Ra
                                                    nc
                                                       hP
                   Bard
                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                       on
                 Reservoir                                 ark
                                                                                  ny
                                                           wa y           Ca
                                                                         Lo
                                                                     ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Source: City of Simi Valley, 2007; PBS&J, 2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Date Revised: October 13, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\StreetClassification.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0    0.25   0.5            1     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure M-2


MOBILITY (M)
Policy
M-4.1      Level of Service (LOS). Design the vehicular circulation system to operate with intersections at
           level of service (LOS) C or better during peak traffic periods. Street intersections may operate on
           an interim basis at LOS D during peak hours around major industrial, commercial, and mixed-use
           centers where the short-term attainment of LOS C may be impractical or not attainable without
           mitigation that has a far greater negative impact than allowing for a greater level of service.
           Projected LOS E or F operation at any time of day will not be acceptable. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
           LU-18, M-2)
  System Operations and Traffic Control
Goals and policies in this section address the need to provide and maintain a high-quality and state-of-the-art
traffic control system to assist the City with managing traffic flow and providing efficient traffic operations,
including the use of advanced technologies and strategies for neighborhood traffic management. There are
also goals and policies to address the need for regular monitoring of system performance to identify
problems at the outset, maintenance of transportation facilities, and ongoing system enhancement and
improvement. Finally, parking is addressed as an essential component of operating a comprehensive
transportation system.
GOAL M-5
Traffic Controls. A high-quality and modern traffic control system is established for the efficient
movement of people, goods, and services along City streets.
Policies
M-5.1      Traffic Control Design. Design traffic control measures
           to ensure City streets and roads function with safety
           and efficiency, including separate left- or right-turn
           lanes to improve safety and alleviate traffic congestion
           or excessive delays. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-5)
M-5.2      Monitor Traffic Conditions. Monitor traffic conditions
           and optimize traffic signal operations and coordination
           on an ongoing basis. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-5)
M-5.3      Advanced Signal Technology. Implement advanced Traffic signal
           signal and intersection technologies that improve
           traffic flow and optimize traffic signal timing and coordination to reduce travel time and delay
           along major corridors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-5)
GOAL M-6
Monitoring and Maintenance. Optimal roadway system operation is maintained through
monitoring of current traffic conditions, maintaining existing roadways, and making improvements
to the circulation and mobility network, when necessary.
GENERAL PLAN                                           5-11                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                     CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Policies
M-6.1      Current Traffic Data. Monitor traffic conditions on an ongoing basis as necessary to comply with
           the City’s Congestion Management Program. (Imp A-1, A-2, A-3, LU-18, M-5)
M-6.2      Roadway Maintenance. Carry out roadway maintenance programs that inspect, repair, and
           rehabilitate pavement surfaces in order to preserve the quality of City streets and thoroughfares.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1)
M-6.3      Improvements to Reflect Changing Traffic Conditions. Consider additional improvements in areas
           with operational issues identified by monitoring traffic conditions, such as intersections with heavy
           turn volumes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-5)
M-6.4      Railroad Grade Crossings. Encourage the railroad entities to continue to improve their railroad
           grade crossing surfaces and safety devices to minimize crossing delay and street maintenance.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Goals and policies in this section identify innovative strategies, improve the operation and management of
transportation systems, and provide travelers with information to make more informed decisions regarding
their travel choices.
GOAL M-7
Advanced Technology Systems. An efficient transportation system is established that utilizes
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) to improve operations of existing and future facilities
through advanced technologies, such as adaptive signal controls, real-time parking availability, and
real-time transit information.
Policies
M-7.1      Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Program and Implementation. Create and implement ITS
           programs and infrastructure improvements that will reduce peak-hour traffic volumes and
           prioritize needs. Implement ITS measures to achieve cost-effective improvements in
           transportation system performance and operations. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-5)
M-7.2      Traffic Management Devices. Secure state-of-the-art traffic
           management devices, such as synchronized traffic signals. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-5)
M-7.3      Traffic Signal Operations. Improve traffic signal operations by
           optimizing signal timing, interconnecting signalized intersections along
           arterial streets, and installing computerized master traffic signal control
           systems in intensively utilized areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-6)
M-7.4      Real-Time Travel. Work with Caltrans and transit providers to provide
           real-time travel and parking availability information for transportation
           system conditions and make the information available to users and
           operators. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
                                                                                       Traffic control device
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    5-12                                    GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
M-7.5     Coordination with Adjacent Jurisdictions. Coordinate operations with adjacent jurisdictions to
          enhance the efficiency of inter-jurisdictional roadway system operations and to encourage
          reciprocal bus passes for adjacent jurisdictions. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
SYSTEM ACCESS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Goals and policies in this section identify the need to balance providing access to development with the need
to maintain the efficient safe flow of traffic along roadways in the system through ongoing improvements.
Street improvements required of a development must be coordinated with other development activity in the
area.
GOAL M-8
System Improvements. Safe and efficient movement of people and goods is provided within the
City through the timely improvement of streets and intersections and the restriction of access along
streets according to the City’s street standards.
Policies
M-8.1     Existing Streets. Improve existing roads within the City as discretionary development creates the
          need. Provide additional roads as needed to complement the General Plan network, and maintain
          all such roads so that they are safe and functioning at an acceptable LOS. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-18, M-1, M-2)
M-8.2     Resolving Impacts. Resolve project-related off-site traffic impacts generated by new development
          and require contributions for cumulative improvements or additions to the mobility system.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-14, LU-18, M-2, M-6)
M-8.3     Cost of Improvements. Allocate costs associated with resolving cumulative off-site traffic impacts
          on the basis of trip generation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-14, LU-18, M-2, M-6)
M-8.4     Accommodate Alternative Modes. Condition discretionary development to minimize traffic
          impacts by incorporating sidewalks and bicycle pathways, bicycle racks and lockers, ridesharing
          programs, transit improvements (bus turnouts, shelters, benches), transportation demand
          measures, and/or transit subsidies for employees or residents of the proposed development.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2)
M-8.5     Coordinate Improvements. Coordinate project phasing with the construction of on-site and off-
          site circulation improvements to maintain optimum levels of traffic movement. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-1, LU-18, M-2)
M-8.6     Driveways and Access. Limit driveway and local street access on arterial streets to maintain a
          desired quality of traffic flow. Wherever possible, consolidate driveways and implement access
          controls during redevelopment of adjacent parcels. A second access to a side street for major
          projects should be located in the middle of a block adjacent to a limited-access arterial. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2)
M-8.7     Emergency Access. Provide all residential, commercial, and industrial areas with efficient and safe
          access for emergency vehicles and evacuation routes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2)
GENERAL PLAN                                           5-13                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                        CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
M-8.8       Funding Measures. Utilize bonding and innovative funding measures to fund identified
            transportation improvements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, IU-1)
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
Goals and policies in this section address the need to manage potential traffic impacts in residential areas as
a result of future development and/or capacity issues along nearby arterial and collector streets.
GOAL M-9
Neighborhood Traffic Control. Community character and quality of life are maintained in City
neighborhoods through the implementation of neighborhood traffic management techniques.
Policies
M-9.1       Neighborhood Transportation System.
            New development that proposes or is
            required to construct street improvements
            shall develop a transportation network
            that     provides      for     well-connected
            neighborhoods wherein local streets are
            designed to discourage through traffic, but
            that encourages residents to travel to
            schools, parks, commercial centers, etc.
            without driving. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, Local neighborhood street—no traffic
            M-2, M-8, M-9, M-10, M-13, M-16)
M-9.2       Neighborhood Traffic Control Measures. Incorporate traffic control measures in residential
            neighborhoods as part of proposed roadway improvement or development projects to mitigate
            traffic impacts to residents and reduce the negative impacts of motor vehicle traffic on the
            residents’ quality of life. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-2)
M-9.3       Design of Traffic Calming Devices. Selected traffic management devices should be appropriately
            designed with consideration to accessibility, drainage, underground utilities, adequate visibility,
            landscaping, and the needs of emergency, sanitation, and transit vehicles. The devices should not
            result in unintended consequences, such as increased emergency response times, or unwanted
            traffic diversion. Balance safety, quality of life, and efficiency when considering traffic calming
            improvements to local neighborhood streets. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-2, M-4)
PARKING
Policies in this section address the need to provide a comprehensive parking strategy to address demand and
a set of innovative policies that considers options to traditional parking facilities and operations.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       5-14                                 GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
GOAL M-10
Parking. An adequate supply of convenient parking is found throughout the City through a parking
system that balances the goals of economic development, advanced Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITS) technologies, reduced travel through Transportation Demand Management (TDM),
livable neighborhoods, sustainability, environmental sensitivity, and public safety within the City.
Policies
M-10.1    Off-Street and Required Parking. Provide
          adequate off-street parking in all new or
          expanded projects as part of project approval
          or construction. Require that new development
          provide adequate, convenient parking for
          residents, guests, business patrons, and
          visitors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2, M-3)
M-10.2    Curb Cuts. Require new development to
          minimize curb cuts to protect on-street parking Commercial parking lot
          spaces. Close curb cuts to create on-street
          parking spaces wherever feasible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2)
M-10.3    Parking Configuration. Site and design new developments so as to avoid the use of parking
          configurations or management programs that will be difficult to maintain and/or enforce.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2, M-3)
M-10.4    Up-to-Date Parking Requirements. Periodically review and update off-street parking requirements
          to ensure that new development provides off-street parking sufficient to serve approved uses.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-3)
M-10.5    Parking Provisions. Ensure that adequate parking is provided for existing and future uses while
          considering shared parking opportunities, TDM plans, and availability of alternate modes of travel,
          based on the site's proximity to transit. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2, M-3)
M-10.6    Public-Private Partnerships. Consider public-private partnerships to meet the City's parking
          demand in areas where it may be desirable for example to remove on-street parking to modify
          street frontages, increase transit parking opportunities, or provide mixed-use/transit-oriented
          development opportunities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2, M-3)
M-10.7    Parking and Shared Parking Area. Support measures that help to reduce the space required for
          parking and parking demand. This may encompass such techniques as shared parking
          opportunities, automated parking facilities, and flex vehicles in mixed-use, transit-oriented, and
          pedestrian-oriented areas throughout the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-3)
M-10.8    Parking Requirements for Pedestrian-Oriented and Local-Serving Uses. Consider revised parking
          requirements for small-scale neighborhood-serving commercial uses in areas that derive most of
          their trade from walk-in business, especially where on-street or other public parking is available.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-3)
GENERAL PLAN                                           5-15                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                      CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
  Alternative Travel Modes
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM)
Major physical improvements to the City’s roadway system are costly, require right-of-way, and may disrupt
the established character of an area and the quality of life for residents and businesses. It is increasingly
recognized that roadway widening is not always the most feasible approach to addressing traffic congestion.
Goals and policies in this section provide a comprehensive set of policies that recognize the need for a multi-
modal approach to mobility in the community. A key element of this approach is the use of Transportation
Demand Management (TDM) that refers to the various measures adopted to change travel behavior to
increase transportation system efficiency and to reduce the number of vehicles using the roadway systems
and the vehicle miles traveled. This approach also manages travel demand by reducing peak hour vehicle
trips, increasing vehicle occupancy, and providing alternative travel modes to the automobile. It recognizes
that not everyone can carpool, take transit, or work close to home. However, there are many trips that can
be modified using various TDM techniques which include incentives to use alternative forms of travel, reduce
the number of vehicle trips, or travel during non-peak times. These goals and policies support and strengthen
the City’s existing TDM program by encouraging the use of alternative travel modes, including public transit,
pedestrian travel, and bicycling. There are also goals and policies to address the movement of goods within
the community.
GOAL M-11
Transportation Demand. Single-occupant motor vehicle travel in the City and traffic impacts are
reduced through Transportation Demand Management (TDM) measures that ensure efficiency of
the existing transportation network and promote the movement of people instead of personal
automobiles.
Policies
M-11.1      Transportation Demand Management (TDM). Utilize and promote TDM measures to encourage
            and create incentives for the use of alternative travel modes, reduction of vehicle miles traveled,
            dispersion of peak traffic, and better utilization of the existing transportation infrastructure.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-11)
M-11.2      Alternative Transportation Modes. Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation
            modes, such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public transit, bicycles, and walking; and provide
            facilities that support such alternative modes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-11)
M-11.3      Airport Shuttles. Work with area transit providers to develop and promote a transportation
            system that serves the Los Angeles International Airport and the Glendale-Pasadena-Burbank
            Airport. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-11, M-12)
M-11.4      Demand Reduction Programs. Work with area businesses to develop programs that promote the
            use of multiple-occupancy vehicle programs for shopping, business, and other uses to reduce
            vehicle miles traveled. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-11)
M-11.5      Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Programs. Encourage existing major employers to
            develop and implement TDM programs to reduce peak period trip generation such as the use of
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     5-16                                 GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
           flex time, staggered working hours, high occupancy company-sponsored vehicles, ride-sharing
           programs, and any other means to lessen peak-hour commuter traffic. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-11)
M-11.6     Transportation Demand Amenities. Encourage major employers to provide transit subsidies,
           bicycle facilities (including changing/shower facilities), alternative work schedules, ridesharing,
           telecommuting, work-at-home programs, employee education, and preferential parking for
           carpools/vanpools. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-11)
BIKEWAYS
Bikeways are an important component of a comprehensive
transportation system to provide the opportunity for recreational use
and as an alternative means of travel within the community and the
region. In Simi Valley, bikeways are anticipated to become even more
heavily used as the Bicycle Master Plan is implemented. The City’s
Bicycle Master Plan contains information on existing and proposed
bicycle facilities. Goals and policies in this section address the need to
provide a safe, efficient, integrated, and comprehensive bikeway
system that will allow for and promote the use of bicycling both for
recreation and as a reliable alternative to automobile travel in the City
and the region. These policies are intended to complement the City’s
Bicycle Master Plan, which may be updated without further revision to Bicycle lane on local roadway
the General Plan.
GOAL M-12
Bicycling as a Travel Mode Option. Develop bicycle facilities and programs in Simi Valley by
providing an integrated, complete, and safe bicycle system and encourage bicycling as a viable
option to automobile travel.
Policies
M-12.1     Bicycle Master Plan. Maintain and update the City’s Bicycle Master Plan to determine desired
           improvements to the City's bicycle network and plan, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway, and
           prioritize improvements for orderly implementation coordinated with the capital improvement
           program. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-10)
M-12.2     Bicycle Usage. Promote bicycling as an option for short trips
           and allow bicycles to connect to mass transit. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, M-9)
M-12.3     Bicycle Facilities. Incorporate bicycle and pedestrian
           facilities in the design plans for new streets and highways
           and, where feasible, in plans for improving existing roads.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-4, M-8, M-13)
M-12.4     Regional Bikeway System. In cooperation with the adjacent
           cities and the Ventura County Transportation Commission,
           plan and provide a system of bicycle lanes and trails within
                                                                           Bicycle trail
GENERAL PLAN                                             5-17                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                         CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
            Simi Valley, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway, that links the City to the surrounding region.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-8, M-10, M-12)
M-12.5      Bicycle Access. Require new development projects on existing and potential bicycle routes to
            provide bicycle and pedestrian access to and through the project and to construct links to adjacent
            uses where appropriate. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2)
M-12.6      Bicycle Network Connections. Provide a continuous bicycle network, including the Arroyo Simi
            Greenway, that connects community facilities and other public and private buildings to each other,
            to the street, and to transit facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, M-2, M-10)
M-12.7      Bikeway Amenities. Require that new development projects (e.g., employment centers,
            educational institutions, and commercial centers) provide bicycle-support facilities, such as bicycle
            racks and storage facilities, to promote bicycle use. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-3, LU-18, M-2)
M-12.8      Bicycle Parking. Coordinate with transit operators to provide for secure short- and long-term
            bicycle parking at primary transit stations. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12, M-15)
M-12.9      Bicycle and Pedestrian Safety. Provide for the safety of bicyclists and pedestrians through
            provision of adequate facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-10)
M-12.10 Funding Sources. Develop new funding sources for maintenance of roadway, pedestrian, and
            bikeway facilities, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-5, ED-7)
PUBLIC TRANSIT
Public transit service in Simi Valley includes Simi Valley Transit's fixed-route bus service, Americans with
Disabilities Act and Dial-A-Ride (seniors over the age of 60) paratransit service, VISTA commuter bus service,
and Metrolink commuter rail. Simi Valley maintains a well-developed municipal transit service that currently
serves approximately 500,000 passengers annually. Goals and policies in this section address the need to
provide a comprehensive, efficient, and integrated public transportation system that serves all sectors of the
community including commuters and those with special needs. The policies include a comprehensive
approach that considers both the local and regional needs of transit riders.
GOAL M-13
Public Transit. A safe, comprehensive, and integrated public transportation system is provided that
serves as an essential component of a multi-modal mobility system, provides local and regional
mobility for residents, including special transportation needs of the elderly, school children, low
income, physically handicapped, and other low mobility groups, and encourages the use of public
transportation as an alternative to automobile travel.
Policies
M-13.1      Transit. Provide alternative forms of public and private transit and give routing, scheduling, and
            planning for work force, youth, handicapped, senior citizens, and shoppers a priority. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        5-18                                GENERAL PLAN
MOBILITY (M)
M-13.2  Transit Design. Support a well-designed transit system to meet the mobility needs of residents and
        visitors including senior, disabled, and transit-dependent persons. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12,
        M-15)
M-13.3  Transit Frequency. Support increased frequency transit service and capital investments to serve
        high-density employment, commercial, residential, or mixed-use areas and activity centers.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-6, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.4  Transit Priority Measures. Consider improvements in transit efficiency and travel times by
        implementing transit priority measures to help bypass congested areas, which may include transit
        signal priority, queue bypass lanes, and exclusive transit lanes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12,
        M-15)
M-13.5  Transit Support Facilities. Participate in efforts to develop
        transit support facilities, including park-and-ride lots, bus
        stops, and shelters. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12,
        M-15)
M-13.6  Multi-Modal Transit. Promote a variety of transit services
        including rail, enhanced buses, express buses, local buses,
        and school buses to meet the needs of residents, workers,
        and visitors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.7  Interconnected Transit System. Create an interconnected
        transportation system that allows a shift in travel from
        private passenger vehicles to alternative modes, including
        public transit, ride sharing, car-sharing, bicycling, and
        walking. Before funding transportation improvements that Bus stop with shelter
        increase vehicle miles traveled, consider alternatives such as increasing public transit or improving
        bicycle and pedestrian travel routes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.8  Transit System Review and Interjurisdictional Cooperation. Work with the Ventura County
        Transportation Commission to ensure the full coordination of the City’s municipal transit system
        with other transit systems in adjacent areas. Work collaboratively with regional agencies and
        adjacent jurisdictions to improve transit service, accessibility, frequency, and connectivity resulting
        in increased ridership and fewer personal automobile trips. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.9  Second Train Station Location. Work with Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) and Metrolink to open a
        west side railroad station in the vicinity of Mountain Gate Plaza when it is shown to be cost
        effective. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.10 Transit Services for Special Needs Populations. Support efforts to increase accessible transit
        services and facilities for the elderly, disabled, and other transportation disadvantaged persons.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.11 Demand-Responsive Service. Support the provision of demand-responsive service (e.g.,
        paratransit) and other transportation services for those unable to use conventional transit.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-9, M-12, M-15)
M-13.12 Development Contributions. Require developer contributions for transit facilities and
        improvements and programs adopted by the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2)
GENERAL PLAN                                         5-19                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                      CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
M-13.13 Development Review. Development projects should provide for transit right-of-way needs to
           offset impacts of the development on the Simi Valley transit system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2)
M-13.14 Bus Turnouts. Provide bus turnouts in new development projects when located on established bus
           routes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2)
WALKABLE COMMUNITIES
Goals and policies in this section provide a comprehensive set of policies to improve the pedestrian-
friendliness of the community, improve the quality of life through design enhancements, and promote
walking as an alternative to automobile travel.
GOAL M-14
Pedestrian Travel. A safe and comfortable pedestrian environment is provided that results in
walking as a desirable travel choice, particularly for short trips, within the City.
Policies
M-14.1     Pedestrian Safety. Design and maintain sidewalks along all roadways, streets, and intersections to
           emphasize pedestrian safety and comfort through a variety of street design and traffic
           management solutions. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-2, M-13)
M-14.2     Pedestrian Crossings. Provide well-marked
           crossings at controlled intersections and not at
           mid-block locations. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-4,
           M-13)
M-14.3     Streetscape Enhancements. Update or prepare
           Design Guidelines that foster the enhancement
           of streets, sidewalks, and other public rights-of-
           way, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway, with
           amenities such as lighting, street trees, benches,
           plazas, public art, or other measures to Pedestrian route
           encourage walking. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-13)
M-14.4     Pedestrian Improvements. Design safe pedestrian routes, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway, by
           collaborating with community groups to identify and implement needed and desirable
           improvements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-13)
M-14.5     Pedestrian Network—Cohesiveness. Develop a cohesive pedestrian network of public sidewalks
           and street crossings that makes walking a convenient and safe way to travel. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           M-8, M-9, M-13)
M-14.6     Pedestrian Network—Connections. Provide a continuous pedestrian network that connects
           community facilities and other public and private buildings to each other, to the street, and to
           transit facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-8, M-9, M-13)
M-14.7     Pedestrian Network—Private. Design access to new developments and buildings to encourage
           walking. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-18, M-2)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      5-20                              GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
M-14.8     Pedestrian Access to Parking. Require new developments to design new parking facilities to
           facilitate safe and convenient pedestrian access. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-2)
M-14.9     American with Disabilities Act. Prioritize projects and establish funding for implementing and
           improving pedestrian street crossings and installing curb ramps where needed to meet ADA
           specifications. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-5, M-1)
M-14.10 Safe Routes to Schools. Work with local school officials in the development, review, and
           implementation of a Safe Route to Schools Program that includes identification of design and
           operational elements along designated student routes to and from schools for both new
           development and existing areas in the City, including the Arroyo Simi Greenway. Incorporate these
           elements into the development and review of street, development, improvement, and
           maintenance plans in those areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-14)
GOODS MOVEMENT
Both truck and rail freight services are
provided in Simi Valley. Designated truck
routes in the City are to be identified with
street signs to guide truck traffic through the
City away from residential neighborhoods,
decreasing the air and noise pollution to
which residents may be exposed. Rail freight
passes through the City daily through intra-
state and transcontinental service on the
Union Pacific Rail lines. The goals and policies
in this section support a system of facilities
that will provide for the efficient flow of
                                                    Rail freight service
goods and services in the City and the region
including truck and rail freight, with a minimum amount of impact to residents and businesses.
GOAL M-15
Truck and Rail Routes. The safe and efficient movement of goods is provided to support commerce
within the City.
Policies
M-15.1     Accommodate Trucks. Provide appropriately designed and maintained roadways to safely
           accommodate truck travel and minimize noise and vibration. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-1, M-4)
M-15.2     Truck Impacts and Deliveries. Minimize noise and other impacts of truck traffic, deliveries, and
           staging in residential and mixed-use neighborhoods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-18, M-2)
M-15.3     Freight Service. Continue to work with regional rail agencies to minimize noise and other impacts
           of freight rail service within Simi Valley. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-12)
GENERAL PLAN                                               5-21                     CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                           CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Mobility
Implementation Program, presented in Table M-1 (Mobility Implementation Program) describes the
measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                        2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table M-1           Mobility Implementation Program
                                                                                                 2011                             Annual
 M-1   Traffic Improvements Plan (TIP). The City shall continue to implement a TIP that
       identifies: street improvements needed to achieve buildout of the General Plan
       Mobility Plan for inclusion in the City’s Capital Improvements Program (CIP);
       improvements that affect the City’s transportation network, such as priorities for
       new and upgraded traffic signals, street widening priorities, and street repaving;
       the ongoing maintenance of sidewalks, parkways, and landscaping; improvements                  
       to implement an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS); and potential funding
       sources.
                     LU-1.5, LU-1.6, M-1.1, M-1.2, M-1.5, M-2.5, M-3.1, M-3.2, M-3.5,
     Implements
                     M-3.7, M-6.2, M-6.3, M-7.1~M-7.3, M-8.1, M-8.8, M-9.1~M-9.3,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     M-12.3, M-14.1, M-14.9, M-15.1
 M-2   Development Review Process. The City shall continue to regulate development
       for compliance with the City’s General Plan through Public Works’ participation in
       the Development Review Process to ensure that access onto arterials allows the
       smooth and safe flow of vehicles and bicycles; a secondary access is provided by
       major projects; local residential neighborhood street design, alignment, or other
       characteristics discourage through traffic; noise and other impacts of truck traffic in        
       residential areas are minimized; and all intersections operate at LOS C or better.
                     LU-17.6, M-1.4, M-3.2, M-3.3, M-3.5~M-3.7, M-4.1, M-8.1~M-8.7,
     Implements
                     M-9.1~M-9.3, M-10.1~M-10.3, M-10.5, M-10.6, M-12.5~M-12.7,
 Which Policy(ies)
                     M-13.12~M-13.14, M-14.1, M-14.7, M-14.8, M-15.2
 M-3   Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall use the Development Code to
       determine off-street parking requirements for all new or expanded projects as part
       of construction. The City shall review and update the Development Code to
       address parking standards for mixed-use and transit-oriented development, for
       small-scale neighborhood serving commercial uses, and to allow for public-private             
       partnerships. Parking requirements shall periodically be reviewed to ensure that
       adequate off-street parking is provided to serve approved uses.
     Implements
                     M-10.1, M-10.3~M-10.8
 Which Policy(ies)
 M-4   Public Works Street Standards. The City shall maintain, and update on a regular
       basis, City Street Standards that shall be applied to all public streets, private
       streets prior to dedication to the City, private roadways accommodating more than
       50 vehicles per hour, and streets providing on-street parking.                                 
     Implements
                     LU-10.7, M-1.3, M-1.4, M-3.1~M-3.6, M-9.3, M-12.3, M-14.2, M-15.1
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           5-22                                                  GENERAL PLAN

MOBILITY (M)
                                                                                                      2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
Table M-1            Mobility Implementation Program
                                                                                               2011                           Annual
M-5    Traffic and Roadway Management Strategies. The City shall implement traffic
       and roadway management strategies, including monitoring traffic and congestion,
       modifying arterial roadways to allow more efficient bus operation, and signal
       synchronization, to improve mobility and efficiency and reduce associated                    
       emissions.
     Implements
                     M-5.1~M-5.3, M-6.1, M-6.3, M-7.1, M-7.2
 Which Policy(ies)
M-6    Traffic Impact Fee Program. The City shall collect Traffic Impact Fees for new
       development projects, which will be used to fund transportation improvements
       identified per the Traffic Impact Fee Program.                                               
     Implements
                     LU-1.6, M-1.6, M-7.3, M-8.2, M-8.3, M-13.3
 Which Policy(ies)
M-7    Regional Transportation Fees. The City will continue to work with the Ventura
       County Transportation Commission (VCTC) to ensure that Simi Valley obtains its
       share of regional transportation funding for pedestrian, bicycle, and transportation
       systems management projects.                                                                 
     Implements
                     M-1.7
 Which Policy(ies)
M-8    Complete Streets Program. The City shall develop and implement a Complete
       Streets Program for the City’s roadway network in compliance with AB 1358, which
       requires streets and roadway systems to accommodate all modes of travel for
       people of all ages and abilities.                                                            
     Implements      LU-10.7, LU-18.5, M-1.2~M-1.4, M-9.1, M-12.3, M-12.4, M-14.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   M-14.6
M-9    Alternative Travel Modes Program. The City shall promote and enhance an
       interconnected transportation system that allows a shift in travel from private
       passenger vehicles to alternative modes, including public transit, ride-sharing, car-
       sharing, bicycling, and walking.                                                             
     Implements
                     M-9.1, M-11.1, M-11.2, M-12.2, M-13.1~M-13.11, M-14.5, M-14.6
 Which Policy(ies)
M-10 Bicycle Master Plan. The City shall maintain and update the City’s Bicycle Master
     Plan to identify improvements for the City’s bicycle network and prioritize
     improvements for orderly implementation with the City’s Capital Improvement
     Program (CIP).                                                                                 
     Implements      LU-10.7, M-1.2, M-1.4, M-9.1, M-12.1, M-12.4, M-12.6, M-12.9,
 Which Policy(ies)   PR-3.7
M-11 Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Programs. The City shall continue
     to implement a TDM Program and educate major employers located within the City
     regarding TDM Programs to reduce vehicle trips and single-occupancy vehicle
     travel. The City shall also encourage major employers to provide Transportation
     Demand Amenities, including transit subsidies, ride-share incentives, bicycle                  
     facilities, alternative work schedules, and preferential parking for
     carpools/vanpools.
     Implements
                     M-11.1~M-11.6
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                 5-23                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                          CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                                                                     2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table M-1            Mobility Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                             Annual
M-12 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall continue to coordinate
     with appropriate agencies, including Caltrans, Ventura County, and the Ventura
     County Transportation Commission, to implement local, state, and regional
     transportation mandates and local transportation and mobility objectives, including           
     locating a second train station on the west side of the City.
     Implements      LU-26.2, M-2.1~M-2.5, M-6.4, M-7.4, M-7.5, M-11.3, M-12.4, M-12.8,
 Which Policy(ies)   M-13.1~M-13.11, M-15.3
M-13 Walkable Community Program. The City shall continue to promote a pedestrian-
     friendly community by providing a cohesive pedestrian network of sidewalks and
     street crossings, and by encouraging streetscape enhancements, such as lighting,
     street trees, benches, and plazas per the City’s Design Guidelines.                           
     Implements      LU-3.3, LU-10.5, LU-10.6, LU-15.4, LU-18.4, LU-18.5, LU-23.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-24.5, M-1.2, M-1.4, M-9.1, M-12.3, M-14.1~M-14.6
M-14 Safe Routes to School Program. The City shall work with the Simi Valley Unified
     School District (SVUSD) to establish a Safe Route to Schools Program, including
     design and operational elements, for both new development and existing areas in
     the City, and ensure that these elements are included in development projects.                
     Implements
                     LU-13.2, LU-21.5, M-14.10
 Which Policy(ies)
M-15 Simi Valley Transit Service. The City will continue to provide transit service to
     address the transportation needs of City residents, and maintain and upgrade
     transit system infrastructure to enhance public use, including adequate transit
     stops, transit shelters, park-and-ride lots, and bicycle parking.                             
     Implements
                     LU-24.2, M-1.2, M-1.4, M-12.8, M-13.1~M-13.11
 Which Policy(ies)
M-16 Safe Traffic Flow. The City shall enforce the prohibition of illegal vendors in public
     rights-of-way to allow for safe traffic flow.
                                                                                                   
     Implements
                     M-1.8, M-9.1
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          5-24                                                GENERAL PLAN

INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
The provision of adequate infrastructure and utilities to accommodate the growth and development
anticipated to occur in Simi Valley as the General Plan is built out is critical in supporting the needs of
residents and businesses and ensuring a high quality of life. Water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, solid
waste, energy, and telecommunications systems will continue to be expanded concurrently with new
development, population, and employment growth. Emphasis is placed on improving infrastructure in areas
that will accommodate infill development, particularly along transit corridors and near transit stations to
support intensified development consistent with the City’s priorities for compact development.
Simi Valley Water Quality Control Plant                              Simi Valley Public Services Center
  Water
Goals and policies in this section address providing current and future residents a reliable water supply by
utilizing the City’s water rights and maintaining long-term water supply plans. Water service to more than
two-thirds of the City is provided by Ventura County Waterworks, District No. 8, which is operated and
managed by the District Board of Directors. Water service to the remaining third of the City is provided by
the Golden State Water Company, a private utility. Existing water infrastructure managed by the City will be
maintained and priority given to fund critical improvements, while new development will not be constructed
until adequate infrastructure is in place.
GOAL IU-1
Reliable Water Supply. A high-quality water supply, water treatment, distribution, pumping, and
storage system that is reliable for meeting the current and projected future daily and peak water
demands of Simi Valley residents is provided for the community.
Policies
IU-1.1      Water Treatment Infrastructure. Plan, secure funding for, and procure sufficient water treatment
            infrastructure with the capacity to meet projected water demands. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1,
            IU-2)
IU-1.2      Service for New Development. Require new development to provide adequate facilities or pay its
            fair share of the cost for facilities required to support growth. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-14, LU-18,
            IU-11, IU-13)
GENERAL PLAN                                             5-25                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                      CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
IU-1.3    Priority for Water Infrastructure. Give a priority in capital improvement programming to funding
          rehabilitation or replacement of critical infrastructure that has reached the end of its useful life.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1)
IU-1.4    Comprehensive Water Supply Plans. Prepare, implement, and maintain long-term, comprehensive
          water supply plans. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2)
IU-1.5    Regulatory Standards. Provide water service that meets or exceeds state and federal drinking
          water standards. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2, IU-13)
IU-1.6    Water Supply During Emergencies. Maintain an adequate water supply during emergencies.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2)
IU-1.7    Recycled Water. Construct and develop infrastructure that provides for recycled water service
          throughout the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-4)
IU-1.8    Infill Areas. Identify and prioritize infrastructure improvements in infill areas to accommodate the
          mix of uses and densities prescribed in the Land Use Plan. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-2)
IU-1.9    Facility Design. Ensure that water utility facilities are designed to be safe, aesthetically pleasing,
          and compatible with adjacent uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-1.10   Efficient Irrigation Systems. Require that water-efficient irrigation systems be installed for all
          private and City landscaping and parkways. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-1.11   Irrigation System Timing. Require that public and private irrigation systems use weather sensors
          to facilitate optimum irrigation timing. Utilize technology to monitor and enforce restrictions on
          the timing of irrigation to reduce water consumption. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-12, IU-13)
GOAL IU-2
Alternative Water Sources. Expand use of alternative water sources that provide adequate water
supplies for present uses and future growth.
Policies
IU-2.1    Alternative Water Sources. Explore new
          sources of water to serve the
          community, including the expansion of
          the City’s recycled water distribution
          system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2, IU-4)
IU-2.2    Recycled Water Master Plan. Expand
          the Recycled Water Master Plan to
          explore the feasibility of installing
                                                        Bard Reservoir
          infrastructure to provide recycled water
          for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and fire fighting. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-4)
IU-2.3    Funding Sources. Apply for state, federal, and private grants to assist the City in expanding the
          recycled water infrastructure. Explore opportunities to partner with other agencies and the
          feasibility of issuing bonds for this purpose. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-4, IU-14)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     5-26                                  GENERAL PLAN

INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
 Wastewater
The Sanitation Services Division of the Simi Valley Department of Public Works operates the City’s sanitary
sewer system including a Water Quality Control Plant that treats all the wastewater in Simi Valley. Policies in
this section provide for adequate and reliable wastewater service by requiring continued monitoring,
maintenance, and upgrading of existing facilities and planning for new capacity to accommodate anticipated
growth in the City. Businesses and residents are monitored and educated to prevent toxic substances from
entering wastewater facilities to reduce adverse effects on water quality.
GOAL IU-3
Service for Current and Future Development. A sewer collection and treatment system that
supports existing and planned development is provided that minimizes adverse effects to water
quality.
Policies
IU-3.1     Peak Flow Service. Provide sufficient wastewater conveyance, pumping, and treatment capacity
           for peak sewer flows and infiltration. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-5)
IU-3.2     Analysis for New Development. Require that new development and major renovation projects
           submit an analysis outlining sewer capacity and improvements needed prior to the issuance of
           building permits. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-3.3     Water Conservation. Require that wastewater flows be minimized in existing and future
           developments through water conservation and recycling efforts. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-12)
IU-3.4     Public Outreach. Administer public outreach campaign to communicate requirements to residents
           and businesses to limit the amount of oils, pesticides, and toxic chemicals entering the sewer
           system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6)
IU-3.5     Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Control Program. Continue to monitor, inspect, and educate
           businesses and residents about FOG to prevent sanitary sewer overflows caused by fats, oils, and
           grease accumulation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, IU-9)
IU-3.6     Monitoring of Toxins. Continue to monitor businesses or uses that may generate, transport,
           release, and/or receive toxic or potentially hazardous substances to prevent discharge into the
           wastewater system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, IU-9)
IU-3.7     System Asset Evaluation and Rehabilitation Plan. Manage the Rehabilitation Plan to prevent
           infrastructure failures caused by aging and deteriorating sewer pipelines. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           IU-1, IU-5)
IU-3.8     Sewer System Maintenance. Continue to clean and video inspect the City’s sewer infrastructure to
           mitigate sanitary sewer overflows, locate deficiencies, and reduce leaks and contamination.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-5)
IU-3.9     Penalties and Fines. Implement severe penalties and fines for dumping hazardous materials into
           the City’s sewer and storm drain systems. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, IU-9)
GENERAL PLAN                                           5-27                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                     CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
IU-3.10    Federal and County Regulations. Continue to implement the latest requirements of the National
           Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System (NPDES) and Ventura County Air Pollution Control
           District (APCD) regulations, including the use of Best Management Practices by businesses in the
           City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, IU-9)
 Stormwater Drainage
The major drainage course through Simi Valley is the Arroyo Simi, which drains from the City’s watershed
eventually out to the Pacific Ocean. Goals and policies in this section provide for reliable management of the
City’s stormwater drainage systems, while reducing water quality impacts of new development, by requiring
continued monitoring and upgrading of existing facilities; planning for new development to reduce
impervious surfaces and for infrastructure to be sized to meet anticipated growth; and avoiding unnecessary
future replacement. As a committed steward of the community’s natural resources, the City will minimize
pollutants entering stormwater outflows to the maximum extent practical using Source Control and
Treatment Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce adverse effects on water quality.
GOAL IU-4
Drainage Facilities. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities and services are available that are
environmentally sensitive, accommodate growth, and protect residents and property.
Policies
IU-4.1     Storm Drain Improvement. Upgrade existing stormwater collection and treatment facilities as
           necessary. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-3, IU-13)
IU-4.2     Adequate Drainage Facilities and Master Plan.
           Ensure that all new drainage facilities are adequately
           sized and constructed to accommodate stormwater
           runoff and prevent flooding. Update the City’s
           Master Plan of Drainage on a ten-year cycle, as
           practical. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-3)
IU-4.3     Drainage Plans. Require developers to prepare
           project-specific drainage plans for proposed
           developments that meet integrated water quality,
           flow reduction, and resources management criteria,
           as technically feasible; define needed drainage
           treatment and runoff controls (BMPs) per City Storm drain channel
           standards; and comply with the City’s most current National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
           System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permit and Master Plan of
           Drainage. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-3, IU-6, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-4.4     Post-Construction Runoff. Impose requirements to control post-construction stormwater runoff
           discharge rates and velocities to prevent or reduce downstream erosion and protect stream
           habitat and private property. The requirements should conform to the standards and practices
           outlined in the City’s most current NPDES MS4 permit and the Master Plan of Drainage. (Imp A-1,
           A-2, LU-18, IU-6, IU-12, IU-13)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    5-28                                  GENERAL PLAN

INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
IU-4.5     Permeable Surfaces. Limit the percentage of impervious surfaces (such as asphalt) for large new or
           renovated development consistent with the Low Impact Development requirements for new and
           redevelopment projects in the City’s most current NPDES MS4 Permit. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2,
           IU-12, IU-13)
IU-4.6     Conservation of Open Space Areas. Conserve undeveloped open space areas and drainage
           channels as practical for the purpose of protecting water resources and water quality in the City’s
           watersheds. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, LU-8, IU-6, IU-13)
IU-4.7     Protection of Water Bodies. Require new development to protect the quality of water bodies and
           natural drainage systems through site design, stormwater treatment, and stormwater best
           management practices (BMPs) consistent with the City’s most current NPDES MS4 Permit.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-3, IU-5, IU-6)
IU-4.8     Public Information and Participation Programs. Implement watershed awareness, stormwater
           pollution prevention, and water quality educational programs for City staff, community groups,
           schools, the public, and other appropriate groups. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6)
IU-4.9     Removal of Debris. Require that parking lots, public and private streets, and alleys be cleaned as
           frequently as necessary, and in a manner that minimizes noise and water consumption, to remove
           debris and contaminated residue. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-12)
 Solid Waste
Goals and policies in this section support a wide range of programs to reduce solid waste, use recycled
building materials, and support the recycling of construction and landscaping waste. As Simi Valley is
currently home to the Simi Valley Landfill and Recycling Center, located within the City’s sphere of influence,
the City continues to monitor Landfill operations and maintain ongoing efforts to minimize the impacts of the
Landfill on the environment and adjacent land uses.
GOAL IU-5
Solid Waste Facilities. Solid waste facilities that meet or exceed requirements of state law, and
utilize strategies for economic and efficient collection, transfer, recycling, storage, and disposal of
refuse are provided.
Policies
IU-5.1     Waste Collection Services. Maintain
           adequate solid waste collection for
           commercial, industrial, and residential
           developments in accordance with state
           law. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-7)
IU-5.2     Waste Collection Operations. Monitor
           the operations of the waste collection
           contractor to ensure that service levels
           are adequate. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-7)
                                                       Simi Valley Landfill
GENERAL PLAN                                          5-29                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                       CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
IU-5.3      Diversion of Waste. Require recycling, composting, and waste separation to reduce the volume
            and toxicity of solid wastes sent to landfill facilities, with the objective of diverting 50 percent of
            non-hazardous waste through source reduction, reuse, and recycling. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-7,
            IU-8)
IU-5.4      Electronic Waste Recycling. Coordinate with businesses that recycle electronic waste to provide
            convenient collection/drop off locations for City residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-8, IU-9)
IU-5.5      Hazardous Waste. Continue the Household Hazardous Waste Disposal Program that provides free
            disposal of household hazardous waste to City residents several times during the year. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, LU-18, IU-8, IU-9)
IU-5.6      Composting and Green Waste Recycling Programs. Sponsor solid waste educational programs on
            backyard waste composting and grass recycling (i.e., mulching grass clippings back into the lawn).
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-7, IU-8)
IU-5.7      Recycling and Reuse of Construction Wastes. Require recycling and reuse of construction wastes,
            including recycling materials generated by the demolition and remodeling of buildings, with the
            objective of diverting 85 percent of construction wastes through source reduction, reuse, and
            recycling. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-8, IU-12)
IU-5.8      Methane Monitoring and Control. Promote methods for methane monitoring, control, and
            recapture in landfills and other sustainable strategies to reduce the release of greenhouse gas
            (GHG) emissions from waste disposal or management sites and to generate additional energy such
            as electricity. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-7)
IU-5.9      Educational Programs. Sponsor public educational programs regarding the benefits of solid waste
            diversion and recycling and encourage residents and businesses to redistribute reusable materials
            (e.g., at garage sales or materials exchanges). (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-8)
  Energy
Electrical energy is supplied to Simi Valley residents and businesses by Southern California Edison, serviced by
two substations in the City, and natural gas is supplied by the Southern California Gas Company, the nation’s
largest natural gas distribution utility. As natural gas is a “fossil fuel” similar to other hydrocarbons such as
coal or oil, the City seeks to reduce consumption of this natural resource, as well as consumption of electrical
energy. Goals and policies in this section address a balance between providing adequate energy to meet the
City’s current and future needs while improving energy efficiency and encourage residents and businesses to
reduce energy consumption. Policies also support increased reliance on renewable energy to reduce Simi
Valley’s dependence on non-renewable energy sources. Implementation of the City’s Green Building
Ordinance will promote energy conservation.
GOAL IU-6
Reliable Energy Resources. Affordable, reliable, and environmentally sensitive energy resources are
available for the City’s residents and businesses.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     5-30                                    GENERAL PLAN

INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
Policies
IU-6.1    New Development. Require that new development is approved contingent upon its ability to be
          served with adequate natural gas, electricity, and infrastructure. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-6.2    Adequate Facilities. Coordinate with Southern California Edison and the Southern California Gas
          Company to ensure that adequate electric and natural gas facilities are available to meet the
          demands of existing and future development and to encourage conservation techniques. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, IU-14)
IU-6.3    Energy Conservation. Install energy efficient appliances and alternative energy infrastructure such
          as photovoltaic panels (solar power panels) on all City facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-10,
          NR-6)
IU-6.4    Renewable Energy. Promote the installation and construction of renewable energy systems and
          facilities such as wind, solar, hydropower, geothermal, and biomass facilities where appropriate.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10, NR-6)
IU-6.5    Photovoltaic Panels for Private Projects.
          Expand the provision of incentives for the
          installation of solar energy panels on private
          development. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10,
          NR-6)
IU-6.6    Photovoltaic Panels for Public Projects. Satisfy
          some or all of the City’s electrical power needs
          through the installation of photovoltaic panels
          (solar power panels). These panels could be
          located on parking structures and roofs.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10, NR-6)                 Solar panels
IU-6.7    Energy Efficiency Audits. Conduct energy
          efficiency audits of existing buildings by evaluating, repairing, and readjusting heating, ventilation,
          air conditioning, and lighting systems. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10, NR-6)
IU-6.8    Education. Continue to promote energy conservation measures and options to all residents,
          businesses, consultants, contractors, etc., through a variety of methods including newsletters,
          brochures, and the City’s website. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10, NR-6)
 Telecommunications
Goals and policies in this section provide a range of innovative telecommunications services to attract and
retain state-of-the-art businesses, provide access to all residents, and facilitate public education.
Telecommunication infrastructure will be designed to be compatible with adjacent uses and to minimize
visual impacts.
GENERAL PLAN                                          5-31                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                    CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
GOAL IU-7
Telecommunications Infrastructure. Provision of
adequate, safe, innovative, and aesthetically
designed telecommunication infrastructure to
support existing and future land uses is provided
within the City.
Policies
IU-7.1     Access and Availability. Work with service
           providers to ensure access to, and availability
           of, a wide range of state-of-the-art
           telecommunication systems and services for
           households, businesses, institutions, and public
           agencies throughout the City. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, IU-14)
IU-7.2     Adequate Facilities and Service. Work with
           utility companies to retrofit areas that are not
           served     by     current     telecommunication Telecommunication facilities
           technologies, and prepare long-range plans to
           provide telecommunication service to newly developing areas, as feasible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           IU-14)
IU-7.3     State-of-the-Art Technology. Encourage local industries, libraries, educational institutions, and
           other entities to support innovation in the design and implementation of state-of-the-art
           telecommunication technologies and facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-14)
IU-7.4     Design and Siting of Utilities. Require that the installation of large telecommunications
           infrastructure, such as cellular towers, be designed to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding
           environment and to be as unobtrusive as possible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-7.5     Large Scale Developments. Establish requirements for the installation of state-of-the-art
           telecommunications technologies in new large-scale mixed-used developments, residential
           communities, and office/commercial projects (e.g., wiring of new development). (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, IU-12, IU-13)
IU-7.6     Evolving Technologies. Continue to implement, as appropriate, new systems and technologies that
           may enhance City operations and services to the public, and require City Departments to adopt
           new technologies. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Infrastructure and
Utility Implementation Program, presented in Table IU-1 (Infrastructure and Utility Implementation
Program), describes the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies
defined in this section.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    5-32                                GENERAL PLAN
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
                                                                                                          2012–2015   2016–2035
Table IU-1           Infrastructure and Utility Implementation
                                                                                                                                  Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                                   2011
IU-1   Capital Improvement Program (CIP). The City shall continue to: identify,
       prioritize, and implement the City’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to eliminate
       deficiencies in public facilities; give priority to funding rehabilitation or replacement
       of critical infrastructure that has reached the end of its useful life; accomplish the
       goals, policies, and programs of the General Plan, giving priority to infrastructure
       improvements in infill areas; and continue to implement new systems and                          
       technologies that may enhance City operations and services to the public,
       including providing reclaimed water service throughout the community.
     Implements      M-8.8, IU-1.1, IU-1.3, IU-1.7, IU-1.8, IU-1.10, IU-3.7, IU-4.1, IU-6.3,
 Which Policy(ies)   IU-7.6, NR-4.7, NR-4.8, NR-6.1, NR-6.3
IU-2   Urban Water Management Plan. The City shall continue to coordinate with
       Ventura County Waterworks District No. 8 and Golden State Water Company in
       the preparation of their Urban Water Management Plans to guide long-range
       planning for water supplies and conservation programs; provide water service that
       meets or exceeds state and federal drinking water standards; and plan, secure                  
       funding for, and procure sufficient water treatment infrastructure with the capacity
       to meet projected water demands.
     Implements      IU-1.1, IU-1.4~IU-1.6, IU-1.8, IU-1.9, IU-2.1, IU-4.5, NR-4.1~NR-4.3,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-4.8, NR-4.9, NR-8.2, S-6.3
IU-3   Master Plan of Drainage. The City shall regularly update the City’s Master Plan of
       Drainage to: ensure storm runoff is adequately handled; upgrade existing
       stormwater collection and treatment facilities, where needed; ensure that all new
       drainage facilities are constructed and maintained to accommodate stormwater
       runoff and prevent flooding; and require developers to prepare drainage plans for                
       development proposals to identify necessary drainage improvements, improve
       downstream deficiencies, and address federal and state discharge requirements.
     Implements
                     IU-4.1~IU-4.3, IU-4.7
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-4   Recycled Water Master Plan. The City shall follow the Recycled Water Master
       Plan as a guide to consider providing recycled water for non-potable uses, such as
       landscape irrigation and fire fighting, explore additional funding sources to expand
       recycled water infrastructure, and apply for additional funding to expand the                                                     
       recycled water infrastructure.
     Implements
                     IU-1.7, IU-2.1~IU-2.3, PR-1.12
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-5   Sewer System Management Plan and Treatment Plant Condition
       Assessment. The City shall maintain the Sewer System Management Plan to
       meet the sewer needs of the community, identify spill response measures, address
       sewer system maintenance, and establish measures for pollution mitigation,
       including inspections, upgrades, and improvements to the system, as necessary. A                 
       Sewer Treatment Plant Condition Assessment shall be maintained by the City to
       prioritize and schedule equipment and building repair/maintenance needs.
     Implements
                     IU-3.1, IU-3.7~IU-3.9, IU-4.7, NR-6.1
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                    5-33                                CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                           CHAPTER 5: MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                                                                   2012–2015   2016–2035
Table IU-1           Infrastructure and Utility Implementation
                                                                                                                           Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                            2011
IU-6   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (Water Quality) Permit(s).
       The City shall ensure that new development proposals protect the quality of water
       bodies and natural drainage systems through site design, stormwater treatment,
       and best management practices consistent with the City’s MS4 and NPDES
       Permit, including the following: monitor and inspect businesses and residences
       regarding Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Control Program; monitor businesses that           
       generate toxic/hazardous substances to prevent discharge into wastewater
       system; and provide watershed awareness public education programs.
     Implements      IU-3.4~IU-3.6, IU-3.9, IU-3.10, IU-4.3, IU-4.4, IU-4.6~IU-4.8,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-5.1~NR-5.4, NR-6.2, NR-6.4
IU-7   Solid Waste Management Monitoring Program. The City shall coordinate with
       and monitor operations of the City’s franchised waste haulers to ensure the
       provision of an adequate and orderly system of operation, services, and programs
       for the collection, recycling, or disposal of all solid waste for new and existing
       development in the City. The City shall require recycling, composting, and waste
       separation to reduce the volume and toxicity of solid wastes sent to the landfill,        
       with the objective of diverting 50 percent of non-hazardous wastes. The City shall
       promote methods for methane monitoring, control, and recapture at the landfill to
       reduce the release of GHG emissions and generate additional energy, if feasible.
     Implements
                     IU-5.1~IU-5.3, IU-5.6, IU-5.8
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-8   Solid Waste Recycling Education Programs. The City shall sponsor and provide
       educational programs to encourage residents and businesses to recycle,
       redistribute, and/or reuse suitable materials.                                            
     Implements
                     IU-5.3~IU-5.7, IU-5.9
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-9   Household Hazardous Waste Disposal Program. The City shall continue to
       provide a household hazardous waste disposal program to allow for the disposal of
       household hazardous wastes, such as automotive products, cleaning products,
       pesticides, and swimming pool chemicals, for City residents. In addition, the City
       shall coordinate with businesses that recycle electronic waste to provide                 
       convenient collection/drop off locations for City residents.
     Implements
                     IU-3.5, IU-3.6, IU-3.9, IU-3.10, IU-5.4, IU-5.5
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-10 Energy Conservation Programs. The City shall conduct energy efficiency audits
      and install energy efficient appliances and infrastructure, such as photovoltaic
      panels, at all City facilities; provide incentives and promote the installation and
      construction of renewable energy systems, such as wind, solar, hydropower,
      geothermal, and biomass facilities, where feasible; conduct workshops for
      residents and business owners to provide information about energy efficiency and           
      solar power; promote energy conservation measures through public information
      and education opportunities; and provide assistance to residents for energy
      efficient residential retrofits.
     Implements
                     IU-6.3~IU-6.8, NR-7.2, NR-7.3, NR-8.2, NR-9.3
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           5-34                                             GENERAL PLAN

INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES (IU)
                                                                                                     2012–2015   2016–2035
Table IU-1           Infrastructure and Utility Implementation
                                                                                                                             Annual   Ongoing
                     Program
                                                                                              2011
IU-11 Development Impact Fees. The City shall continue to require that new
      development provide adequate infrastructure facilities or provide fees to pay for its
      share of the infrastructure facilities in order to support growth in the community.          
     Implements
                     IU-1.2
 Which Policy(ies)
IU-12 Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall review and update the Development
      Code to establish requirements for new development proposals, as follows: require
      submittal of a sewer capacity analysis; require submittal of drainage plans that
      comply with the City’s Master Plan of Drainage and the NPDES permit; limit the
      percentage of permeable surfaces to comply with NPDES permit; protect water
      bodies and natural drainage systems; provide incentives for installation of solar
      energy panels; require wireless telecommunications facilities to be designed to
      minimize visual impacts on surrounding area; require the recycling and reuse of
      construction wastes; require the installation of state-of-the-art telecommunications                                          
      technologies in new large-scale mixed-use developments, residential
      developments, and office/commercial projects; require that irrigation systems use
      weather sensors to facilitate optimum irrigation timing; and require that wastewater
      flows be minimized in existing and future development through water conservation
      and recycling efforts.
     Implements      IU-1.9~IU-1.11, IU-3.2, IU-3.3, IU-4.3~IU-4.5, IU-4.9, IU-5.7, IU-6.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   IU-7.4, IU-7.5
IU-13 Development Review Process. The City shall continue to utilize the Development
      Review Process to ensure that adequate natural gas, electricity, and other utilities
      and infrastructure are provided for new development and redevelopment projects
      and that they are appropriately designed to address City standards and federal and           
      state discharge requirements.
     Implements      IU-1.2, IU-1.5, IU-1.9~IU-1.11, IU-3.2, IU-4.1, IU-4.3~IU-4.6, IU-6.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   IU-7.4, IU-7.5
IU-14 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
      appropriate agencies, such as Golden State Water Company, Waste Management
      Company, Southern California Gas Company, Southern California Edison, and
      telecommunications providers regarding issues addressing water, wastewater,                  
      stormwater drainage, solid waste, energy, and telecommunications.
     Implements
                     IU-2.3, IU-6.2, IU-7.1~IU-7.3
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                 5-35                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY


CHAPTER 6 Natural Resource
                                                                  CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
INTRODUCTION
Nestled in a scenic valley, Simi Valley provides a quality of life that is closely linked to its natural setting,
which physically separates the community from adjacent jurisdictions and contributes to its distinct identity.
Simi Valley’s unique character and quality of life are influenced by its setting, which includes the hillsides,
canyons, picturesque sandstone rock outcroppings, and rural lands that surround the community. In addition
                                                                 to recreational and aesthetic resources, many
                                                                 of these areas provide ecological benefits and
                                                                 valuable plant and animal habitat.
                                                                 The General Plan’s goals, policies, design
                                                                 criteria, and land use densities reflect the
                                                                 dedication of the community to preserving its
                                                                 ridgelines, open space, and tree-studded
                                                                 hillsides as important natural and visual
                                                                 resources. The policies limit the amount and
Simi Valley hillside open space
                                                                 types of development allowed in these
natural areas and guide the character of development that occurs in the hillsides surrounding Simi Valley.
Many of these goals and policies are implemented through the City’s Hillside Performance Standards and
Tree Preservation Ordinance. These policies are further supported by the Simi Valley City Urban Restriction
Boundary (CURB), which was established by a vote of the electorate in 1988 to limit urban sprawl and protect
the existing agricultural, open-space, view sheds, wildlife, and watershed areas surrounding the community
from the impacts of development.
NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
In recent years, there has been a growing community interest in sustainability. Sustainability is related to the
quality of life in a community and whether the economic, social, and environmental systems that make up
Simi Valley are maintained in a way that creates a healthy living environment, uses resources wisely, and
preserves the way of life for present and future residents. Sustainability comprises an important component
of the General Plan policies and programs and is woven throughout all chapters of the General Plan.
Sustainable land use practices accommodate population growth in a more efficient manner than expanding
the City outward into open space. It involves reinvesting in existing underutilized areas, providing housing
close to jobs, promoting transit use and walking, and minimizing urban sprawl, loss of open space, pollution,
and traffic congestion. Sustainable design and building practices include incorporating energy efficiency,
water conservation, waste minimization, pollution prevention, resource efficient materials, and high
standards of indoor environmental quality in all phases of a building’s life.
The City of Simi Valley will continue to preserve its environmental resources and is committed to the
protection of its water, biological species and habitat, urban forest, air, energy, and scenic amenities. The
following goals and policies provide guidance to ensure that future development within the City and its
sphere of influence supports this commitment.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   6-2                                    GENERAL PLAN

NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
 Open Space and Natural Features
The unique character of Simi Valley and many aspects of quality of life in the community are influenced by
the substantial hillside areas, canyons, open space, and rural and agricultural lands that surround the
community. Goals and policies in this section relate to the preservation and maintenance of natural open
space areas, including local and regional parks, as shown in Figure NR-1 (Open Space Resources), and the
creation and preservation of important wildlife habitat areas and corridors in the areas surrounding the City
as shown in Figure NR-2 (Wildlife Habitat and Movement Corridors).
GOAL NR-1
Natural Resource Conservation. Natural resources of importance to the City of Simi Valley and its
Planning Area are conserved, enhanced, and protected.
Policies
NR-1.1    Open Space Preservation and Buffer Zone. Protect, conserve, and maintain the open space,
          hillside, and canyon areas that provide a buffer zone around the City’s urban form, serve as
          designated habitat for sensitive species, and provide recreation opportunities for residents and
          visitors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1)
NR-1.2    Slope Preservation. In open space areas, uses requiring grading or other alteration of land shall
          maintain the natural topographic character and ensure that downstream properties and
          watercourses are not adversely affected by siltation or chemical runoff. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-3)
NR-1.3    Partnerships to Fund Open Space Protection. Establish partnerships with public and private
          conservation agencies such as the Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District, Santa Monica
          Mountains Conservancy, Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority, and the Nature
          Conservancy, adjoining cities, and non-governmental organizations to maximize funding for open
          space land acquisition and preservation opportunities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1, NR-13)
NR-1.4    Tierra Rejada Greenbelt. Maintain the Tierra Rejada Greenbelt located to the west of the Simi
          Valley City limits, which serves as an important visual, biological, and open space resource
          separating and defining a distinct edge for urbanized development. Additionally, support the
          County of Ventura efforts to reduce development density within the Greenbelt. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-8, LU-18, NR-1, NR-13)
NR-1.5    Development Regulations. Amend the Development Code as necessary to provide effective
          preservation of open space areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1, NR-4)
NR-1.6    Open Space for Wildlife Habitat. Preserve open space in its natural form. Prioritize preservation of
          open space that can support Sensitive, Endangered, and Protected species, as defined by the
          county, state, and federal governments, as part of a contiguous system that allows the movement
          of wildlife from one habitat area to another. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1)
NR-1.7    Tools to Preserve Open Space. Maximize the protection of open space through the following
          actions:
             ■ City land use, development, and zoning regulations
             ■ Fee-title dedications associated with new private developments
GENERAL PLAN                                          6-3                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                  CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
             ■   Mitigation requirements for loss of habitat areas
             ■   Development agreements that maintain open space in private developments
             ■   Establishment of conservation easements
             ■   Easement acquisition that retains open space
             ■   Tax sale, donation, life estate, eminent domain, and leaseback arrangements (Imp A-1, A-2,
                 LU-1, LU-2, LU-7, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, NR-4, NR-5)
NR-1.8    Density Transfer. In lieu of providing open space, allow concentrated development and limit
          development to low density residential or low intensity recreational uses for more effective
          protection of open space and environmental resources. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4,
          NR-5)
NR-1.9    Restoration of Degraded Areas. Require replanting of vegetation and remediation of associated
          erosion in conjunction with requested land use approvals in hillside areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
          LU-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-3, NR-5)
NR-1.10 Restoration of Landfill Area. Work with the County of Ventura to ensure that the landfill area in
          the City’s sphere of influence is restored to the most natural state possible upon termination of
          landfill operations. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-13)
NR-1.11 Arroyo Simi. Enhance and conserve the Arroyo Simi and its tributaries as a natural resource for
          scenic and passive recreational enjoyment by the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1,
          NR-8)
GOAL NR-2
Vegetation and Habitat Preservation. Plant and wildlife habitat are preserved and enhanced and
wildlife movement corridors are protected.
Policies
NR-2.1    Tree      Preservation.      Encourage     the
          preservation of trees and native vegetation
          in development projects. Require that new
          development utilize creative land planning
          techniques to preserve any existing healthy,
          protected trees to the greatest extent
          possible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-7, LU-18,
          NR-4, NR-5)
NR-2.2    Wildlife Crossings. Require the installation
          of wildlife crossing structures by developers
          or as part of public improvement projects. Hillside vegetation
          Minimize artificial night lighting in the
          vicinity of wildlife crossing structures and adjacent wild lands. Install appropriate wildlife fencing
          and encourage the growth of woody native vegetation leading up to crossing structures to provide
          cover and direction and to encourage the use of the crossing structures by wildlife. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-1, LU-18, NR-5)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    6-4                                  GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Open Space
                                                                                                                                             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Natural Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sss sGolf Course
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sss s
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                  sss sWater Body
                                                                                                                                                      Aven ida Simi                                                                                              City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                       Alamo St                                                                                                  City Urban Restriction Boundary
                           L o s A g e le s A
                                  n           v
                 Ar
                      r o yo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence
                             Sim
                                                     as
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                               A       Cochr an St
                                                          y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                  Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                             First St
                                                             Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                               d
                   e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                aR
     T   ie r r
                                                                               Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                Royal Av
                                                                                                                      Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                      Sinaloa
                                               Rd
                                   Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                   Woo d
                                            Ra
                                             nc
                                                  hP
                Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                               on
              Reservoir                           ark
                                                                          ny
                                                    way           Ca
                                                                 Lo
                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Source: City of Simi Valley, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Date Revised: December 10, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\OpenSpace_ArroyoSimi.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0   0.25   0.5           1      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure NR-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wildlife Habitat and
                                                                                                                                             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Movement Corridors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wildlife Movement Areas/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Landscape Linkage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wildlife Habitat
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av                              Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                        City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                      Aven ida Simi                                                                                             City Urban Restriction
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                       Alamo St
                           L o s A g e le s A
                 Ar
                      r o yo
                                  n           v                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sphere of Influence
                             Sim
                                                     as
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                               A       Cochr an St
                                                          y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                  Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                             First St
                                                             Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                               d
                   e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                aR
     T   ie r r
                                                                               Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                Royal Av
                                                                                                                      Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                      Sinaloa
                                               Rd
                                   Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                   Woo d
                                            Ra
                                             nc
                                                  hP
                Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                               on
              Reservoir                           ark
                                                                          ny
                                                    way           Ca
                                                                 Lo
                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: South Coast Wildlands, June 2006;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ventura County, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\wildlife_corridors.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0   0.25   0.5           1    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure NR-2


NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
NR-2.3      Agency Collaboration. Work with federal, state, and local agencies, such as Santa Monica
            Mountains Conservancy, Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority, Rancho Simi
            Recreation and Park District, National Park Service, and other organizations, for guidance on the
            restoration of riparian communities and vegetative cover at passageways. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
            NR-13)
NR-2.4      Habitat Connectivity. Ensure that projects within areas identified as regional wildlife corridors are
            designed and constructed so as to preserve the ability of wildlife to travel through the region.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4)
NR-2.5      Wetland and Sensitive Habitat Mitigation. Conserve wildlife ecosystems, wetlands, and sensitive
            habitat areas in the following order of protection preference: (1) avoidance; (2) on-site mitigation;
            and (3) off-site mitigation. Where avoidance is not possible, require provision of replacement
            habitat through restoration and/or habitat creation to mitigate the loss of wetland and/or
            sensitive habitat. Off-site replacement habitat should be at a minimum of 5:1 replacement ratio or
            as recommended by the California Department of Fish and Game. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-7,
            LU-18, NR-2, NR-4, NR-5)
NR-2.6      Site Assessments. Require assessment by a qualified professional for development applications
            that may adversely affect sensitive biological or wetland resources, including occurrences of
            special-status species, occurrences of sensitive natural communities, and important wildlife areas
            and movement corridors. Ensure that individual projects incorporate measures to reduce impacts
            to special-status species, sensitive natural communities, and important wildlife areas and
            movement corridors according to Simi Valley’s environmental review process. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1,
            LU-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-5)
NR-2.7      Projects Outside the Valley Floor. Design projects outside the valley floor to include measures that
            avoid isolating areas of wildlife habitat from larger habitat areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-18,
            NR-2, NR-5)
NR-2.8      Compatibility of Trails to Habitat. Require developers or agencies to align or relocate trails to
            avoid impacting sensitive habitats such as wetlands and areas where endangered species are
            present. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, NR-5, NR-13)
 Visual Resources
The City of Simi Valley offers a variety of natural and man-made aesthetic resources that are visible to people
walking, cycling, or driving through the City. The preservation and maintenance of man-made and natural
aesthetic resources are important components of maintaining the quality of life in this community. Goals and
policies in this section address view protection, maintenance of natural topography, and reducing the visual
impacts of utilities and signs within natural areas.
GOAL NR-3
Visual Resource Protection. Significant visual resources are preserved as important quality-of-life
amenities for residents and as assets for recreation and tourism.
GENERAL PLAN                                             6-9                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                      CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
Policies
NR-3.1     Maintenance of Natural Topography. Preserve hills, ridgelines, canyons, bluffs, significant rock
           outcroppings, and open space areas surrounding the City as a visual resource, and locate buildings
           and utility infrastructure to minimize alteration of natural topography. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-8,
           LU-18, NR-1, NR-2)
NR-3.2     Trails, Recreation Areas,
           and Viewing Areas. Provide
           public trails, recreation
           areas, and viewing areas
           near     significant    visual
           resources              where
           appropriate. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-1, LU-18, NR-5)
NR-3.3     Location and Design of
           Developments.         Require
           development within visually
           sensitive areas to minimize
           impacts to scenic resources Recreation area
           and to preserve unique or
           special visual features, particularly in hillside areas, through the following:
              ■  Creative site planning
              ■  Integration of natural features into the project
              ■  Appropriate scale, materials, and design to complement the surrounding natural landscape
              ■  Clustering of development so as to preserve open space vistas and natural features
              ■  Minimal disturbance of topography
              ■  Creation of contiguous open space networks (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-18, NR-5)
NR-3.4     Collaboration with Local, State, and Federal Agencies. Coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions and
           state and federal agencies to protect designated scenic resources and corridors that, although
           beyond the City’s land use authority, are important to the welfare of City residents. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, NR-13)
NR-3.5     Development Location on Hillsides. Require development to preserve and enhance physical
           features by being located down and away from ridgelines. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-3)
 Water Conservation and Water Quality
Clean water is essential to sustain present and future generations, as well as plants and animals that are a
part of the ecosystem. Simi Valley is situated within the Calleguas Creek Watershed, which is comprised of
several groundwater basins including the Conejo-Tierra Rejada basin, located partly within the City, and an
extensive network of wetlands, as depicted in Figure NR-3 (Wetlands and Watersheds). Goals and policies in
this section guide development and infrastructure system management practices to conserve existing water
resources and protect surface water and groundwater within this basis from degradation by runoff and
pollution.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       6-10                             GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wetlands
                                                                                                                                                Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and Watersheds
LA S P OSA S VA LLE Y
Gr oun dwater Basi n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   National Wetlands Inventory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Urban Restriction Boundary
                                                                                                                                                         Towns hip Av                              Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                         Aven ida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ot  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                          Alamo St
                              L o s A g e le s A
                    Ar               n           v
                         r o yo
                                Sim
                                                        as
                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                  Ý
                                                                                                                                                  A       Cochr an St
                                                             y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stear ns St
                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                              Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                         Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                     Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                                First St
                                                                Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                                  U.P.R .R.
                                  d
                      e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                   aR
        T   ie r r
                                                                                  Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                    SIMI VALLE Y
          CO N EJO -TI E RRA                                                                       Royal Av
                                                                                                                                Gr oun dwater Basi n
        REJADA VOLCANIC
        Gr oun dwater Basi n
                                                                                                                         Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                         Sinaloa
                                                  Rd
                                      Ma   d e ra                         Lake
            Rd
E
í
?   n
   O l se                                   Woo d
                                               Ra
                                                nc
                                                     hP
                   Bard
                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                  on
                 Reservoir                           ark
                                                                             ny
                                                       way           Ca
                                                                    Lo
                                                                ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: CA Interagency Watershed Map, 1999;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service NWI, Jan 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\WatershedWetlands.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0   0.25   0.5           1     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure NR-3


NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
GOAL NR-4
Water Conservation. Water consumption is minimized through conservation methods and other
techniques.
Policies
NR-4.1    Water Conservation. Establish water conservation goals and benchmarks for the next 20-year
          period. Establish auditing methods to evaluate the extent of success in meeting goals as well as the
          effectiveness of conservation programs and technology. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2, NR-9)
NR-4.2    Public Education. Establish a comprehensive water conservation program to educate the public,
          publicize regulations, and provide information regarding incentives. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2,
          NR-9)
NR-4.3    Water Conservation Measures. Require water conservation measures/devices that limit water
          usage for all new construction projects and major alterations to existing facilities, including public
          facilities. These measures should include the use of water-efficient landscaping and irrigation,
          stormwater capture, efficient appliances and fixtures, and use of “gray water” for irrigation.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, IU-2, NR-4, NR-9)
NR-4.4    Partnerships for Conservation. Explore partnerships with other public agencies (such as the Simi
          Valley Unified School District, Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District, and Ventura County
          Watershed Protection District) to reduce water consumption. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-13)
NR-4.5    Water Efficient Landscaping. Require that drought-tolerant landscaping be installed for all private
          and City landscaping and parkways. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4)
NR-4.6    Irrigation Timing. Require that public and private irrigation be done at optimum times of the day,
          such as early mornings or late afternoon, and use weather sensors to facilitate optimum irrigation.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4)
NR-4.7    Monitoring System. Adopt state-of-the-art water monitoring systems to remotely monitor the
          City’s water usage, leaks, and ruptures. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, NR-12)
NR-4.8    Infrastructure Upgrades. Continue to upgrade the City’s water infrastructure to minimize water
          leakage and ensure adequate supply for residents and businesses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-2,
          NR-9, NR-12)
NR-4.9    Funding. Explore methods to provide financial support for water conservation efforts. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, IU-2, NR-9)
GOAL NR-5
Watershed Protection. Local watersheds, water bodies, and groundwater resources, including
creeks, reservoirs, and rivers, are protected from pollution and degradation.
Policies
NR-5.1    Permeable Surfaces. Limit the percentage of impermeable surface (such as asphalt) for new or
          renovated public, institutional, residential, and commercial projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18,
          IU-6, NR-4, NR-10)
GENERAL PLAN                                          6-13                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
NR-5.2  Protect Open Space Areas and Water
        Resources. Conserve undeveloped open
        space areas and drainage channels for the
        purpose of protecting water resources in the
        City’s watershed. For new development and
        post-development runoff, control sources of
        pollutants and improve and maintain urban
        runoff water quality through stormwater
        protection measures consistent with the
        City’s     National    Pollution      Discharge
        Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. (Imp A-1,
        A-2, LU-8, LU-18, IU-6, NR-1, NR-10)
NR-5.3  Watershed Education. Implement watershed
        awareness and water quality educational
                                                         Storm drain message
        programs for community organizations, the
        public, and other appropriate groups.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, NR-10)
NR-5.4  Removal of Debris. Require that parking lots and public and private streets and alleys be cleaned
        as frequently as necessary, and in a manner that minimizes noise and water consumption, to
        remove debris and contaminated residue. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, IU-6, NR-4, NR-10)
NR-5.5  Arroyo Simi. Restore and protect the Arroyo Simi as a natural resource that contributes to
        recharge and filtration capability for the watershed. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, NR-1, NR-8)
GOAL NR-6
Water Quality. There are minimal adverse effects to water quality from the sanitary sewer system.
Policies
NR-6.1  Sewer System Management Plan. Prepare and maintain a Sewer System Management Plan to
        reflect infrastructure needs and environmental requirements, address emergency spill response
        and preventive maintenance, establish legal authority, and include pollution mitigation measures.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-1, IU-5, NR-12)
NR-6.2  Public Outreach. Prepare and implement a public outreach campaign to communicate to residents
        and businesses the requirements to limit the amount of fats, oils, pesticides, and toxic chemicals
        entering the sewer system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, NR-10)
NR-6.3  Sewer System Upgrades. Continue to inspect, upgrade, and improve the City’s sewer
        infrastructure to minimize deficiencies and reduce leaks and contamination. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
        IU-1, NR-12)
NR-6.4  Penalties and Fines. Implement severe fines for dumping hazardous materials into the City’s
        water, sewer, and storm drain systems. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-6, NR-10)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                 6-14                                  GENERAL PLAN

NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
  Energy Resources
These goals and policies address plans to reduce greenhouse gases, promote energy conservation, and
incorporate sustainable building practices, such as designing, constructing, and operating buildings and
landscapes to incorporate energy efficiency, water conservation, waste minimization, pollution prevention,
resource efficient materials, and high standards of indoor environmental quality.
GOAL NR-7
Reliable Energy Resources. Reliable, affordable, and environmentally sensitive energy resources are
available for residents and businesses.
Policies
NR-7.1    Monitor Climate Action Plan (CAP). Monitor progress toward meeting the emissions reduction
          targets identified in the City’s Climate Action Plan (CAP), which complies with statewide
          greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction goals as established by AB32. Revise and update the CAP, as
          necessary. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-9, LU-18, NR-2, NR-11)
NR-7.2    Public Education. Continue to promote energy conservation measures and options to all residents,
          businesses, consultants, contractors, etc., through newsletters, brochures, and the City’s website.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-10, NR-6)
NR-7.3    Energy Award Program. Develop
          an annual energy conservation
          award program for new sustainable
          development in the community
          that demonstrates leadership in
          energy efficiency and involves
          innovation       in     conservation
          applications. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-9,
          LU-18, IU-10, NR-6, NR-11)
NR-7.4    Solar-Ready Buildings. Require
          that, where feasible, all new Solar panels
          buildings be constructed to allow
          for easy, cost-effective installation of solar energy systems in the future addressing such elements
          as: optimal roof orientation, clear access, adequacy of structural support, and installation of
          electrical conduit and plumbing. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-9, LU-18, NR-4, NR-11)
GOAL NR-8
Reduced Energy Consumption. Energy consumption is minimized through sustainable building
practices and other reduction strategies.
NR-8.1    Green Building Retrofit. Promote the retrofitting of existing structures with green building
          technologies/practices and encourage municipal structures under renovation to be built to a green
          energy standard such as LEED. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-7)
GENERAL PLAN                                           6-15                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                   CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
NR-8.2      Community Education for Green Building Practices. Create a program to educate and assist
            residents and businesses in increasing their knowledge and awareness of Green Building Practices
            to increase energy performance for existing structures. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-9, LU-18, IU-2, IU-10,
            NR-6, NR-7, NR-9, NR-11)
NR-8.3      Urban Heat Island Effects. Seek to reduce the “heat island” effect of developed areas by
            promoting such features as white roofs, light colored hardscape/paving materials, and shade trees,
            and by reducing the extent of unshaded areas in parking lots. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-18, NR-2,
            NR-7)
NR-8.4      Solar Homes Partnership. Require that projects of five or more housing units participate in the
            California Energy Commission’s new solar homes partnership, which provides rebates to
            developers who offer solar power in at least 50% of new units, or a program with similar
            provisions. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4)
  Air Quality
Although air quality has improved in the Southern California air basin in which Simi Valley is located over the
last two decades, the region continues to experience significant air pollution problems. Both the federal and
state governments have established air quality standards and regulations pertaining to a variety of pollutants
and emissions. These regulations are administered in Simi Valley by the Ventura County Air Pollution Control
District. The following goals and policies balance the City’s management of land use, circulation, and other
regulatory actions in consideration of their potential effects on local and regional air quality.
GOAL NR-9
Air Quality. Air Quality in the City and the Simi Valley environs is improved.
NR-9.1      Regional Cooperation. Ensure that air quality standards are consistent with the Countywide
            recommendations of the Ventura County Air Pollution Control District, which are intended to
            reduce air quality impacts. In addition, cooperate with the Southern California Association of
            Government’s efforts to implement provisions of the region's Air Quality Management Plan.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-13)
NR-9.2      Truck Deliveries. Encourage local businesses to alter truck delivery schedules for off-peak delivery
            times. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-1, LU-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-5)
NR-9.3      Improved Technology. Promote and implement state and federal regulations that improve
            transportation technology, vehicle mileage performance, and cleaner fuels. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7,
            LU-18, IU-10, NR-4, NR-6)
NR-9.4      Contractors. Require that government contractors minimize greenhouse gas emissions in building
            construction, operations, etc. For example, contractors can use low or zero-emission vehicles and
            equipment. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-7, LU-18, NR-4, NR-7)
NR-9.5      Dust and Particulate Control. Adopt procedures to regulate and minimize particulate emissions
            from paved and unpaved roads, parking lots, and building construction activities. (Imp A-1, A-2,
            LU-2, LU-18, NR-2)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    6-16                                    GENERAL PLAN

NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
NR-9.6     Construction and Operation. Evaluate development project applications, including for particulate
           matter, by using the procedures and thresholds established in the most recent version of the
           Ventura County Air Quality Assessment Guidelines as published by the Ventura County Air
           Pollution Control District, and ensure that projects incorporate all applicable construction and
           operation mitigation measures contained therein. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-13)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Natural Resource
Implementation Program, presented in Table NR-1 (Natural Resource Implementation Program), describes
the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                     2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table NR-1           Natural Resource Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                           Annual
 NR-1 Open Space Preservation. The City shall continue to protect, conserve, and
      maintain the open space, hillside, and canyon areas that provide a buffer zone
      around the City’s urban form, serve as designated habitat for sensitive species,
      and provide recreation opportunities by establishing partnerships with other land
      management agencies. The City shall maintain the Tierra Rejada Greenbelt and
      support the County’s efforts to reduce development capacity in Greenbelt areas. In
      addition, the City shall maximize protection of open space through the following:
      amend the Development Code to provide effective open space preservation;
      require mitigation for the loss of habitat areas; require development agreements             
      that maintain open space in private developments; establish and acquire
      conservation easements; accept donations for open space protection; and
      conserve undeveloped open space and drainage channels for the purpose of
      protecting water resources in the City’s watershed.
                      LU-3.1~LU-3.3, LU-4.1~LU-4.4, LU-4.6, LU-6.1, LU-7.1, LU-11.1,
      Implements
                      LU-21.8, LU-22.1, NR-1.1, NR-1.3~NR-1.7, NR-1.11, NR-3.1,
  Which Policy(ies)
                      NR-5.2, NR-5.5, PR-1.5
 NR-2 Environmental Review. The City shall continue to ensure that all development
      proposals are reviewed per the requirements of California Environmental Quality
      Act (CEQA) to ensure that mature trees are preserved; appropriate wildlife
      crossings are installed; sensitive biological or wetland resources adversely affected
      by new development are appropriately evaluated, mitigated, and restored; trails
      impacting sensitive habitats are relocated, when necessary; visual resources are
      preserved; water resources within the City’s watershed are protected; truck
      deliveries are scheduled for off-peak times; air quality thresholds are updated and          
      potential impacts are analyzed; and particulate emissions are regulated and
      minimized.
                      LU-1.5, LU-1.8, LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-4.1~LU-4.8, LU-5.1,
                      LU-5.7~LU-5.9, LU-6.1~LU-6.4, LU-7.1, LU-8.4, LU-9.1, LU-9.2,
      Implements
                      LU-11.1, LU-16.1~LU-16.3, LU-17.6, LU-18.3, LU-21.10, LU-23.4,
  Which Policy(ies)
                      LU-32.1, NR-1.7, NR-1.9, NR-2.5~NR-2.7, NR-3.1, NR-7.1, NR-8.3,
                      NR-9.1, NR-9.2, NR-9.5, NR-9.6, PR-1.5, PR-1.6, PR-3.8
GENERAL PLAN                                                 6-17                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                           CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                                     2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table NR-1           Natural Resource Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                             Annual
NR-3 Hillside Performance Standards (HPS). The City shall continue to regulate
     development per the HPS in open space areas to regulate grading and alteration
     of land, maintain the natural topographic character of the land, allow for density
     transfer to increase open space areas, and require replanting of graded slopes and            
     restoration of degraded areas.
     Implements      LU-3.1, LU-3.2, LU-4.1~LU-4.10, LU-6.1, LU-11.1, LU-11.3~LU-11.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   LU-21.11, NR-1.2, NR-1.9, NR-3.5
NR-4 Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall review and update the Development
     Code to establish requirements for new development proposals, as follows:
     provide effective preservation of open space areas, habitat movement corridors,
     and wildlife crossings; require that drought-tolerant landscaping be installed for all
     private and City landscaping and parkways; establish requirements for irrigation
     timing; limit the percentage of impermeable surface for development projects;
     require cleaning of parking lots and streets in a manner that minimizes noise and
     water consumption; require that all new buildings be constructed to allow for future         
     installation of solar energy systems; require that development projects of five or
     more housing units participate in the California Energy Commission’s new solar
     homes partnership; require that government contractors minimize greenhouse gas
     emissions in building construction and operations; and regulate and minimize
     particulate emissions from roads, parking lots, and building construction activities.
     Implements      NR-1.5, NR-1.7, NR-1.8, NR-2.1, NR-2.4, NR-2.5, NR-4.3, NR-4.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-4.6, NR-5.1, NR-5.4, NR-7.4, NR-8.4, NR-9.3, NR-9.4
NR-5 Development Review Process. The City shall continue to regulate development
     for compliance with General Plan goals, policies, land uses, and development
     standards through the Development Review Process to ensure the following: avoid
     isolating areas of wildlife habitat from larger habitat areas in open space areas;
     provide public trails, recreation areas, and viewing areas near significant visual            
     resources, where appropriate; and require development within visually sensitive
     areas to minimize impacts to scenic resources.
     Implements      NR-1.7~NR-1.9, NR-2.1, NR-2.2, NR-2.5~NR-2.8, NR-3.2, NR-3.3,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-9.2
NR-6 Energy Conservation and Green Building Education Programs. The City shall
     continue to promote energy conservation measures and green building practices
     through various measures and programs, including newsletters, brochures,
     classes, and the City’s website. The City shall promote and implement federal and
     state regulations that improve transportation technology, vehicle mileage
     performance, and cleaner fuels. In addition, the City shall develop an annual                 
     energy conservation award program for new sustainable development in the
     community.
     Implements
                     IU-6.3~IU-6.8, NR-7.2, NR-7.3, NR-8.2, NR-9.3
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          6-18                                                GENERAL PLAN

NATURAL RESOURCES (NR)
                                                                                                     2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
Table NR-1           Natural Resource Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                           Annual
NR-7 Green Building Program. The City shall continue to promote sustainable building
     practices for the retrofitting of existing structures and municipal structures to be
     built to a green energy standard, such as LEED; to educate residents and
     businesses regarding green building practices; to reduce the ―heat island‖ effect of
     developed areas by promoting white roofs, light colored paving materials, and
     shade trees and by reducing the extent of unshaded areas in parking lots; and to             
     require contractors to minimize greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in building
     construction and operations.
     Implements
                     NR-8.1~NR-8.3, NR-9.4, PR-3.8
 Which Policy(ies)
NR-8 Arroyo Simi Greenway Plan. The City shall enhance and conserve the Arroyo
     Simi as a natural resource for (1) scenic and passive enjoyment by the community
     by adopting and implementing the Arroyo Simi Greenway Plan and (2) recharge
     and filtration capability of the community’s watershed.                                      
     Implements
                     NR-1.11, NR-5.5, PR-1.14
 Which Policy(ies)
NR-9 Water Conservation Program. The City shall develop and implement a Water
     Conservation Program, establishing water conservation goals for the next 20-year
     period; identifying water conservation measures that reduce water use, such as
     water-efficient landscaping and irrigation, efficient appliances and fixtures, and the
     use of ―gray water‖ for irrigation; and establishing auditing methods to evaluate the
     success of the programs. The Program will include programs to educate the public,             
     publicize regulations, and provide information regarding incentives. The City shall
     seek additional financial assistance for water conservation efforts.
     Implements
                     NR-4.1~NR-4.3, NR-4.8, NR-4.9, NR-8.2
 Which Policy(ies)
NR-10 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. The City
      shall control sources of pollutants and improve and maintain urban runoff water
      quality through stormwater protection measures consistent with the City’s National
      Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit; limit the percentage of
      impermeable surfaces for new or renovated development proposals; implement
      watershed awareness and water quality education programs for the public,
      including requirements to limit the amount of fats, oils, pesticides, and toxic             
      chemicals entering the sewer system; implement fines for dumping hazardous
      materials into the City’s water, sewer, and storm drain systems; and require that
      parking lots and public and private streets and alleys be cleaned as frequently as
      necessary to reduce pollutants.
     Implements
                     NR-5.1~NR-5.4, NR-6.2, NR-6.4
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                6-19                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                          CHAPTER 6: NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                                     2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table NR-1           Natural Resource Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                             Annual
NR-11 Climate Action Plan (CAP). The City shall prepare a CAP to reduce or encourage
      reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from all sectors within the City.
      The CAP will establish a baseline inventory of GHG emissions and measures to
      reduce GHG emissions, which will comply with statewide GHG reduction goals as
      established by AB32 and any subsequent targets. The CAP will be monitored to                
      review progress towards meeting the emission reduction target and revised as
      appropriate.
     Implements
                     NR-7.1, NR-7.3, NR-7.4, NR-8.2
 Which Policy(ies)
NR-12 Capital Improvement Program (CIP). The City shall continue to prepare and
      adopt a CIP to eliminate deficiencies in public infrastructure, including the
      following: continue to upgrade the City’s water infrastructure to minimize water
      leakage and ensure adequate water supply, adopt state-of-the-art water monitoring
      systems to remotely monitor the City’s water usage, leaks, and ruptures; prepare
      and maintain a Sewer System Management Plan to identify infrastructure needs,
      address emergency spill response and preventive maintenance, and include                     
      pollution mitigation measures; and continue to inspect, upgrade, and improve the
      City’s sewer infrastructure to minimize deficiencies and reduce leaks and
      contamination.
     Implements
                     NR-4.7, NR-4.8, NR-6.1, NR-6.3
 Which Policy(ies)
NR-13 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
      appropriate agencies, such as Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, Mountains
      Recreation Conservation Authority, Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District,
      California State Parks, National Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, adjoining cities,
      County of Ventura, Simi Valley Unified School District, and the Ventura County Air
      Pollution Control District regarding issues addressing open space preservation,
      restoration of the landfill area, restoration of riparian communities and vegetative         
      cover at passageways, wetland and sensitive habitat mitigation, designated scenic
      resources and corridors, water conservation, and efforts to improve air quality and
      reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
     Implements      NR-1.3, NR-1.4, NR-1.10, NR-2.3, NR-2.8, NR-3.4, NR-4.4, NR-9.1,
 Which Policy(ies)   NR-9.6
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          6-20                                                GENERAL PLAN

CHAPTER 7 Community Service
                                                                   CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
INTRODUCTION
The social well-being of a community is nurtured and sustained by access to a full range of services that
educate, enrich lives, and meet basic human needs for health, safety, and quality of life. To reach these goals,
Simi Valley strives to provide quality educational, recreational, and cultural services through schools, parks,
libraries, infrastructure, community centers, and cultural centers and events. Access to education, good jobs,
active recreational opportunities, and social programs enhances the City’s livability for residents. In addition,
a skilled workforce and an engaging cultural environment are important in attracting new industries to the
community to keep the City’s economy healthy.
The following goals and policies provide guidance to ensure that future development within the City and its
Planning Area supports the City’s commitment to high quality community services, including parks and
recreational services and facilities, and other public services such as libraries, cultural facilities, and
community education.
PARKS AND RECREATION (PR)
  Park and Recreational Facilities
Parks and open space are important elements in Simi Valley, contributing to residents’ quality of life and a
healthy population. The Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District (RSRPD), an independent special district, is
responsible for the acquisition, development, and maintenance of parkland and open space within its
jurisdiction, which includes the entire City of Simi Valley in addition to lands beyond the City’s boundaries.
Parks and recreational facilities serve as focal points of neighborhood identity and activity. Parklands also
                                                                    help to sustain natural environmental
                                                                    resources by providing landscapes that
                                                                    absorb greenhouse gases, produce oxygen,
                                                                    and filter pollutants to the groundwater
                                                                    basin.
                                                                    As depicted in Figure PR-1 (Parks/Recreation
                                                                    Facilities), Simi Valley residents are offered a
                                                                    comprehensive system of parks, golf
                                                                    courses, trails, and outdoor amenities that
Rancho Madera Community Park
                                                                    are heavily used. In addition, the City
maintains a broad spectrum of cultural and recreational facilities including the Cultural Arts Center and a
state-of-the-art Senior Center. Goals and policies in this section address the broad range of recreation
resources available to Simi Valley residents including parklands, recreational facilities and programs, and
trails. Simi Valley’s extensive trail system, depicted in Figure PR-2 (Trails) indicates existing and future trails,
designed to accommodate both pedestrians and equestrians for the enjoyment of the City’s rich natural
setting.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     7-2                                      GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                             37
                                                                                                                                             !             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Parks/
                                                                                                                                             36
                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                            Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                         42
                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                 Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                             Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                       ssssOpen Space
                                                                                                                                                                    Tow nsh ip Av                                 Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ssssGolf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d      41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ssss
                                                                                                                                                                     Aven ida Sim i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ot     !                                        !6                                                         Park
                                                                                                                                             !3                                      23                                                                                                                                             Arroyo Simi Equestrian Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aS
                        18
                        !                                                                                                                                            Alam o St       !                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                   Ar
                             Lo s
                                           A n g e le s A v                                                                                                                                                                     !  25                                                                                               City Urban Restriction Boundary
                        r o yo
                                 Sim                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                     !                                         E
                                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                                               A
                                       i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                      Coc hran St
                                                  31
                                                                as
                                                                     y St                                                                                                           24                                                                               32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yosemite Av                Kue hne r Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stea rns St
                                                 !                                                                                                                                  !
                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tap o C a n y o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                     Seq uoi a Av
                                                                                                                              Errin ger Rd          Syca mor e Dr
                                                     27                                                  Firs t St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11
                           a Rd
                                                     !  1
                                                        !               Mad era Rd
                                                                                                                          !7             !4 29                                 U.P.R. R.                                                                                           !
             rr a R e ja d                       26
                                                 !                                                          Los Ang eles Av
                                                                                                                     34                     !                                                                                                         !2
        T ie
                                                                                                                     !                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                    13 !                                                                                                        38  !8
                                                                                           Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                      !2                            !                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                             Roy al Av
                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                          !                                               35
                                                                                                    15                                                               33 !
                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                    !                             Fitz gera ld Rd                                                              1. Arroyo Park                                             22. Rancho Simi Community Park
                                                                                                                                              30
                                                         d                       Sinaloa                                                                                                                       2. Arroyostow Park                                         23. Rancho Tapo Community Park and Veterans Plaza
                                                   era R                                                                                      !
                                             Mad
                                                                                  Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3. Atherwood Park                                          24. Sequoia Park
                                                         40 39
                                                        !!                                                                                                                                                     4. Berylwood Park                                          25. Simi Hills Park
            Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                 5. Challenger Park                                         26. Stargaze Park
E
í
?                                              20
                                               !    Woo d
     n
    O lse                                                                                                                                                                                                      6. Chumash Park and Trail                                  27. Strathearn Historical Park and Museum
                                                       Ra
                                                         nc             !9                                                                                                                                     7. Citrus Grove Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               8. Corriganville Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          28. Sycamore Canyon Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          29. Sycamore Drive Community Center
                   Bard
                 Reservoir
                                                   28
                                                              hP
                                                              ark
                                                                        !19          ny
                                                                                        o   nR
                                                                                                   d           !5                                                                                              9. Coyote Hills Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10. Darrah Volunteer Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30. Sycamore Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          31. Tierra Rejada Park
                                                   !          wa y           Ca                                                                                                                                11. Foothill Park                                          32. Verde Park
                                                                            Lo
                                                                        ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                               12. Frontier Park                                          33. Vista Del Arroyo Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               13. Runkle Triangle                                        34. Willowbrook Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               14. Houghton-Schreiber Park                                35. Arroyo Simi Equestrian Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                               15. Lincoln Park                                           36. Big Sky Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16. Mayfair Park                                           37. Simi Dog Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               17. Marr Ranch Park                                        38. Rocky Pointe Natural Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               18. Oak Park (Ventura County)                              39. Sinaloa Park                                    Source: City of Simi Valley, 2007; PBS&J, 2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Date Revised: September 30, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19. Old Windmill Park                                      40. Sinaloa Ball Fields                             D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Parks_Recreation.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20. Rancho Madera Community Park                           41. Simi Hills Golf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                               21. Rancho Santa Susana Community Park/Center              42. Lost Canyons Park                                                       0     0.25    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure PR-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Trails
                                                                                                                                               Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _   Trailhead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _                                         Hiking/Equestrian Trail*
                                                                                                                                                        Towns hip Av                              Ka                                                                         Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                        Aven ida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sss sOpen Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ot  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sss sGolf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                             St
                                                                                                                                                         Alamo St
                    Ar
                              L o s A g e le s A
                                     n           v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sss sCity Boundary
                         r o yo
                                Sim
                                           _           as
                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                 Ý
                                                                                                                                                 A       Cochr an St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Urban Restriction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Boundary
                                                            y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stear ns St
                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                               Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                        Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                                         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                    Erringe r Rd
                                                                                               First St
                                                               Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                                 U.P.R .R.
                               d                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                          da R                                                                    Los Angel es Av
                    Re ja                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
              rra
     T ie                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                 Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *Trail locations are conceptual.
                                                                                                  Royal Av   _                                          _             _                                                                              _                  Actual design to be determined
                                                          _                                                                                                                                                                                                             during project review.
                                                                                                                        Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                        Sinaloa
                                                 Rd
                                     Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                     Woo d
                                              Ra
                                                nc
                                                     hP                                          _
                 Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                 on
               Reservoir                             ark
                                                                            ny
                                                      way           Ca
                                                                   Lo
                                                               ng
                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Simi Valley, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Trails.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure PR-2


PARKS AND RECREATION (PR)
GOAL PR-1
Parks and Recreation Facilities. Parks, recreation, and community facilities that enhance
community livability and contribute to public health are available to serve the diverse recreational
needs of residents and visitors.
Policies
PR-1.1    Park and Recreation System. Support RSRPD in its efforts to develop, operate, and maintain a
          system of parks, recreational facilities (i.e., swimming pools, golf courses, ball courts, etc.), and
          open space areas throughout Simi Valley that provide opportunities for both passive and active
          recreation and leisure activities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.2    Location of Facilities. Work with RSRPD to ensure that parks and recreational facilities are well
          dispersed throughout the community and include opportunities for all residents regardless of
          income. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.3    Service Levels. Encourage RSRPD to provide two acres of neighborhood parks and three acres of
          community parks per 1,000 residents. Strive to provide park facilities so that all residents live
          within 2 miles of a community park and ½ mile of a neighborhood park. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1,
          PR-2, PR-3, PR-5)
PR-1.4    Park Zone. Work with RSRPD to develop and implement a new zoning district to designate existing
          and future parks in the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1, PR-3)
PR-1.5    Conservation of Natural and Historical Assets. Support, encourage, and participate in enhancing
          community aesthetics by conserving natural assets such as mature trees, fragile animal habitats,
          endangered species, and historically significant sites, as part of park and facilities development.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-1, NR-2, PR-1)
PR-1.6    Arrangements with Private and Public Entities. Seek to make expanses of open space, natural
          parks, or other recreational areas, which may be owned and/or controlled by private parties or
          other agencies, available for public use by entering into mutually beneficial agreements for the
          operation of such areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-2, PR-1, PR-2)
PR-1.7    On-Site Facilities. Require large-scale business parks or office development projects to provide
          recreational amenities and gathering places, when deemed appropriate. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          PR-2)
PR-1.8    Shared Facilities. Work cooperatively with RSRPD and Simi Valley Unified School District (SVUSD)
          to allow or facilitate the use of school facilities for recreational use by youth and adult sport
          leagues and the general public. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.9    Revenue Generating Recreational Facilities. Work with RSRPD to develop recreational amenities
          such as miniature golf courses and quality food concessions to generate additional revenue which
          will help support, improve, and expand recreational opportunities in the community. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.10   Private Commercial Recreational Facilities. Encourage private commercial recreational facilities
          such as ice rinks, bowling alleys, indoor or outdoor skateboard parks, Frisbee golf and paintball
GENERAL PLAN                                           7-7                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                               CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
        facilities, and bow and arrow ranges to maintain, upgrade, and preserve facilities to help meet
        recreational interests of residents, workforce, and visitors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-2)
PR-1.11 Youth Facilities. Work with RSRPD to plan and design parks to incorporate adequate facilities for
        youth to ensure safe and active gathering places for their recreation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.12 Recycled Water. Encourage RSRPD to utilize recycled water for irrigating landscaping at new and
        existing parks and golf courses, when infrastructure is available to do so. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
        IU-4, PR-1)
PR-1.13 Arroyo Simi Greenway Recreational
        Amenities.      Provide     for    the
        development of new parks and the
        expansion of existing parks,
        including rest areas and other
        amenities, as part of the Arroyo Simi
        Greenway system to link these
        resources to provide recreation,
        pedestrian, and visual amenities.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-4)
PR-1.14 Arroyo Simi Greenway Educational
        Amenities.        Encourage        the
        incorporation of kiosks, interpretive
        signage, and public art at strategic
        locations along the Arroyo Simi
        Greenway. Examples of educational
        topics include watershed and water
        quality, Native American and
        cultural history, and native habitat.
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-8, PR-4)
PR-1.15 Complementary Design. Ensure that
        the design and aesthetics of all
        parks, recreation, and community
        centers is compatible with existing
        adjoining uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, Park amenities
        PR-2)
PR-1.16 Small Public Places for Infill Areas.
        Require new development to provide small plazas, pocket parks, civic spaces, and other gathering
        places that are available to the public, particularly in infill areas, in addition to Quimby Act
        requirements. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-3, LU-16, LU-18, PR-3)
PR-1.17 Park Safety. Coordinate security between RSRPD and the Simi Valley Police Department as a
        means to impede vandalism and other illegal activities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.18 Accessible Facilities. Encourage RSRPD to renovate recreational facilities to achieve accessible
        standards as specified in state and federal laws such as the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
        (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                 7-8                                    GENERAL PLAN
PARKS AND RECREATION (PR)
PR-1.19   Funding. Work with RSRPD to fund the costs of acquisition and development of parks and
          recreation facilities through land dedication, Quimby Act funds, federal and state grants, in lieu
          fees, development impact fees, and other funding sources, as appropriate. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-14,
          LU-18, ED-6, ED-8, PR-1, PR-5)
PR-1.20   Development Agreements. Provide incentives and enter into development agreements with
          developers to contribute financing for parks and other amenities for infill and mixed-use areas.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-14, LU-18, ED-6, ED-8, PR-2, PR-5)
PR-1.21   Multiple Tools. Work with RSRPD to leverage a broad range of federal, state, and local funding and
          economic development tools to ensure high-quality development, maintenance, and programming
          for Simi Valley’s parks and recreation system. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, ED-8, PR-1)
PR-1.22   Joint Use. Encourage RSRPD to enter into agreements and joint partnerships with other agencies,
          where feasible, to expand recreational opportunities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-1.23   Land Lease and License Agreements. Encourage RSRPD to enter into agreements with private
          and/or quasi-public companies (i.e., utilities) to serve the public and generate revenue for the
          development and maintenance of parks and recreational facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
 Park and Recreational Programs
GOAL PR-2
Recreational and Leisure Programs. Recreational programs and services are provided that promote
personal enrichment, healthy lifestyles, wellness, fun, lifelong learning, skill development, and
positive relationships.
PR-2.1    Quality of Life. Promote healthy lifestyles, recreational, and leisure activities, and programs for the
          entire family, including youth and senior populations, as important considerations for recreational
          programs and amenities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-2.2    Variety of Services. Encourage RSRPD to provide a wide range of recreation opportunities
          designed to enrich the lives of all residents including passive, active, individual, team, and
          organized recreational activities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-2.3    Programs for All Residents. Encourage RSRPD to accommodate special needs individuals and
          groups as part of the provision of recreational programs. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
PR-2.4    Senior and Youth Programs. Work with RSRPD to provide services and programs which meet
          social, recreational, and health needs for the senior and youth population. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          PR-1)
PR-2.5    Recreation Programs to Meet Needs. Support existing and future recreation programs and
          services to ensure that programmed activities are meeting community needs. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          PR-1)
PR-2.6    User Fees. Support RSRPD in the collection of user fees from participants of recreation classes,
          activities, programs, sport leagues, and facility rentals to help offset the cost of providing park and
          recreation services and facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-1)
GENERAL PLAN                                            7-9                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                  CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
 Trails
GOAL PR-3
Accessible and Connected Trail System. An interconnected and accessible trail system is available
to provide connections to community facilities, recreational areas, public and private schools,
regional trails, canyons, hills, and open space to provide an important recreational opportunity
throughout Simi Valley.
PR-3.1    Multi-Use Trails. Provide multi-purpose trails with sufficient width to accommodate visitors
          desiring access to nature to travel using various options (e.g., on foot, on bike, on horseback, with
          dogs on leashes, etc.), when travel options are compatible and are environmentally sustainable,
          and offer a variety of experiences/challenge levels as appropriate. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-6)
PR-3.2    Integrated Trail System. Continue to link the community’s trails system with neighboring trail
          systems and the Arroyo Simi Greenway to create an integrated trail system throughout the
          community as identified on the Trail System Map. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-6)
PR-3.3    Private Development of Trails. Require the dedication and construction of trails, accessible to the
          public, for projects proposed in open space areas, along the Arroyo Simi Greenway and its
          tributaries, and other areas identified on the Trail System Map. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-2, PR-6)
PR-3.4    Trail Size. Develop trails with sufficient width to accommodate multiple uses while minimizing
          environmental impacts. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-6)
PR-3.5    Physical Accessibility. Design trails and
          other visitor facilities to be accessible
          for people with disabilities, when
          feasible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-6)
PR-3.6    Trailheads. Provide trailheads that can
          include parking, restrooms, directional
          signage, shade, water, and convenient
          access to trails. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          PR-6)
PR-3.7    Alternate Transportation Modes.
          Provide facilities and services (e.g.,
          bike racks, co-location of trailheads
                                                    Arroyo Simi Trail
          and transit stops, etc.) that encourage
          the use of bicycles and work with other agencies to encourage and facilitate transit travel to trails,
          including the Arroyo Simi Greenway. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, M-10, PR-6)
PR-3.8    Sustainable Trails. Consider and implement sustainable, best practices for the location and design
          of trails including the use of long-lasting natural materials and permeable surfaces; reduction or
          avoidance of chemicals; construction that follows natural terrain and minimizes intrusion on
          natural habitat; prevention of run-off into habitat or streams to minimize erosion; and care in
          scheduling maintenance activities to minimize disturbance of nesting and breeding of sensitive
          species. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, NR-2, NR-7, PR-6)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   7-10                                   GENERAL PLAN

PARKS AND RECREATION (PR)
PR-3.9      Education Amenities. Install in appropriate locations educational and interpretive signs and kiosks
            to enhance public understanding of the history of the area, natural resources, and the need for
            maintenance and enhancement of trails and open space areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, PR-6)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Parks and Recreation
Implementation Program, presented in Table PR-1 (Parks and Recreation Implementation Program),
describes the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this
section.
                                                                                                         2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table PR-1           Parks and Recreation Implementation Program
                                                                                                  2011                           Annual
 PR-1 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
      appropriate agencies, such as Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District, Simi
      Valley Unified School District, and the Simi Valley Police Department regarding
      issues addressing parks, recreation facilities, and open space; joint use of shared
      facilities; natural and historical assets preservation; facilities for youth and seniors;        
      park safety; funding for parks and recreation facilities; accessibility of parks; and
      recreational and leisure programs to meet the needs of the community.
      Implements       PR-1.1~PR-1.6, PR-1.8, PR-1.9, PR-1.11, PR-1.12,
  Which Policy(ies)    PR-1.17~PR-1.19, PR-1.21~PR-1.23, PR-2.1~PR-2.6
 PR-2 Development Review Process. The City shall continue to regulate development
      for compliance with General Plan goals, policies, land uses, and development
      standards through the Development Review Process to ensure the following:
      provide recreational amenities and gathering places for large-scale business parks
      and office developments; encourage private commercial recreational facilities to                
      meet community needs; and ensure compatibility of parks and recreation facilities
      with adjacent uses.
      Implements
                       PR-1.3, PR-1.6, PR-1.7, PR-1.10, PR-1.15, PR-1.20, PR-3.3
  Which Policy(ies)
 PR-3 Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall update the Development Code to
      establish a new Park zoning district, to establish development standards for
      existing and future parks in the City; to require new development proposals to
      provide public places for infill areas.                                                          
      Implements
                       PR-1.3, PR-1.4, PR-1.16
  Which Policy(ies)
 PR-4 Arroyo Simi Greenway Plan. The City shall consider the expansion of existing
      parks, including rest areas and other amenities, as part of the Arroyo Simi
      Greenway system to link these resources to other recreation, pedestrian, and
      visual amenities; encourage the incorporation of educational amenities.                          
      Implements
                       PR-1.13, PR-1.14
  Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                    7-11                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                     CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                                                            2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table PR-1           Parks and Recreation Implementation Program
                                                                                     2011                             Annual
PR-5 Development Impact Fees. The City shall require that new development
     proposals provide fees or enter into development agreements to contribute
     financing for parks and other amenities.                                             
     Implements
                     PR-1.3, PR-1.19, PR-1.20
 Which Policy(ies)
PR-6 Open Space/Trail Program. The City shall continue to encourage and support an
     interconnected and accessible trail system throughout the community and
     surrounding open space areas as an important recreational amenity.                   
     Implements
                     PR-3.1~PR-3.9
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      7-12                                           GENERAL PLAN

COMMUNITY SERVICES (CS)
COMMUNITY SERVICES (CS)
Community services and cultural arts such as libraries, schools, museums, human service programs, and
performing arts are essential to maintaining an educated, informed, caring, and culturally enriched
community. These services provide the building blocks for the kind of neighborhoods and communities that
are key to this General Plan. A challenge to sustaining a high quality of life in Simi Valley is being able to
balance providing these key services in locations that enhance the community’s access to them and minimize
adverse impacts to the community from their operation. Refer to Figure CS-1 (Community Facilities), for the
general location of key public service facilities in Simi Valley.
In Simi Valley, the Simi Valley Unified School District (SVUSD) is responsible for providing the majority of
primary and secondary education for Simi Valley residents. Additional educational facilities in the City include
a number of private and parochial schools operated by religious organizations or other private entities.
Additionally, the City contracts with the Ventura County Library Service Agency to provide library service to
Simi Valley residents from the Simi Valley Library located in the Civic Center.
Though state law does not require that General Plans address these community services, goals and policies in
this section address Simi Valley’s commitment to continue efforts to support community service needs,
including high quality education, library, and cultural arts programs for the anticipated growth of its
population. These goals and policies further address human service programs which include improving
health, living a balanced and productive life, and preventing homelessness. The City of Simi Valley, the
private sector, and private and non-profit partners will continue to provide the tools and resources that focus
on individual, family, and community improvements that respond to service needs identified by Simi Valley
residents.
GOAL CS-1
Human Service Needs. A broad range of community services and programs are provided to meet
the social and human needs of residents and enrich daily living in the community.
CS-1.1     Agency Collaboration. Collaborate with the County, community-based agencies, non-profit
           groups, and public and private schools to develop service programs that are responsive to the
           needs of all ages and socio-economic groups. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-1.2     Location of Community Services. Encourage the development of community and social services
           “under one roof” to save on costs, avoid duplication of services, and provide greater convenience
           for residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-1.3     Services Provided by Other Agencies. Support service programs provided by the County, nonprofit
           groups, and other agencies. Encourage these groups in the expansion, maintenance, and
           coordination of services. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
GENERAL PLAN                                             7-13                      CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                   CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
CS-1.4      Senior       and     Youth
            Services. Support the
            provision and expansion
            of services, programs,
            and facilities to meet the
            needs of seniors and
            youth in Simi Valley.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
            CS-2, CS-3)
CS-1.5      Health      and     Mental
            Health Services. Support
                                         Simi Valley Senior Center
            existing and future health
            and mental health services and programs, emergency shelters, and transitional housing provided
            by the County, the City, and other private or non-profit agencies or groups, to serve the needs of
            residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-1.6      Homeless Services. Support public and nonprofit agencies in securing funding for and the
            development and provision of homeless services, programs, emergency shelters, and transitional
            housing. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-4)
CS-1.7      Emergency Weather Centers. Support the provision of emergency warming and cooling centers as
            needed. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-4)
CS-1.8      Community Services and Volunteer Opportunities. Work with public and non-profit agencies and
            service providers to publicize, promote, and coordinate volunteer opportunities for community
            services and programs. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
  Arts and Culture
Goals and policies in this section support the establishment and maintenance of a diversity of cultural
facilities and amenities in Simi Valley. The City is home to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and
Museum, the Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center, Strathearn Historical Park and Museum, and a number of other
historic and cultural resources. Art and cultural programs, exhibitions, performances, and similar events
provide opportunities for the attendance, participation, and appreciation of residents and visitors. The
inclusion of visual arts opportunities broadens the exposure and awareness of City residents and visitors to
enhance and enrich Simi Valley’s cultural environment and quality of life. Historical Resources are addressed
in the Community Development Chapter.
GOAL CS-2
Facilities and Programs. A diversity of arts and cultural facilities and programs are available for
people of all ages to enrich the community and enhance the quality of life for residents.
CS-2.1      Arts and Cultural Partnerships. Encourage partnerships among arts and cultural groups,
            educational facilities, community organizations, and the private sector to develop arts and cultural
            educational activities and programming for all ages. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      7-14                                GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Facilities
                                                                                                                                          Lost Ca nyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Legend
                                                                                                                                  Simi Valley
                                                                                                                                  Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ñ Cultural Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                            !                                                                                        5
                                                                                                   Rancho Tapo Community Park
                                                                                                        24                                                                                               Simi Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! Library
                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                   and Veterans Plaza
                                                                                                                                                                         18                   Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! Park/Community Center
                                                                                                          Simi Valley                                                                                ot
                                                                                                 !! k(
                                                                                                     ! 31 Cultural Arts
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                      34               !  Center                                    Alamo St
                                                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! School
                   Ar
                            L o s A g e le s A
                                   n           v
                                                                              3
                                                                                      !              ñ
                                                                                                     *                                                                                  Simi Valley City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rancho Santa Susanna                                                                 City Boundary
                        r oyo
                               Sim                                           ! Ý    A
                                                                                    E                    15                                         Cochr an St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Community Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Urban Restriction
                Strathearn Historical               as
                                                         y St
                                                                               37
                                                                               !                26
                                                                                                        !     4642
                                                                                                              !! ! 27                                                                                                                                                                                                 Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kuehn er Dr
                                                                                                !
                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo St
                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                    Tap o C a n yo n
                Park and Museum                                           9           17           !                        20
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                    Sycam ore Dr
                                                                          !           !
                                                                                                             Erringe r Rd
                                                                    14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                        First St
                                                            Made ra Rd
                                                                   !            !19                              !       41
                                                                                                                                                        U.P.R .R.
                 45
                                                    ! !2                     4        16!ñ
                                                                                         *!2928
                                                                                         30
                                                                                           Los Angel es Av
                                                                                                                   10 40
                                                                                                                         !
                 !                                          43              !         !   !                        ! !
                                                         38 !23                   !                                         11
                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
Ronald Reagan
Presidential Library                                  39
                                                         !    ! 44
                                                                !             36
                                                                                                                            !
and Museum                                            !12
                                                       ! !1 ! 35  25         !                                                   32
                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                         Santa Susana Historic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Railroad Depot
                                                                       !               13
                                                                                       !                         Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                                                                               ñ
                                                                                                                               *
                              ñ                                             22 6
                              *    Mad
                                         e ra R
                                                d
                                                                       !8 !
                                                                     Sinaloa
                                                                      Lake      !
                                                                                          33
                                                                                         !                      Sycamore Drive
           Rd
E
í
?   n
  O ls e                                  !                     Rancho Madera
                                                                Community Park
                                                                                                                Community Center
                  Bard
                                                                                   Rd                                                                                                  Elementary Schools            16. Simi Elementary                                 Charter Schools
                Reservoir                                                     on
                                                                         ny                                                                                                            1. Abraham Lincoln Elementary 17. Sycamore Elementary                             29. Apollo High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18. Township Elementary
                                                                 Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                       2. Arroyo Elementary                                                              30. Monte Vista School
                                            !21                 Lo
                                                            ng
                                                                                                                                                                                       3. Atherwood Elementary                    19. Vista Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Private Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                       4. Berylwood Elementary                    20. White Oak Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         31. Good Shepard Lutheran
                                                                                                                                                                                       5. Big Springs Elementary                  21. Wood Ranch Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32. Grace Brethren
                                                                                                                                                                                       6. Crestview Elementary                    Middle Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33. Grace Brethren Jr/Sr High School
                                                                                                                                                                                       7. Garden Grove Elementary                 22. Hillside Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         34. Light House Christian School
                                                                                                                                                                                       8. Hollow Hills Elementary                 23. Sinaloa Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         35. The Pacific Academy
                                                                                                                                                                                       9. Justin Elementary                       24. Valley View Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         36. Phoenix Ranch and Day Camp
                                                                                                                                                                                       10. Katherine Elementary                   High Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         37. Pinecrest Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                       11. Knolls Elementary                      25. Royal High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         38. Simi Valley Adventist School       Source: Ventura County, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                       12. Madera Elementary                      26. Santa Susana High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         39. St. Rose of Lima Elementary        Date Revised: September 30, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                       13. Mountain View Elementary               27. Simi Valley High                                                          D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Community Facilities.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40. Valley Bible Academy
                                                                                                                                                                                       14. Park View Elementary                   Adult Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                       15. Santa Susana Elementary                28. Simi Valley Adult School                                                                  0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure CS-1


COMMUNITY SERVICES (CS)
CS-2.2    Public Art. Support the donation, installation, and display of public art and the incorporation of
          display space in new public facilities and key recreational areas such as along the Arroyo Simi
          Greenway. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CS-2.3    Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center. Support the continuation and expansion of events, performances,
          and art shows occurring at the Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CS-2.4    Events and Programs. Support festivals, seminars, workshops, concerts, and community cultural
          programs. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CS-2.5    Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center Foundation. Support
          the mission and activities of the Simi Valley Cultural
          Arts Center Foundation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CS-2.6    Cultural Tourism. Promote cultural tourism in Simi
          Valley to attract visitors and tourists interested in
          cultural events, such as promotion of the Ronald
          Reagan Presidential Library and Museum, Simi Valley
          Cultural Arts Center, Corriganville Park, and
          Strathearn Historical Park and Museum. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, CS-5)
CS-2.7    Cooperative Partnerships. Work cooperatively with
          RSRPD, SVUSD, and community groups including the
          Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center Foundation to
          support art programs and cultural facilities located in
          Simi Valley. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-2.8    Strathearn Historical Park and Museum. Encourage
          relocation of historical structures threatened with
                                                                   Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center
          demolition to the Strathearn Historical Park and
          Museum and support activities, events, and historical programs occurring at the Strathearn
          Historical Park and Museum. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
 Community Education
Goals and policies in this section provide for the development of schools commensurate with population
growth that are accessible from every neighborhood. Opportunities for life-long learning are encouraged,
enabling Simi Valley residents to obtain skills to meet the needs of evolving business sectors. Schools are
encouraged to be located and designed to serve as a key component of neighborhood identity and activity.
GOAL CS-3
Community Education. High-quality and equitably distributed educational facilities are available
that provide an education for the children and youth of Simi Valley as well as life-long learning
opportunities for all residents.
CS-3.1    Provision of Schools. Work with the SVUSD to provide school sites and upgrade existing facilities
          that serve the needs of the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
GENERAL PLAN                                         7-17                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                  CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
CS-3.2    New School Sites. Assist SVUSD to find appropriate sites for new or expanded school facilities
          within infill development opportunities in the community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-3.3    Joint-Use. Work with SVUSD and RSRPD to explore opportunities for joint-use that integrates uses
          for recreation, cultural, and non-school-related activities at new and existing facilities. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-3.4    Multi-Use Facilities. Work with SVUSD to provide and design creative multi-use facilities that
          integrate schools with community rooms, parks, public libraries, and City services, such as police
          facilities, as part of one multi-use development. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-3.5    Continuing and Adult Education. Encourage and support the development, expansion, and
          upgrade of adult education facilities and continuing educational programs in order for residents to
          obtain workforce skills to meet the needs of the business community. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-3.6    Support for Community Colleges. Support the activities of nearby community colleges to provide
          continuing education programs, career development, and academic courses to Simi Valley
          residents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-3.7    Youth Workforce. Encourage and support programs to develop the youth workforce to meet the
          needs of the business community and prepare youth for the future. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-3)
 Libraries
Goals and policies in this section provide for the continuation of library services and the provision of facilities
commensurate with population growth. Not only do libraries serve as a repository for books, music, and
other resources, they also can serve as gathering places for readings and other community activities.
GOAL CS-4
Library Services and Facilities. Library facilities are provided that enhance Simi Valley’s quality of life
and create opportunities for self-learning and cultural and academic enrichment.
CS-4.1    Library Services. Continue to support
          Ventura County in the provision of
          library services and programs to meet
          the needs of residents. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-18, CS-1)
CS-4.2    Joint Use Facilities. Encourage libraries
          to be sited and consolidated with other
          community facilities such as civic
          centers, community centers, and
          educational facilities. (Imp A-1, A-2, Simi Valley Library
          LU-18, CS-1)
CS-4.3    Satellite Libraries. Develop new freestanding “satellite libraries” or shared library facilities with
          area schools, at new community centers, or within private development in order to supplement
          services offered at the Simi Valley Library. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    7-18                                  GENERAL PLAN

COMMUNITY SERVICES (CS)
CS-4.4     Facility Usage. Encourage the use of library facilities, including the Ronald Reagan Presidential
           Library, as additional venues for community events and programs. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-4.5     Multi-Functional Facilities. Support the use of the Simi Valley Library, the Ronald Reagan
           Presidential Library, and other new facilities to serve as multi-functional facilities, cultural centers,
           and gathering places. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-4.6     Technology and Access. Encourage the use of computers and the internet to digitally access library
           resources, multi-media, and other information. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
CS-4.7     Alternative Service Delivery. Work with Ventura County and other agencies, as necessary, to
           explore alternative models to deliver library services to Simi Valley residents, in situations when
           Ventura County cannot provide the level and/or type of services desired by the City, and the
           means to fund payment of these services. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, CS-1)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Community Services
Implementation Program, presented in Table CS-1 (Community Services Implementation Program), describes
the measures or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                   2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table CS-1           Community Services Implementation Program
                                                                                            2011                           Annual
 CS-1 Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
      appropriate agencies, such as the County of Ventura, nonprofit groups,
      community-based agencies, public and private schools, Rancho Simi Recreation
      and Park District, and Simi Valley Unified School District regarding the following:
      provide service programs and venues that are responsive to the needs of the
      community; coordinate services and provide services ―under one roof‖; pursue
      funding for various community service needs; provide health and mental health
      services; establish a central location to advertise community services and
      programs and to publicize volunteer opportunities; encourage partnerships to               
      develop arts and cultural activities; support art programs and cultural facilities
      located in the community; support community education; provide library services
      and facilities within the community, and encourage relocation of historical
      structures threatened with demolition to the Strathearn Historical Park and
      Museum.
      Implements      CS-1.1~CS-1.3, CS-1.5, CS-1.8, CS-2.7, CS-2.8, CS-3.1~CS-3.6,
  Which Policy(ies)   CS-4.1~CS-4.7
 CS-2 Senior Citizens Programs. The City shall support and coordinate with other
      agencies for the provision of programs and services for senior citizens in the
      community, including the Simi Valley Senior Center; senior nutrition programs;
      Council On Aging, an advisory body to the City Council on issues affection seniors;
      the Lifeline Program providing emergency response for seniors; Brown Bag                   
      Program; and other special events and fundraisers.
      Implements
                      CS-1.4
  Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                                 7-19                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                         CHAPTER 7: COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                                                                   2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table CS-1           Community Services Implementation Program
                                                                                            2011                             Annual
CS-3 Youth Programs. The City shall support and coordinate with other agencies for
     the provision of programs and services for youth in the community, including
     developing the youth workforce; providing support and referral for youth and their
     families with issues related to truancy, substance abuse, runaways, peer pressure,
     and personal crises; and the Youth Council, an advisory body to the City Council            
     on issues affecting youth.
     Implements
                     CS-1.4, CS-3.7
 Which Policy(ies)
CS-4 Homeless Programs. The City shall support and coordinate with other agencies
     for the provision of programs and services for persons in the community, including
     homeless persons. This shall include providing information and referrals to local
     programs and nonprofit resources regarding a wide variety of needs, such as
     landlord/tenant issues, homeless services, and other social services and support to
     the Task Force on Homelessness, an advisory body to the City Council on issues              
     related to homelessness. Where feasible, the City shall encourage development of
     new or expanded homeless services and programs, emergency weather centers,
     and transitional housing.
     Implements
                     CS-1.6, CS-1.7
 Which Policy(ies)
CS-5 Public Art and Cultural Tourism Programs. The City shall support public art in
     new public facilities and key recreational areas, such as the Arroyo Simi
     Greenway; support the continuation and expansion of events at the Simi Valley
     Cultural Arts Center; support the mission and activities of the Simi Valley Cultural
     Arts Center Foundation; support festivals, seminars, workshops, concerts, and               
     community cultural programs; and promote cultural tourism in the community to
     attract visitors.
     Implements
                     CS-2.1~CS-2.6
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         7-20                                               GENERAL PLAN

CHAPTER 8 Safety and Nois
                                                                     CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
INTRODUCTION
The built and natural environments of Simi Valley contain a number of hazards that require special
consideration and treatment in the land use planning process. Protection from the risks of natural and man-
made hazards, including crime, is essential in establishing a sense of well-being for residents and an
important consideration in attracting new businesses, residents, and visitors to the City. State law requires
that the General Plan specifically identify areas in the community subject to hazards and include appropriate
                                                                             actions to minimize these
                                                                             hazards. Goals and policies in this
                                                                             section are designed to reduce
                                                                             hazards from floods, seismic
                                                                             activity, wildland and urban fires,
                                                                             and hazardous materials, and
                                                                             provide       effective    disaster
                                                                             preparedness, timely emergency
                                                                             response,         and      ongoing
                                                                             coordination with emergency
Fire Station 44, Wood Ranch                                                  response agencies, as well as
                                                                             protection from excessive noise.
COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
  Emergency Preparedness
GOAL S-1
Emergency Response. Effective emergency preparedness and rapid response to natural or human-
induced disasters are provided that minimize the loss of life, damage to property, and disruptions in
the delivery of vital public and private services during and following disaster.
Policies
S-1.1       Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan and NIMS Plan. Implement the strategies in the City’s Multi-Hazard
            Mitigation Plan and National Incident Management System (NIMS) Plan to prevent the replication
            of pre-disaster conditions. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
S-1.2       NIMS Compliance. Maintain compliance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency
            National Incident Management System (NIMS), which is a template for the management of
            incidents to reduce the loss of life and property and harm to the environment. (Imp A-1, A-2,
            LU-18, S-1)
S-1.3       Consistent and Current Emergency Response Plans. Develop and maintain consistent,
            comprehensive, and up-to-date plans and regulations, including the General Plan and the Multi-
            Hazard Mitigation Plan, to prepare for and respond to disasters. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     8-2                                   GENERAL PLAN

COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
S-1.4     Disaster Skills Training. Enhance the capabilities of the City’s first responders to effectively
          function in disasters, including the City’s Disaster Service Worker Team, Police Department, and
          City employees. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
S-1.5     Data and Information Tracking. Maintain an up-to-date Geographic Information System (GIS)
          database that tracks new development and structures in hazard areas in order to enhance the
          City’s capability to assess and respond to emergency incidents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
S-1.6     Evacuation Planning. Coordinate evacuation planning, including evacuation routes, among
          emergency responders including the Ventura County Fire Protection District, Sheriff’s Department,
          the California Highway Patrol, and law enforcement agencies in other local jurisdictions. (Imp A-1,
          A-2, LU-18, S-1)
S-1.7     Post-Disaster Response. Plan for the continued functioning of critical facilities following a major
          disaster to help prevent major problems during post-disaster response, such as evacuations,
          rescues, large numbers of injuries, and major cleanup operations. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
S-1.8     Funding Programs. Pursue funding for programs related to preparedness, training, mitigation, and
          response for catastrophic events. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1)
GOAL S-2
Interjurisdictional Cooperation. Established agreements and coordination protocols are maintained
that support cooperative training, preparation, and response activities from federal, state, and
regional agencies during and after catastrophic events.
Policies
S-2.1     Mutual Aid Agreements. Continue to participate in mutual-aid agreements to ensure adequate
          resources, facilities, and other support for emergency response. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
S-2.2     Intergovernmental Partnership. Maintain ongoing partnerships with federal, state, county, and
          local governmental agencies to identify and implement disaster mitigation actions, including
          information sharing. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
S-2.3     Emergency and Disaster Exercises. Coordinate with Ventura County, Los Angeles County, and
          other jurisdictions to conduct emergency and disaster-preparedness exercises to periodically test
          operational and emergency plans. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
GOAL S-3
Public Awareness. The community is well informed regarding appropriate disaster preparation
strategies and response protocols for actions before, during, and after catastrophic events.
Policy
S-3.1     Educational Outreach. Sponsor and support education programs to increase awareness regarding
          disaster preparedness protocols and procedures and disaster risk reduction strategies to all
          segments of the community, including local officials, residents, businesses, property owners, and
          others who have interests in the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-3)
GENERAL PLAN                                           8-3                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                       CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
 Police Services, Crime Prevention, and Protection
GOAL S-4
Police Services, Crime Prevention, and Protection. Quality police services are provided that protect
the long-term safety and well-being of Simi Valley residents, businesses, and visitors from criminal
activities.
Policies
S-4.1       Response Time Standards. Achieve and
            maintain appropriate response times for all
            call priority levels to provide responsive
            police services for the safety of residents
            and visitors. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-4)
S-4.2       Staffing Standards. Maintain optimum
            staffing levels for both sworn police officers
            and civilian support staff in order to provide
            quality police services to the community.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-4)                      Emergency crew working on an incident
S-4.3       Cooperation with Other Agencies. Continue to work with the California Highway Patrol, the
            Ventura County Sheriff’s Department, and neighboring law enforcement agencies for the provision
            of emergency services and to provide backup police assistance in emergency situations. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, LU-18, S-4)
S-4.4       Community Education and Awareness.
            Continue to be responsive to crime trends
            by informing and educating the community
            through the Neighborhood Watch and
            Business Watch Programs and the Business
            Alert and Citizen Alert System and
            facilitating educational programs dealing
            with personal safety awareness. (Imp A-1,
            A-2, LU-18, S-3, S-4)
S-4.5       Communication with the Community. Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) training
            Maintain a dialogue with the community to and public outreach
            improve relationships and customer service,
            and continually explore innovative means to communicate with the public on police services.
            (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-3, S-4)
S-4.6       Technology. Ensure changes and upgrades in equipment and policing activities keep pace with
            changing technologies. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-4)
S-4.7       Crime Prevention through Design. Support and encourage the use defensible space concepts (site
            and building lighting, visual observation of open spaces, secured areas, etc.) in the design of new
            development and rehabilitation projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     8-4                                   GENERAL PLAN

COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
S-4.8      Development Review. Review new development and rehabilitation projects for security matters as
           part of the development review process. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5)
  Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Simi Valley is located in a seismically active area in
proximity to several major regional fault systems,
including the Simi-Santa Rosa fault that traverses
the northern portion of the City, as shown in
Figure S-1 (Seismic and Geologic Hazards). The City
has established a fault hazard zone that prohibits
structures on fault traces within this zone. Hazards
associated with seismic activity include the
potential for liquefaction and landslides. Areas
susceptible to liquefaction include those within
river channels and flood plain deposits, such as the
Arroyo Simi, and are generally located in the
western and eastern portions of Simi Valley, as
shown in Figure S-1. Landslides are also associated Bare hillside with adjacent development
with seismic activity though there are other factors that may influence their occurrence. These factors
include the slope, moisture content of the soil, and the composition of the soils and subsurface geology.
Fortunately, most of the developed portions of the City are relatively flat and not subject to landslides
hazards. However, the foothills of the Santa Susana Mountains to the north, and the Simi Hills and Santa
Monica Mountains to the south, include landslide hazard zones. All development in these areas must have
geotechnical investigations completed prior to construction. Additional efforts to mitigate geologic and
seismic hazards are included below.
GOAL S-5
Geologic and Seismic Hazards. Adverse effects to residents, public and private property, and
essential services caused by seismic and geologic hazards are minimized.
Policies
S-5.1      Review Safety Standards. Regularly review and enforce all seismic and geologic safety standards,
           including the Building Code, in site design and building construction methods. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           S-5, S-6)
S-5.2      Building Codes. Adopt building codes that include design and construction features that provide
           protection for new and renovated structures in hazard areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-6)
S-5.3      Geotechnical Investigations. Require geotechnical investigations for applicable improvements to
           determine the potential for ground rupture, groundshaking, landslides, and liquefaction impacts
           due to seismic events, as well as expansive soils and subsidence problems, on sites where these
           hazards are potentially present. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5)
GENERAL PLAN                                            8-5                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                             CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
S-5.4       Critical Facilities. Encourage the upgrade, retrofitting, and/or possible relocation of all existing
            critical facilities (e.g., schools, police stations, fire stations, and medical facilities) and other public
            facilities that do not meet current building code standards and are located within geologic hazard
            areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5)
S-5.5       Tilt-Up Structures. Encourage the upgrade and retrofit of tilt-up structures that do not meet
            current building code standards and are located within geologic hazard areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
            S-5)
S-5.6       Damage Prevention and Control. Develop a comprehensive approach to reducing the possibility of
            damage and losses due to earthquakes. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5, S-6)
S-5.7       Data and Analysis. Develop and maintain an up-to-date database of critical City assets and
            periodically assess their vulnerability to geologic hazards (e.g., data on construction type,
            occupancy rating, seismic reinforcements, etc.). (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-11)
S-5.8       Intergovernmental Coordination. Establish and maintain cooperative relationships with federal,
            state, and local government agencies and special districts to promote information and resource
            sharing. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
S-5.9       Public Education and Partnerships. Partner with other agencies and organizations to provide
            public education programs about potential geologic hazards in Simi Valley, and proper emergency
            preparation and response strategies before, during, and after geologic occurrences. (Imp A-1, A-2,
            LU-18, S-2, S-3)
S-5.10      Funding Programs. Pursue federal and state programs to provide training, education, and
            mitigation activities for protection against seismic activity. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
  Fire Services
Fire is a natural occurrence and is influenced by a number of factors including fuel sources, topography, and
weather. While no part of Simi Valley is located within a Fire Hazard area, the potential for fire is a problem
in the urban fringe and hillside areas that surround the valley floor, as shown in Figure S-2 (Fire Hazard).
Goals and policies in this section provide for coordinated fire prevention, protection, and emergency medical
services that serve all areas of Simi Valley in support of residents and businesses for urban or wildland fires.
GOAL S-6
Fire and Emergency Medical Services. Coordinated fire protection and emergency medical services
are provided that support the needs of residents and businesses and maintain a safe and healthy
community.
S-6.1       Ventura County Fire Protection District, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency, and Simi
            Valley Hospital Coordination. Continue to work with and support the Ventura County Fire
            Protection District, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency, and Simi Valley Hospital with
            regard to personnel, facility, and infrastructure needs to maintain a high level of fire and
            emergency services within the City. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2, S-7)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          8-6                                     GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Seismic and
                                                                                                                                             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Geologic Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Earthquake Induced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Landslide Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Simi/Santa Rosa Earthquake
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av                              Ka                                                             Fault Hazard Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                      Aven ida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot                                                      Earthquake Induced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liquefaction Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                       Alamo St
                 Ar
                           L o s A g e le s A
                                  n           v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                      r o yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Urban Restriction Boundary
                             Sim
                                                     as
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                               A       Cochr an St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                          y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                  Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                             First St
                                                             Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                               d
                   e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                aR
     T   ie r r
                                                                               Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                Royal Av
                                                                                                                      Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                      Sinaloa
                                               Rd
                                   Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                   Woo d
                                            Ra
                                             nc
                                                  hP
                Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                               on
              Reservoir                           ark
                                                                          ny
                                                    way           Ca
                                                                 Lo
                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: Ventura County, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          seismic_geologic_hazards.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure S-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fire
                                                                                                                                             Lost Canyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Very High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                High
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av                              Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                        Non-State Responsibility Area
                                                                                                                                                      Aven ida Simi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                       Alamo St
                         L o s A g e le s A                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Urban Restriction
                 Ar             n           v
                    r o yo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Boundary
                           Sim
                                                     as
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               Ý
                                                                                                                                               A       Cochr an St                                                                                              Sphere of Influence
                                                          y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stear ns St
                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tapo St
                                                                                                                                                                           Tapo C a n yo n
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av
                                                                                                                  Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                             First St
                                                             Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                               d
                   e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
                aR
     T   ie r r
                                                                               Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                Royal Av
                                                                                                                      Fitzge rald Rd
                                                                      Sinaloa
                                               Rd
                                   Ma   d e ra                         Lake
         Rd
E
í
?   n
O l se                                   Woo d
                                            Ra
                                             nc
                                                hP
                Bard
                                                                                    Rd
                                                                               on
              Reservoir                          ark
                                                                          ny
                                                    way           Ca
                                                                 Lo
                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: CA Dept. Fire & Forest Protection, 1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Fire Hazards.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure S-2


COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
S-6.2     Emergency Response. Periodically evaluate emergency response to Citywide disasters to
          determine if service improvements are needed. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-1, S-2)
S-6.3     Adequate Infrastructure. Continue to assess the water pressure for fire suppression and evaluate
          and implement feasible solutions. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, IU-2, S-7)
 Urban and Wildland Fire Hazards
GOAL S-7
Fire Protection. People and property in Simi Valley are protected from urban and wild fires.
Policies
S-7.1     Intergovernmental             Coordination.
          Cooperate with the Ventura County Fire
          Protection District in periodically
          evaluating services and service criteria
          to ensure that the City continues to
          receive adequate fire protection,
          prevention services, and information-
          sharing protocols. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          S-2, S-7)
S-7.2     Fire Department Review. Continue
          review by the Ventura County Fire
          Protection District of all proposed
          structures and developments within the
          community to mitigate potential Controlled burn
          wildland fire loss and damage. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2, S-5, S-7)
S-7.3     Fire Inspection. Work with the Ventura County Fire Protection District to ensure an ongoing fire
          inspection program to reduce fire hazards associated with critical facilities, public assembly
          facilities, industrial buildings, and nonresidential buildings. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2, S-7)
S-7.4     Fire Protection Systems. Encourage existing commercial and multiple-unit residential uses to
          install fire protection systems, as required by the state, building, and fire codes for new
          development, and encourage the use of automatic sprinkler systems in existing structures.
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-6)
S-7.5     Fuel Modification. Ensure that new development complies with fuel modification requirements of
          the Ventura County Fire Protection District, as applicable. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5)
S-7.6     Post-Fire Debris Flow. Develop and implement a comprehensive approach to mitigate damage and
          loss due to post-fire debris flow. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-8)
S-7.7     Public Education. Promote public education of residents regarding site design, landscaping,
          location of materials, and brush landscaping to prevent and reduce fire hazards. (Imp A-1, A-2,
          LU-18, S-3)
GENERAL PLAN                                            8-11                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                          CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
S-7.8      Funding. Ensure that new developments pay a pro-rata share for increased fire protection as
           necessitated by their construction. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-14, LU-18, ED-8, S-5)
  Flood Hazards
The City of Simi Valley is located within the Calleguas Creek Watershed in southeastern Ventura County,
which ultimately drains to the Pacific Ocean. This watershed includes the Arroyo Simi and its tributaries,
which expose developed areas on the valley floor to flooding as shown in Figure S-3 (Flood Hazards). The
control measures that have been put in place by the City to mitigate potential damage and destruction from
flooding include the following.
GOAL S-8
Flood Hazard Protection. Residents, workers, and visitors are protected from flood hazards.
Policies
S-8.1      Floodplain Requirements. Regulate new development and protect existing development within
           flood prone areas in accordance with City, state, and federal building codes. Follow federal
           requirements to reduce damage and loss due to flooding and to maintain the City’s eligibility
           under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5, S-6, S-9)
S-8.2      Flood Insurance. Request assistance from state and federal governments, as necessary, to enable
           the City to maintain compliance with National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requirements.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2, S-9)
S-8.3      Flood Prevention Design. Require that new development incorporate sufficient measures to
           mitigate flood hazards, including the design of on-site drainage systems linking with Citywide
           storm drainage, gradation of the site so that runoff does not impact adjacent properties or
           structures on the site, and elevation of any structures above the localized flooding elevation.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-5, S-6)
S-8.4      Critical Facilities. Prohibit the location of critical facilities within an area subject to significant
           inundation during any flood event unless the facility can be adequately protected from inundation,
           and provide for updating of critical facilities within these areas when practical. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, S-6)
S-8.5      Facility Use or Storage of Hazardous Materials. Require that all facilities storing, using, or
           otherwise involved with substantial quantities of on-site hazardous materials within flood zones
           comply with applicable standards of elevation, anchoring, and flood proofing, and that hazardous
           materials be stored in watertight containers. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-6)
S-8.6      New Development. Ensure that new development is properly located and designed to avoid
           flooding, and require upgrades and improvements of the existing storm drain system for on-site
           retention to handle the increased runoff generated from the development site. (Imp A-1, A-2,
           LU-18, S-5)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                    8-12                                   GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           General Plan Update
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Flood
                                                                                                                                            Lost Ca nyons Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                      Towns hip Av                               Ka
                                                                                                                                                                                                        d                                                                        City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                      Avenid a Si mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                                      Alamo St
                        L o s A g e le s A
                 Ar            n           v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Urban Restriction
                    r oyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Boundary
                           Sim
                                                    as
                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                              Ý
                                                                                                                                              A        Cochr an St
                                                         y St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yosemite Av   Kuehn er Dr
                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stear ns St
                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                              Tapo St
                                                                                                                 Erringe r Rd         Sycam ore Dr
                                                                                                                                                      Sequo ia Av          Tap o C a n yo n
                                                                                            First St
                                                            Made ra Rd
                                                                                                                                                               U.P.R .R.
                              d
                  e ja   da R                                                                  Los Angel es Av
               aR
     Ti   er r
                                                                              Sina loa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                               Royal Av
                                                                                                                     Fitzge rald Rd                                                       HIGH RISK AREAS
                                                                     Sinaloa                                                                                                                     Zone A
                                               d
                                        e ra R                                                                                                                                            Areas with a 1% annual chance of flooding and a 26% chance of
                                  Mad
                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                          flooding over the life of a 30-year mortgage. Because detailed
         Rd                                                                                                                                                                               analyses are not performed for such areas; no depths or baseflood
E
í
?   n
O ls e                                  Woo d
                                                                                                                                                                                          elevations are shown within these zones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone AE
                                                                                                                                                                                          The base floodplain where base flood elevations are provided.
                                          Ra
                                            nc
                                               hP                                                                                                                                         AE Zones are now used on new format FIRMs instead of A1-A30 Zones.
                Bard
                                                                                   Rd                                                                                                            Zone AH
                                                                              on
              Reservoir                         ar k
                                                                         ny
                                                   way           Ca                                                                                                                       Areas with a 1% annual chance of shallow flooding, usually in the form
                                                                Lo                                                                                                                        of a pond, with an average depth ranging from 1 to 3 feet. These areas
                                                            ng
                                                                                                                                                                                          have a 26% chance of flooding over the life of a 30-year mortgage.
                                                                                                                                                                                          Base flood elevations derived from detailed analyses are shown at
                                                                                                                                                                                          selected intervals within these zones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone AO
                                                                                                                                                                                          River or stream flood hazard areas, and areas with a 1% or greater
                                                                                                                                                                                          chance of shallow flooding each year, usually in the form of sheet flow,
                                                                                                                                                                                          with an average depth ranging from 1 to 3 feet. These areas have a
                                                                                                                                                                                          26% chance of flooding over the life of a 30-year mortgage. Average
                                                                                                                                                                                          flood depths derived from detailed analyses are shown within these zones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone A99
                                                                                                                                                                                          Areas with a 1% annual chance of flooding that will be protected by a
                                                                                                                                                                                          Federal flood control system where construction has reached specified legal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: FEMA, January 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                          requirements. No depths or base flood elevations are shown within these zones. Date Revised: October 3, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                          MODERATE TO LOW RISK AREAS                                                     D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Flood Hazards.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone 0.2% Annual Chance Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                          Areas with a 0.2% annual chance flooding.                                                    0  0.25 0.5       1    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure S-3


COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
S-8.7    Preservation of Flood Plains. Require preservation of flood plains as open space, when practical,
         as the preferred alternative to development or channelization in project environmental impact
         reports (EIRs). (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-8, LU-18, S-6)
S-8.8    Dam Failure Warning Plan. Maintain the City’s Dam Failure Response Plan to alert affected
         residents, businesses, and government agencies located in potential hazard areas. (Imp A-1, A-2,
         LU-18, S-9)
 Hazardous Materials
GOAL S-9
Hazardous Materials. Residents, visitors, property, and the natural environment in Simi Valley are
protected to the maximum extent feasible by the use, storage, and/or transport of hazardous
materials.
Policies
S-9.1    Interjurisdictional Coordination. Continue to carry out inspections, emergency response, and
         enforcement of hazardous materials and waste compliance procedures for Simi Valley. (Imp A-1,
         A-2, LU-18, S-2, S-10)
S-9.2    Educate Residents/Businesses. Educate residents and businesses regarding methods to reduce or
         eliminate the use of hazardous materials, including the disposal of household hazardous materials,
         including medications, batteries, e-waste, biomedical waste, etc., and the use of safer nontoxic
         equivalents. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-3)
S-9.3    Emergency Response. Maintain and
         enhance the City’s first responders’
         ability to safely and effectively
         respond to hazardous materials
         incidents and releases. (Imp A-1,
         A-2, LU-18, S-1, S-7)
S-9.4    Hazardous Materials Regulation.
         Work with relevant agencies
         regarding        enforcement        of
         applicable laws requiring all users,
         producers,        disposers,      and Hazardous materials transport
         transporters of hazardous materials and wastes to clearly identify the materials that they store,
         use, produce, dispose, or transport, and to notify the appropriate City, county, state, and federal
         agencies in the event of a violation. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-2)
S-9.5    Known Areas of Contamination. Require proponents of projects in known areas of contamination
         from oil operations or other uses to perform comprehensive soil and groundwater contamination
         assessments, in accordance with applicable standards. If contamination exceeds regulatory action
         levels, require the proponent to undertake remediation procedures prior to grading and
         development through a cleanup program under the supervision of the Ventura County
         Environmental Health Division, Department of Toxic Substances Control, or Regional Water Quality
GENERAL PLAN                                         8-15                       CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
           Control Board (depending upon the nature of any identified contamination). (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           S-5, S-6)
S-9.6      Siting of Sensitive Uses. Develop and implement strict land use controls, performance standards,
           and structure design standards for uses that generate, use, or store hazardous materials, including
           development setbacks from sensitive uses such as residential homes, schools, hospitals, daycare
           and eldercare facilities, high density population facilities (such as movie theaters, auditoriums,
           museums), and other sensitive uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-6)
S-9.7      Hazardous Waste Collection. Conduct frequent and convenient household hazardous waste
           collection events. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, S-3, S-10)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Safety
Implementation Program, presented in Table S-1 (Safety Implementation Program), describes the measures
or actions to be taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                     2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table S-1            Safety Implementation Program
                                                                                              2011                             Annual
 S-1    Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan. The City shall continue to implement the Multi-
        Hazard Mitigation Plan and maintain compliance with the Federal Emergency
        Management Agency National Incident Management System (NIMS) to prevent
        and address disasters. This shall include maintaining consistency between the
        Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan and the City’s General Plan; providing disaster skills        
        training; tracking new development in hazard areas; coordinating evacuation
        planning; planning for post-disaster response; and pursuing funding.
      Implements
                      S-1.1~S-1.8, S-6.2, S-9.3
  Which Policy(ies)
 S-2    Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
        appropriate agencies, such as federal, state, and local governmental agencies;
        Ventura County and Los Angeles County; California Highway Patrol; Ventura
        County Sheriff’s Department; Ventura County Fire Protection District; Ventura
        County Environmental Health Division; Department of Toxic Substances Control;
        and the Regional Water Quality Control Board regarding issues addressing mutual
        aid agreements, disaster mitigation actions, including information sharing, and
        emergency and disaster exercises; provision of emergency services and backup
        police assistance; public education programs about potential geologic hazards in
        the community, proper emergency preparation, and response strategies; pursuing             
        funding for training, education, and mitigation activities for protection against
        seismic activities; maintaining a high level of fire and emergency services within
        the City; provision of fire inspection program to reduce fire hazards; compliance
        with National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requirements; inspections,
        emergency response, and enforcement of hazardous materials and waste
        compliance procedures; and enforcement of hazardous materials regulations.
      Implements      S-2.1~S-2.3, S-5.8~S-5.10, S-6.1, S-6.2, S-7.1~S-7.3, S-8.2, S-9.1,
  Which Policy(ies)   S-9.4
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           8-16                                               GENERAL PLAN

COMMUNITY SAFETY (S)
                                                                                                         2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
Table S-1            Safety Implementation Program
                                                                                                  2011                           Annual
S-3    Public Education Programs. The City shall continue to provide public education
       programs to increase awareness of disaster preparedness protocols, procedures,
       and risk reduction strategies for the community; crime trends and personal safety
       awareness; potential geologic hazards, proper emergency preparation, and
       response strategies; fire hazard prevention and reduction strategies, including site
       design, landscaping, location of materials, and brush landscaping; and methods to               
       reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, including the disposal of
       hazardous materials.
     Implements
                     S-3.1, S-4.4, S-4.5, S-5.9, S-7.7, S-9.2, S-9.7
 Which Policy(ies)
S-4    Police Services. The City shall continue to provide quality police services for the
       community including achieving and maintaining appropriate response times;
       maintaining appropriate staffing levels; providing community education regarding
       personal safety awareness; communicating with the community; evaluating
       emergency response to citywide disasters to determine if service improvements                   
       are needed; upgrading equipment with regard to changing technologies; and
       responding to hazardous materials incidents and releases.
     Implements
                     S-4.1~S-4.6
 Which Policy(ies)
S-5    Development Review Process. The City shall continue to regulate development
       for compliance with General Plan goals, policies, land uses, and development
       standards through the Development Review Process to ensure the following:
       support and encourage the use of defensible space concepts in the design of new
       development and rehabilitation projects; include crime prevention review of new
       development and rehabilitation projects; review and enforce all seismic and
       geologic safety standards; adopt building codes that provide protection for new and
       renovated structures in hazard areas; require geotechnical investigations be
       submitted; encourage the upgrade, retrofitting, and/or relocation of critical facilities        
       located in geologic hazard areas; encourage the upgrade and retrofit of tilt-up
       structures located in geologic hazard areas; reduce the possibility of damages and
       losses due to earthquakes; continue review of projects by Ventura County Fire
       Protection District to mitigate potential wildland fire losses and damages; ensure
       that fuel modification requirements are addressed; and ensure that new
       developments pay a pro-rata share for increase fire protection.
     Implements      S-4.7, S-4.8, S-5.1, S-5.3~S-5.6, S-7.2, S-7.5, S-7.8, S-8.1, S-8.3,
 Which Policy(ies)   S-8.6, S-9.5
GENERAL PLAN                                                   8-17                               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                 CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
                                                                                                        2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
Table S-1            Safety Implementation Program
                                                                                                 2011                             Annual
S-6    Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall review and update the Development
       Code to establish requirements for new development proposals, as follows: adopt
       building codes that provide protection for new and renovated structures in hazard
       areas; require installation of fire protection systems in new commercial and
       multiple-unit residential development projects; require that new development
       incorporates sufficient measures to mitigate flood hazards; prohibit location of
       critical facilities within areas subject to inundation during any flood event unless it
       can be protected; provide for updating of critical facilities in flood hazard areas;
       require that facilities storing or using hazardous materials within flood zones                
       comply with storage requirements; ensure that new development is located outside
       of flood hazard areas; require upgrades and improvements to storm drain systems
       for on-site retention; require preservation of flood plains as open space, when
       practical; require soil and groundwater contamination assessments in known areas
       of contamination; develop and implement land use controls and standards for uses
       that generate, use, or store hazardous materials.
     Implements      LU-19.6, S-5.1, S-5.2, S-5.6, S-7.4, S-8.1, S-8.3~S-8.5, S-8.7, S-9.5,
 Which Policy(ies)   S-9.6
S-7    Fire Protection Services. The City shall continue to contract for quality fire
       protection services with the Ventura County Fire Protection District, including
       prevention services, information sharing, and fire inspection services; evaluate
       emergency response to Citywide disasters to determine if service improvements                  
       are needed; and assess the water pressure for fire suppression.
     Implements
                     S-6.1, S-6.3, S-7.1, S-7.2, S-9.3
 Which Policy(ies)
S-8    Post-Fire Debris Flow. The City shall develop and implement a comprehensive
       approach to mitigate damage and loss due to post-fire debris flow.
                                                                                                      
     Implements
                     S-7.6
 Which Policy(ies)
S-9    Flood Hazard Protection. The City shall continue to ensure the community is
       protected from flood hazards through the following: regulate new development and
       protect existing development within flood prone areas; maintain the City’s eligibility
       under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP); and maintain the City’s Dam                 
       Failure Response Plan to alert the community located in potential hazard areas.
     Implements
                     S-8.1, S-8.2, S-8.8
 Which Policy(ies)
S-10   Hazardous Materials. The City shall continue to provide inspections, emergency
       response, and enforcement of hazardous materials and waste compliance
       procedures in the community. The City shall continue to work with relevant
       agencies regarding enforcement of hazardous materials regulations and continue                 
       to conduct household hazardous waste collection events.
     Implements
                     S-9.1, S-9.7
 Which Policy(ies)
S-11   City Asset Database. The City shall develop and maintain a database of critical
       City assets and periodically assess their vulnerability to geologic hazards.
                                                                                                      
     Implements
                     S-5.7
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           8-18                                                  GENERAL PLAN

NOISE (N)
NOISE (N)
The urban environment contains a variety of noise sources that can affect the way people live and work.
Some types of noise are only short-term irritants, like the pounding of a jackhammer or the whirring rattle of
a lawnmower. Generally, these noise sources can be controlled through City noise regulations, such as a
noise ordinance. However, other noises, such as freeway noise, may be permanent fixtures in the
community. The information provided herein identifies noise sources, noise sensitive land uses, and noise
compatibility standards. The goals and policies in this section of the General Plan are designed to include
noise control in the planning process in order to maintain compatible land uses with acceptable
environmental noise levels to protect Simi Valley residents from excessive noise.
 Community Noise Contours
As with most urban and suburban environments, the primary noise sources in Simi Valley are mobile sources
such as vehicle traffic, train pass-bys, and other transportation-related noises. A typical noise environment
consists of a base of steady ambient noise that is the sum of many distant and indistinguishable noise
sources. Imposed on this background noise is the sound from individual local sources. These can vary from an
occasional train passing to virtually continuous noise from traffic on a major highway.
Several quantitative indicators are commonly used to gauge the likelihood that environmental noise would
have an adverse effect on a community. These indicators consider that the most disruptive aspects of noise
are strongly associated with the average acoustical energy content of the sound over the time it occurs
and/or with the time of day when the sound occurs. The indicators used in this General Plan are defined as
follows:
    ■ Leq, the equivalent energy noise level, is the average acoustic energy content of noise for a stated
      period of time. Thus, the Leq of a time-varying noise and that of a steady noise are the same if they
      deliver the same acoustic energy to the ear during exposure. For evaluating community impacts, this
      indicator is not affected by whether the noise occurs during the day or the night.
    ■ CNEL, the Community Noise Equivalent Level, is a 24-hour average Leq with a 10 dBA “weight” added to
      noise during the hours of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM, and a 5 dBA “weight” added during the hours of
      7:00 PM to 10:00 PM to account for increased noise sensitivity in the evening and nighttime.
Railway through Simi Valley                              SR-118 Freeway through Simi Valley
GENERAL PLAN                                          8-19                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                         CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
                                                       In general, there are three distinct noise sources in the
                                                       community: the Ronald Reagan Freeway (State Route
                                                       118), major and minor arterial roads, and the Union
                                                       Pacific Railroad lines that provide freight and passenger
                                                       rail service, in addition to various stationary sources such
                                                       as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning units.
                                                       Noise contours for the major noise sources in Simi Valley
                                                       were developed for existing conditions and future
                                                       conditions. Existing noise contours were determined
Railway next to residential development                from 2006 traffic data and are expressed in terms of the
                                                       CNEL as shown in Figure N-1 (Existing Noise Contours).
                                                       Future noise conditions for roadways are presented for
                                                       the 2030 time period derived from projected traffic
                                                       levels for that year to reflect anticipated buildout of the
                                                       General Plan and are shown in Figure N-2 (Future Noise
                                                       Contours). Noise contours represent lines of equal noise
                                                       exposure, just as the contour lines on a topographic map
                                                       are lines of equal elevation. The contours shown on the
                                                       maps are the 60, 65, and 70 dB CNEL noise levels.
                                                       The noise contours represent the maximum possible
                                                       traffic noise levels at locations within them (i.e., they do
                                                       not account for building placement or traffic speeds, nor
                                                       the attenuating effects of walls, structures, and terrain
                                                       features that might intervene between the roads and any
                                                       location of interest) and should be used as a guide for
                                                       land use planning. The 60 dB CNEL contour is the noise
Peaceful and quiet neighborhood
                                                       level for which noise considerations should be included
when making land use policy decisions that affect existing and proposed noise-sensitive developments. The
65 dB CNEL contour describes the area for which new noise sensitive developments will be permitted only if
appropriate mitigation measures are included such that the standards in this section are achieved.
  Noise and Land Use Compatibility
Noise exposure criteria should be incorporated into land use planning to reduce future noise and land use
incompatibilities. Simi Valley has a number of educational facilities, hospitals, convalescent homes, day care
operations, and other facilities that are considered noise-sensitive. However, the primary noise-sensitive
uses within the City are residential land uses. The noise exposure of these sensitive uses varies from low in
quiet residential areas, to high, in areas adjacent to the SR-118 Freeway. Considering noise sources as part of
the planning process is achieved by specifying acceptable noise exposure ranges for various land uses
throughout the City. Table N-1 (Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Sources) presents criteria used
to assess the compatibility of proposed land uses with the noise environment.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     8-20                                     GENERAL PLAN
                                          CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                          General Plan Update
                                                Existing Noise
                                                  Contours
                                         Legend
                                              70 CNEL
                                              65 CNEL
                                              60 CNEL
                                              City Boundary
                                              City Urban Restriction
                                              Boundary
       Ar
            r o yo                            Sphere of Influence
                     Sim
                      i              E
                                     Ý
                                     A
                           Sinaloa
                            Lake
E
í
?
      Bard
    Reservoir
                                         Source: PBS&J, 2009
                                         Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                         D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Noise_Contours.mxd
                                          [
                                                                        Miles
                                                       0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                           Figure N-1


                                          CITY of SIMI VALLEY
                                          General Plan Update
                                                 Future Noise
                                                   Contours
                                         Legend
                                              70 CNEL
                                              65 CNEL
                                              60 CNEL
                                              City Boundary
                                              City Urban Restriction
                                              Boundary
       Ar
            r o yo                            Sphere of Influence
                     Sim
                      i              E
                                     Ý
                                     A
                           Sinaloa
                            Lake
E
í
?
      Bard
    Reservoir
                                         Source: PBS&J, 2009
                                         Date Revised: December 15, 2010
                                         D21310_Simi_Valley_GP\Noise_Contours.mxd
                                          [
                                                                        Miles
                                                       0   0.25   0.5           1   1.5
                                                           Figure N-2


NOISE (N)
 Table N-1             Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Sources
                                                                                             Noise Exposure (dBA, CNEL)
                              Land Use Category                                       55      60      65       70  75      80
 Residential—Low-Density Single Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes
 Residential—Multiple-Family
 Transient Lodging—Motels, Hotels
 Institutional—Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes
 Performance Venues—Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheatres
 Outdoor Sports Activities—Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
 Outdoor Recreation—Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
 Outdoor Recreation/Activities—Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water
 Recreation, Cemeteries
 Office Buildings—Business Commercial and Professional
 Industrial—Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture
 SOURCE:    2002 General Plan Guidelines, State Office of Planning and Research
              Normally Acceptable: Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are
              of normal conventional construction without any special noise insulation requirements.
              Conditionally Acceptable: New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of
              the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional
              construction, but closed windows and fresh air supply or air conditioning will normally suffice.
              Normally Unacceptable: New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or
              development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise
              insulation features included in the design.
              Clearly Unacceptable: New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
GENERAL PLAN                                                    8-25                                CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                      CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
In addition to the Land Use
Compatibility Matrix, the City’s
interior and exterior noise standards
are identified in Table N-2 (Interior
and Exterior Noise Standards), which
represents specific noise standards
for interior and exterior noise areas
that are considered acceptable
based on noise levels generated by
adjacent mobile sources, such as
automobiles, trucks, and trains. The
Simi Valley Noise Ordinance governs Residential adjacent to commercial
noise from nontransportation sources and does not specify maximum noise levels, but identifies various
noise generators, such as construction equipment amplification and mechanical devices, and provides certain
restrictions on these generators.
              Table N-2              Interior and Exterior Noise Standards
                                            Land Use Categories                                         CNEL (LDN)
                                                                                                            a           b
                      Categories                                    Uses                           Interior    Exterior
              Residential                    Single Family, Duplex, Multiple Family                   45c         63
                                             Mobile Home                                              45d         63d
              Commercial/Institutional       Hotel, Motel, Transient Lodging                          45
                                             Hospitals, School Classroom                              45          —
                                             Church, Library                                          45
              SOURCE: Simi Valley General Plan, 1988
              a. Includes bathrooms, toilets, closets, corridors
              b. Limited to the following:
                 ■ Private yard of single-family residence
                 ■ Multi-family private patio or balcony that is served by a means of exit from inside the dwelling
                 ■ Mobile home park
              c. Noise level requirement with closed windows. Mechanical ventilating system or other means of
                 natural ventilation shall be provided as of Chapter 12, Section 1205 of UBC.
              d. Exterior noise level should be such that interior noise level will not exceed 45 CNEL.
GOAL N-1
Land Use Compatibility. Land use conflicts between various noise sources and other human
activities are minimized.
Policies
N-1.1      Noise Standards. Require noise attenuation for all development where the projected exterior and
           interior noise levels exceed those shown in Table N-1 (Interior and Exterior Noise Standards), to
           the extent feasible. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-1)
N-1.2      Noise between Adjacent Uses. Require that mixed-use and multi-family residential developments
           demonstrate that the design of the structure will adequately isolate noise between adjacent uses
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                              8-26                                           GENERAL PLAN

NOISE (N)
          (orientation, window insulation, common wall separation, common floor/ceilings separation, etc.).
          (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-1, N-2)
N-1.3     Mixed-Use Development Standards. Require, whenever physically possible, new mixed-use
          developments to locate loading areas, parking lots, driveways, trash enclosures, mechanical
          equipment, and other noise sources away from the residential portion of the development, and
          apply physical construction standards (equipment, construction standards) to reduce noise
          between uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-1)
N-1.4     Noise Attenuation Measures. Ensure that all new development provides adequate sound
          insulation or other protection from existing and anticipated noise sources. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
          N-2)
N-1.5     Sensitive Receptors. Incorporate ambient noise level considerations into land use decisions
          involving schools, hospitals, and similar noise-sensitive uses. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-2)
 Mobile Noise Sources
GOAL N-2
Sensitive Receptors. Motor vehicle traffic and railroad noise impacts on sensitive noise receptors
are minimized.
Policies
N-2.1     State Motor Vehicle Noise Standards. Encourage the enforcement of state motor vehicle noise
          standards for cars, trucks, and motorcycles through coordination with the California Highway
          Patrol and Simi Valley Police Department. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-3)
N-2.2     Roadway Noise Sensitivity Measures. Ensure the employment of noise attenuation measures in
          the design of roadway improvement projects consistent with funding capability. Support efforts by
          the California Department of Transportation and others to provide for acoustical protection of
          existing noise-sensitive land uses affected by these projects. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-3)
N-2.3     Noise Attenuation along Major Arterials and Railroad Tracks. Require the use of walls and berms
          in the design of residential and other noise-sensitive land uses that are adjacent to the 118
          Freeway, major arterials, and railroad tracks. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-1)
N-2.4     Noise Studies for New Development. Require the preparation of noise studies, as deemed
          necessary by the Department of Environmental Services, for new development (especially
          residential projects) along the freeway corridor, major thoroughfares, and railroad tracks to ensure
          that adequate sound attenuation from these noise sources is provided. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-2)
 Stationary Noise Sources
GOAL N-3
Stationary Noise. Nontransportation-related noise impacts on sensitive receptors are minimized.
GENERAL PLAN                                          8-27                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY
                                                                             CHAPTER 8: SAFETY AND NOISE
Policies
N-3.1      Protection from Stationary Noise
           Sources. Continue to enforce
           interior and exterior noise
           standards to ensure that sensitive
           noise receptors are not exposed
           to excessive noise levels from
           stationary noise sources, such as
           machinery, equipment, fans, and
           air    conditioning    equipment.
           (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-12, LU-18)
N-3.2      Regulation of Sound-Amplifying
           Equipment. Continue to regulate
           the use of sound-amplifying
           equipment. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18,
           N-1)                             Metrolink train station
N-3.3      Enforcement of Hours of Construction Activity. Continue to enforce restrictions on hours of
           construction activity so as to minimize the impacts of noise and vibration from the use of trucks,
           heavy drilling equipment, and other heavy machinery to adjacent uses, particularly in residential
           areas. (Imp A-1, A-2, LU-18, N-1)
 Implementation Program
Each General Plan policy is correlated with one or more implementation measure. The Noise Implementation
Program, presented in Table N-3 (Noise Implementation Program), describes the measures or actions to be
taken by the City to carry out the goals and policies defined in this section.
                                                                                                   2012–2015     2016–2035            Ongoing
 Table N-3           Noise Implementation Program
                                                                                            2011                             Annual
 N-1    Simi Valley Municipal Code. The City shall review and update the Development
        Code to establish requirements for new development proposals, as follows: require
        noise attenuation for all development where the noise levels exceed established
        standards; require that mixed-use and multi-family residential developments
        mitigate noise impacts between adjacent uses; require development standards for
        new mixed-use developments to locate noise sources away from residential
        portions of the development; require the use of walls and berms for residential          
        projects adjacent to the 118 Freeway and major arterials; enforce interior and
        exterior noise standards; regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment; and
        enforce restrictions on hours of construction activity.
     Implements
                     LU-19.6, N-1.1~N-1.3, N-2.3, N-3.2, N-3.3
 Which Policy(ies)
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        8-28                                                GENERAL PLAN

NOISE (N)
                                                                                                 2012–2015   2016–2035            Ongoing
Table N-3            Noise Implementation Program
                                                                                          2011                           Annual
N-2    Environmental Review. The City shall continue to ensure that all development
       proposals are reviewed per the requirements of California Environmental Quality
       Act (CEQA) to ensure that all new development provides adequate sound
       insulation or other protection from existing and anticipated noise sources;
       incorporate ambient noise level considerations into land use decisions involving        
       noise sensitive uses; and require the preparation of noise studies for new
       development.
     Implements
                     N-1.2, N-1.4, N-1.5, N-2.4
 Which Policy(ies)
N-3    Interagency Coordination and Partnership. The City shall coordinate with
       appropriate agencies, such as California Highway Patrol and Caltrans, to enforce
       state vehicle noise standards and to coordinate roadway design and
       improvements.                                                                           
     Implements
                     N-2.1, N-2.2
 Which Policy(ies)
GENERAL PLAN                                               8-29                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY


CHAPTER 9 Glossar
                                                                                   CHAPTER 9: GLOSSARY
A
Adaptive Reuse. A method by which a building is adapted to a different use from its original use, while its
general physical form is retained.
Air Pollution. The presence of contaminants in the air in concentrations that exceed naturally occurring
quantities and are undesirable or harmful.
Ambient Noise Level. The combination of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient
noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
Ambient. Surrounding on all sides; used to describe measurements of existing conditions with respect to
traffic, noise, air, and other environments.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT). Number of vehicles (cars, trucks, etc.) on a road over a 24-hour period
(measured in vehicles per day).
A-Weighted Decibel (dBA). A numerical method of rating human judgment of loudness. The A-weighted
scale reduces the effects of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human hearing.
B
Best Management Practices (BMP). A policy, rule, or regulation that results in greater efficiency or benefits
than from standard practices.
Bicycle Lane (Class II facility). A corridor expressly reserved for bicycles, existing on a street or roadway in
addition to any lanes for use by motorized vehicles.
Bicycle Path (Class I facility). A paved route not on a street or roadway and expressly reserved for bicycles
traversing an otherwise unpaved area. Bicycle paths may parallel roads but typically are separated from them
by landscaping.
Bicycle Route (Class III facility). A facility shared with motorists and identified only by signs, a bicycle route
has no pavement markings or lane stripes.
Bikeways. A term that encompasses bicycle lanes, bicycle paths, and bicycle routes.
Buffer. A strip of land designated to protect one type of land use from another incompatible use. Where a
commercial district abuts a residential district, for example, additional use, yard, or height restrictions may
be imposed to protect residential properties. The term may also be used to describe any zone that separates
two unlike zones, such as a multi-family housing zone between single-family housing and commercial uses.
Build-out. Development of land to its full potential or theoretical capacity as permitted under current or
proposed planning designations or zoning.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      9-2                                  GENERAL PLAN
GLOSSARY
C
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). A state law (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et
seq.) requiring state and local agencies to regulate activities with consideration for environmental protection.
If a proposed activity has the potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an Environmental
Impact Report (EIR) must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy before taking action on the proposed
project. General Plans usually require the preparation of a “Program EIR.”
Capital Improvement Program (CIP). A proposed timetable or schedule of all future capital improvements
(government acquisition of real property, major construction project, or acquisition of long-lasting, expensive
equipment) to be carried out during a specific period and listed in order of priority, together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. Capital improvement programs are usually
projected five or six years in advance and should be updated annually.
Capital Improvement. A specific undertaking involving procurement, construction, or installation of facilities
or related equipment which improves, preserves, enhances, or modernizes the City’s provision of municipal
services, has a useful life of at least five years, and costs in excess of $20,000.
Carbon Dioxide. A colorless, odorless, nonpoisonous gas that is a normal part of the atmosphere.
Carbon Footprint. A measure of the impact of human activities on the environment. Carbon Footprint can be
measured as the total amount of greenhouse gases (GHG) and carbon dioxide emitted for a product or
service within a specific geographic area.
Class I Bike Route. A bike path characterized by complete physical separation from automotive traffic.
Class II Bike Route. A portion of a roadway or shoulder which is separated from traffic lanes by the use of a
solid white stripe on the pavement and has been designated for preferential use by bicyclists.
Class III Bike Route. A bicycle route with roadside signs suggesting a route for cyclists, and urging auto users
to share the road, but lacking any striping or preferential space for cyclists.
Climate Change. The change in the average weather of the earth that may be measured by changes in wind
patterns, storms, precipitation, and temperature.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). The average equivalent sound level during a 24-hour day,
obtained after addition of 5 decibels (dB) to sound levels in the evening from 7:00 PM to 10:00 PM and after
addition of 10 dB to sound levels in the night after 10:00 PM and before 7:00 AM (see also “A-Weighted
Decibel”).
Complete Neighborhood. A neighborhood that promotes livability and safety for residents of all ages,
incomes, and cultural backgrounds with characteristics such as: a mix of housing types and housing
affordability; one or more nodes or districts of vibrant commercial or civic activity that provide identity for
the neighborhood; neighborhood services and facilities including schools, parks, retail (e.g., grocery store,
drug store), restaurants and cafes, and community centers or other public meeting hall; employment
opportunities accessible by transit; sustainable designs and green infrastructure that respond to climatic
demands and conserve scarce resources; extensive tree canopy and attractive landscaping; a sense of
GENERAL PLAN                                              9-3                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                 CHAPTER 9: GLOSSARY
personal safety (e.g., low crime rate, short police and emergency response times); an interconnected street
network with short blocks and few cul-de-sacs; convenient access to public transportation (e.g., light rail and
bus); a complete network of pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and roadway facilities that are connected to
adjacent neighborhoods, centers, corridors, and employment; and well-maintained housing and public
facilities.
Complete Streets. Streets that include facilities and designs that enable safe access for all users (i.e.,
pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and transit riders) of all ages and abilities with characteristics such as
comprehensive, integrated, and connected network; balanced design; variety of uses and activities that
create a varied streetscape; design that relates well to bordering uses and allows for continuous activity;
pedestrian sidewalks and biking facilities that promote safety and maximize access to bordering uses;
aesthetically designed street lights that provide sufficient illumination of sidewalks; consistent landscaping
that includes street trees and landscaped medians and sidewalks; sustainable design that minimizes runoff,
minimizes heat island effects, responds to climatic demands, and conserves scarce resources; and well-
maintained facilities.
Critical Facilities. Facilities serving or housing people in the event of an earthquake or flood, such as
hospitals, fire, police, and emergency service facilities; and utility “lifeline” facilities, such as water,
electricity, and gas supply, sewage disposal, communications, and transportation facilities.
Cultural Resource. A broad definition for a variety of resources, including archaeological sites, isolated
artifacts, Native American cultural properties, and historic buildings, structures, landscapes, sites, and
features.
D
Day-Night Average Noise Level (Ldn). A 24-hour average Leq with a 10 dBA “penalty” added to noise levels
during the hours of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM to account for increased sensitivity that people tend to have to
nighttime noise. Because of this penalty, the Ldn would always be higher than its corresponding 24-hour Leq
(e.g., a constant 60 dBA noise over 24 hours would have a 60 dBA Leq, but a 66.4 dBA Ldn).
dBA. Measurement unit for “a-weighted decibels,” which are commonly used for measuring environmental
and industrial noise and the potential hearing damage associated noise health effects.
Decibel (dB). A unit for describing the amplitude of sound, as it is heard by the human ear (see also “A-
Weighted Decibel,” “Community Noise Equivalent Level,” and “Day-Night Average Level”).
E
There are no terms to be included.
F
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that
show special flood hazard areas, including the 100-year floodplain. They also show flood insurance rate map
zones and other flood-related information applicable to a community.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   9-4                                    GENERAL PLAN

GLOSSARY
Floodplain. A lowland or relatively flat area adjoining the banks of a river or stream that is subject to a one
percent or greater chance or flooding in any given year (e.g., 100-year flood).
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The ratio of gross building area (GBA) of development divided by the total net lot
area (NLA). For example, a one-story building covering its entire lot would have a FAR of 1.0. A two-story
building covering half its lot would also have an FAR of 1.0. The formula for calculating FAR is GBA/NLA = FAR.
Fuel Modification. The manipulation or removal of fuels to reduce the likelihood of ignition and/or to lessen
potential damage and resistance to control from a fire. Fuel modification zones are strategically placed as a
buffer to open space, or areas of natural vegetation, and generally would occur surrounding the perimeter of
a subdivision, commercial development, or isolated development of a single-family dwelling.
G
Greenbelt. An open area that may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding development or
used as a buffer between land uses or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area.
Greenhouse Gases (GHG). Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, analogous to the way a greenhouse
retains heat. Common GHGs include water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxides,
chlorofluorocarbons, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, ozone, and aerosols. The
accumulation of GHG in the atmosphere regulates the earth’s temperature. Without the natural heat
trapping effect of GHG, the earth’s surface would be cooler.
H
Hazardous Material. A material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical
characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the
environment if released into the workplace or the environment. Hazardous materials include, but are not
limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material that a handler or the administering
agency has a reasonable basis for believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or
harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. (California Health and Safety
Code)
Hazardous Waste. A waste or combination of wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics, may either: (a) cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating irreversible illness; or (b) pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. (California Health and Safety Code)
I
Impact Fees. Fees required by City code, ordinance, resolution or other City law to be paid as a condition of,
or prerequisite to, issuance of a building permit for the development of residential uses, as those fees may be
amended from time to time. (SCC 17.191.020)
GENERAL PLAN                                            9-5                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                CHAPTER 9: GLOSSARY
J
There are no terms to be included.
K
There are no terms to be included.
L
Level of Service (LOS). A measure of the quality of the traffic flow describing transportation operating
conditions. LOS is described generally in terms such as the volume-to-capacity ratio of a street or
intersection, speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, and traffic interruptions. The transportation LOS
system uses the letters A through F to designate different levels, with LOS A representing the best operating
conditions and LOS F the worst.
Livable Community. A Community recognizing its own unique identity and placing a high value on the
planning processes that help manage growth and change to maintain and enhance its community character.
(American Institute of Architects)
M
Mixed-Use Development. Properties on which various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and
residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with
significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design. A “single site” may include
contiguous properties.
Mutual Aid Agreements. An agreement between agencies and/or jurisdictions to assist each other in times
of emergency or when the other agency’s resources can more efficiently respond to calls for service than the
agency that is the normal service provider.
N
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP, managed by FEMA, makes federally backed flood
insurance available in communities that agree to adopt and enforce floodplain management ordinances to
reduce future flood damage.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). A national program under Section 402 of the
Clean Water Act for regulation of discharges of pollutants from point sources to waters of the United States.
Discharges are illegal unless authorized by an NPDES permit. (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency)
Noise Attenuation. The ability of a material, substance, or medium to reduce the noise level from one place
to another or between one room and another. Noise attenuation is specified in decibels (dB).
Noise Contours. Lines drawn about a noise source indicating constant energy levels of noise exposure. CNEL
and Ldn are the metrics utilized to describe community noise exposure.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                  9-6                                  GENERAL PLAN

GLOSSARY
Noise Sensitive Land Use/Sensitive Receptors. Those specific land uses that have associated indoor and/or
outdoor human activities that may be subject to stress and/or significant interference from noise produced
by community sound sources. Such human activity typically occurs daily for continuous periods of 24 hours or
is of such a nature that noise is significantly disruptive to activities that occur for short periods.
O
There are no terms to be included.
P
Parking, Shared. A public or private parking area used jointly by two or more uses.
Peak Hour. The time period during which the greatest demand occurs on the transportation system in the
morning and early afternoon, also known as “rush hour.”
Public and Quasi-public Uses. Institutional, academic, governmental, and community service uses, either
owned publicly or operated by nonprofit organizations, including private hospitals and cemeteries.
Q
There are no terms to be included.
R
Recycled Water. Treated wastewater that can be used for irrigation and other nonpotable uses.
Rehabilitation. The upgrading of a building, previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition, for human
habitation or use.
Ridgeline (Primary and Secondary). A line marking a ridgetop. Primary ridgelines are mostly undeveloped
primary topographical features consisting of slopes greater than 25 percent that dominate the City’s
landscape. Secondary ridgelines are important form-giving and space-defining features of lesser significance
than primary ridgelines because views of these features are partially blocked or have been developed with
urban land uses.
Right-of-way. A linear strip of land reserved as an easement exclusively for public use, including, but not
limited to, streets, bike lanes, sidewalks, on-street parking, transit lanes, landscaping, and/or railroad tracks.
S
Sensitive Species. Includes those plant and animal species considered threatened or endangered by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and/or the California Department of Fish and Game according to Section 3 of the
federal Endangered Species Act:
    ■ Endangered—any species in danger of extinction throughout all, or a significant portion of, its range
GENERAL PLAN                                              9-7                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

                                                                                    CHAPTER 9: GLOSSARY
   ■ Threatened—a species likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future
        throughout all, or a portion of, its range; these species are periodically listed in the Federal Register
        and are, therefore, referred to as “federally listed” species
Special Assessment District. An area where an assessment is imposed against a property because of a public
project that benefits the owners in the defined area. (California Government Code Section 16271[d])
Special District. Any public agency, other than a local government, formed pursuant to general law or special
act for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries. Special
district includes, but is not limited to, a county service area, a maintenance district or area, an improvement
district or improvement zone, or any other zone or area, formed for the purpose of designating an area
within which a property tax rate will be levied to pay for a service or improvement benefiting that area.
Specific Plan. A legal tool authorized by Article 8 of the Government Code (Section 65450 et seq.) for the
systematic implementation of the general plan for a defined portion of a community’s planning area. A
specific plan must specify in detail the land uses, public and private facilities needed to support the land uses,
phasing of development, standards for the conservation, development, and use of natural resources, and a
program of implementation measures, including financing measures.
Sustainable. Community use of natural resources in a way that does not jeopardize the ability of future
generations to live and prosper.
T
Traffic Calming Features. Measures taken to slow traffic and/or reduce traffic volumes on neighborhood
streets. They include, among other measures, signage and speed limit signs, striping, speed humps, and
traffic circles.
Transit. The conveyance of persons or goods from one place to another by means of a local, public
transportation system.
Transportation Demand Management (TDM). A strategy for reducing demand on the road system by
reducing the number of vehicles using the roadways and/or increasing the number of persons per vehicle.
TDM attempts to reduce the number of persons who drive alone on the roadway during the commute period
and to increase the number in carpools, vanpools, buses and trains, walking, and biking. TDM can be an
element of TSM (see below).
Transportation Systems Management (TSM). Individual actions or comprehensive plans to reduce traffic
congestion by increasing the efficiency of the transportation system itself. Examples would include improved
traffic signal timing, coordination of multiple traffic signals, or spot improvements that increase capacity of
the roadway system.
U
Urban Forest. Tree population in an urban setting managed for the purpose of improving the urban
environment.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       9-8                                  GENERAL PLAN

GLOSSARY
Urban Heat Island Effect. The urban heat island effect is a measurable increase in ambient urban air
temperatures resulting primarily from the replacement of vegetation with buildings, roads, and other heat-
absorbing infrastructure. The heat island effect can result in significant temperature differences between
rural and urban areas. (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency)
V
There are no terms to be included.
W
Wildlife Corridors. A strip of habitat connecting wildlife populations separated by human activities (e.g.,
roads, development) that allows an exchange of individual wildlife populations and facilitates
reestablishment of wildlife populations in isolated areas.
XYZ
There are no terms to be included.
GENERAL PLAN                                           9-9                       CITY OF SIMI VALLEY

 
    CHAPTER 4 Housing 
   

 
                               RESOLUTION NO. 2014-07
               A RESOLUTION . OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE
               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY APPROVING GENERAL PLAN
               AMENDMENT GPA-91 FOR· THE 2013-2021 HOUSING
               ELEMENT AND RE-USE OF THE ,GENERAL PLAN
               UPDATE FEIR
               WHEREAS, the City of Simi Valley has initiated an amendment to the
 General. Plan (GPA-91) to update the Housing Element to meet requirements of State
 law;
               WHEREAS, the Planning Commission reviewed the 2013-2021 Draft
 Housing Element, conducted a public hearing on October 23, 2013, and recommended
the City Council authorize submission of the Draft Housing Element to the California
 Department of Housing and Community Development, as amended;
               WHEREAS, the City Council reviewed the 2013-2021 Draft Housing
 Element for submittal to the Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and conducted a public hearing on November 4, 2013;
               WHEREAS, HCD stated in a letter, dated December 24, 2013, that the
Draft Housing Element will comply with State law once the specified zoning
amendments are approved by the City;                                          .
               WHEREAS, the City Council adopted Ordinance 1221 on January 13,
2014, adopting the required Zoning Ordinance amendments to meet Housing Element
requirements; and
               WHEREAS, a Final Environmental Impact Report (FEIR) was approved
for the General Plan Update and 2008-2013 Housing Element on June 4, 2012. Since
adoption of the Housing Element in November 2012, only minor changes have been
incorporated into the' 2013-2021 Housing Element to meet changes in State law and to
utilize the most recent data available. The 2013-2021 Housing Element is consistent
with the previously prepared FEIR for the General Plan Update and, therefore, it is
being re-used as the environmental document for CEQA purposes.
               NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SIMI
VALLEY DOES HEREBY RESOLVE AS FOLLOWS:
                        /
               SECTION 1. The CEQA findings, for re-use of the FEIR for the General
Plan Update, contained in the City Council staff report dated November 4, 2013, and
incorporated herein by reference, are hereby approved.                              .
               SECTION 2. The findings for the 2013-2021 Housing Element, contained
in the City Council staff report dated November 4, 2013, and incorporated herein by
reference, are hereby approved.
P 33/1-14(klk)

                                                                          RES. NO. 2014-07
               SECTION 3.         General Plan Amendment (GPA-91), the 2013-2021
Housing Element, as specified in Attachment A of the City Council staff report dated
February 3, 2014, attached hereto, as otherwise amended by the City Council, is hereby
approved.
               SECTION 4. The City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this resolution
and shall cause a certified resolution to be filed in the Office of the City Clerk. '
               PASSED and ADOPTED this 3 rd day of February 2014
Attest:
Approved as to Form:
                          ity Attorney
P 33/1-14(klk)                              -2-
                                                                              RES. NO. 2014-07
       I, Assistant City CIE:~rk of the City of Simi Valley, California, do hereby certify that the
foregoing Resolution No. 2014-07 was regularly introduced and adopted by the City Council
                                                                                          rd
of the City of Simi Valley, California, at a regular meeting thereof held on the 3 day of
February 2014, by the following vote of the City Council:
       AYES:             Council Member Mashburn, Judge, Sojka, Mayor Pro Tem
                         Becerra and Mayor Huber
       NAYS:           , None
       ABSENT:           None
       ABSTAINED:        None
       IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the official seal
of the City of Simi Valley, California, this 4th day of February 2014.
                                                              Assistant City Clerk
                                                 -3-
 
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER 4  Housing ................................................................................................................................ 4‐1 
             Housing (H) ................................................................................................................................... 4‐5 
               Community Context ................................................................................................................. 4‐5 
               Authorization for the Housing Element ................................................................................... 4‐5 
               Organization of the Housing Element...................................................................................... 4‐5 
               Data Sources ............................................................................................................................ 4‐6 
               Relationship to Other General Plan Elements ......................................................................... 4‐6 
               Public Participation .................................................................................................................. 4‐7 
             Housing Needs Assessment .......................................................................................................... 4‐8 
               Population Characteristics and Trends .................................................................................... 4‐8 
               Employment Profile ............................................................................................................... 4‐11 
               Household Characteristics ..................................................................................................... 4‐13 
               Persons with Special Housing Needs ..................................................................................... 4‐19 
               Housing Stock Characteristics ................................................................................................ 4‐31 
               Housing Costs and Affordability ............................................................................................ 4‐35 
               Project‐Based Rental Housing Assistance .............................................................................. 4‐39 
               Estimated Housing Needs ...................................................................................................... 4‐43 
             Housing Constraints .................................................................................................................... 4‐45 
               Non‐Governmental Constraints ............................................................................................. 4‐45 
               Governmental Constraints ..................................................................................................... 4‐49 
               Infrastructure and Public Service Constraints ....................................................................... 4‐73 
               Environmental Constraints .................................................................................................... 4‐74 
             Housing Resources ...................................................................................................................... 4‐77 
               Residential Development Potential ....................................................................................... 4‐77 
               Financial Resources ............................................................................................................... 4‐89 
               Administrative Resources ...................................................................................................... 4‐90 
               Opportunities for Energy Conservation ................................................................................. 4‐92 
             Housing Plan ............................................................................................................................... 4‐93 
               Goals and Policies .................................................................................................................. 4‐93 
               Housing Programs .................................................................................................................. 4‐96 
               Summary of Objectives ........................................................................................................ 4‐104 
Appendices 
Appendix H1    Review of Past Accomplishments 
Appendix H2    Public Participation 
Appendix H3    Residential Capacity Under General Plan 2030 
 
                                     
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                    4‐2                                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING (H)
Figures 
Figure H‐1  Average Household Size Comparison ................................................................................................... 4‐15 
Figure H‐2  Median Household Income Comparison ............................................................................................. 4‐16 
Figure H‐3  Housing Unit Growth (1990–2010) ...................................................................................................... 4‐31 
Figure H‐4  Median Home Prices in Ventura County – 2013 ................................................................................. 4‐35 
Figure H‐5  Foreclosures (August 2013) ................................................................................................................... 4‐49 
Figure H‐6  Development Review Process ............................................................................................................... 4‐71 
Figure H‐7  Opportunity Areas ................................................................................................................................. 4‐80 
 
Tables 
Table H‐1   Population Growth................................................................................................................................... 4‐8 
Table H‐2   Age Composition and Changes ............................................................................................................... 4‐9 
Table H‐3   Race/Ethnicity ........................................................................................................................................ 4‐10 
Table H‐4   Regional Comparison of Race and Ethnicity ........................................................................................ 4‐11 
Table H‐5   Comparison of Educational Attainment ............................................................................................... 4‐11 
Table H‐6   Employment Profile of Residents ......................................................................................................... 4‐12 
Table H‐7   Major Employers in Simi Valley ............................................................................................................. 4‐13 
Table H‐8   Household Characteristics ..................................................................................................................... 4‐14 
Table H‐9   Household Income Distribution—2000 to 2011 ................................................................................. 4‐16 
Table H‐10  Household Income Levels—2009 ......................................................................................................... 4‐17 
Table H‐11  Overcrowding by Tenure, Simi Valley ................................................................................................... 4‐18 
Table H‐12  Special Needs Groups in Simi Valley ..................................................................................................... 4‐19 
Table H‐13  Disability Status by Age—2011 ............................................................................................................. 4‐21 
Table H‐14  Disabilities Tallied – 2011 ...................................................................................................................... 4‐22 
Table H‐15  Single‐Parent Families ............................................................................................................................ 4‐24 
Table H‐16  Families Living in Poverty....................................................................................................................... 4‐25 
Table H‐17  Services for Special Needs Populations ................................................................................................ 4‐27 
Table H‐18  Housing Unit Type .................................................................................................................................. 4‐32 
Table H‐19  Housing Age ............................................................................................................................................ 4‐32 
Table H‐20  Housing Tenure ...................................................................................................................................... 4‐33 
Table H‐21  Tenure by Household Size ..................................................................................................................... 4‐34 
Table H‐22  Vacancy Status ....................................................................................................................................... 4‐34 
Table H‐23  Average Apartment Rents—2013 ........................................................................................................ 4‐36 
Table H‐24  Private Homes for Rent ......................................................................................................................... 4‐36 
Table H‐25  Affordable Housing Cost ........................................................................................................................ 4‐38 
Table H‐26  Rental Assistance in Simi Valley ............................................................................................................ 4‐39 
Table H‐27  Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing ................................................................................................... 4‐40 
Table H‐28  Rent Subsidies Required ........................................................................................................................ 4‐42 
Table H‐29  Market Value of At‐Risk Housing Units ................................................................................................ 4‐42 
Table H‐30  Estimated Housing Needs ..................................................................................................................... 4‐44 
Table H‐31  Disposition of Home Purchase, Refinance and Improvement Loans—2011 .................................... 4‐47 
Table H‐32  Basic Residential Development Standards ........................................................................................... 4‐52 
Table H‐33  Simi Valley Parking Requirements ........................................................................................................ 4‐53 
Table H‐34  Use Regulations for Residential Districts .............................................................................................. 4‐54 
Table H‐35  Schedule of Typical Residential Development Processing Fees ......................................................... 4‐61 
GENERAL PLAN                                                          4‐3                                                 CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H‐36  Comparison of Planning Fees ................................................................................................................ 4‐62 
Table H‐37  Development Impact Fees (Typical Projects) ...................................................................................... 4‐63 
Table H‐38  Actual Development Fees for Recent Projects .................................................................................... 4‐64 
Table H‐39  Approvals and Processing Times for Typical Developments .............................................................. 4‐67 
Table H‐40  Slope and Density .................................................................................................................................. 4‐75 
Table H‐41  Pending and Approved Residential Projects ........................................................................................ 4‐78 
Table H‐42  Opportunity Areas—Land Use Assumptions ....................................................................................... 4‐86 
Table H‐43  Development Potential ......................................................................................................................... 4‐87 
Table H‐44  Adequacy of Sites in Meeting RHNA .................................................................................................... 4‐89 
Table H‐45  Housing Developers ............................................................................................................................... 4‐91 
Table H‐46  Quantified Objectives .......................................................................................................................... 4‐104 
 
Table H1‐1  Review of Past Accomplishments ......................................................................................................... H1‐2 
Table H1‐2  Summary of Accomplishment: January 1, 2008–September 1, 2013 ............................................. H1‐10 
Table H3‐1  Tapo Street Corridor A ........................................................................................................................... H3‐4 
Table H3‐2  Tapo Street Corridor D .......................................................................................................................... H3‐6 
Table H3‐3  Los Angeles Avenue B .......................................................................................................................... H3‐14 
Table H3‐4  Old Town B ........................................................................................................................................... H3‐22 
Table H3‐5  Los Angeles Avenue Transit‐Oriented Development/Industrial Area C .......................................... H3‐23 
Table H3‐6  Los Angeles Avenue Transit‐Oriented Development/Industrial Area D .......................................... H3‐24 
 
                                 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                   4‐4                                                                 GENERAL PLAN 
 

 
HOUSING (H)
HOUSING (H) 
  Community Context 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  is  located  in  the  southeast  corner  of  Ventura  County  bordering  the  San  Fernando 
Valley of the Greater Los Angeles Area. Simi Valley is surrounded by the Santa Susana Mountain range and 
the  Simi  Hills,  west  of  the  San  Fernando  Valley  and  northeast  of  the  Conejo  Valley.  It  is  characterized  as  a 
commuter bedroom community feeding the larger cities in Ventura County to the west and the Los Angeles 
area and San Fernando Valley to the east. 
Simi Valley was originally inhabited by Chumash Indians and then became one of the earliest Spanish colonial 
Ranchos in Ventura and Santa Barbara Counties (Rancho Simi). Until the late 19th century, the Rancho had a 
Spanish‐speaking  majority  and  was  then  settled  by  Anglo‐Americans.  The  new  settlers  focused  on  farms, 
orchards and groves which dominated the areas landscape until the 1970s. The City was incorporated in 1969 
with approximately 10,000 residents. According to the 2010 Census, the City is home to 124,237 residents, 
covers 42.42 square miles, offers a wide variety of residential types and job opportunities and is the home of 
the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. 
  Authorization for the Housing Element 
The  California  State  Legislature  has  identified  the  attainment  of  a  decent  home  and  suitable  living 
environment for every Californian as the state’s major housing goal. Recognizing the important role of local 
planning programs in pursuit of this goal, the state law requires that all jurisdictions periodically prepare a 
housing element as part of their comprehensive General Plan. Section 65583 of the Government Code sets 
forth the specific components to be contained in a Housing Element. This Housing Element was prepared in 
compliance with state law and covers the period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021. 
  Organization of the Housing Element 
The Simi Valley Housing Element is comprised of the following major components: 
   ■ Introduction:  An  outline  of  the  purpose,  data  sources  and  community  participation  undertaken  to 
       update the Housing Element. 
   ■ Housing Needs Assessment: An analysis of the City’s population, household composition, employment 
       base, and the characteristics to identify housing needs. 
   ■ Housing  Constraints:  A  review  of  potential  market,  governmental,  and  environmental  constraints  to 
       meeting the City’s identified housing needs. 
   ■ Housing Resources: An evaluation of opportunities that will further the development of new housing. 
   ■ Housing Plan: A statement of the Housing Plan to address Simi Valley’s housing needs identified in this 
       document, including housing goals, policies, and programs. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                  4‐5                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                         CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
   Data Sources 
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The 2010 Census provided 
the  basis  for  population  characteristics.  However,  unlike  the  2000  Census,  which  included  detailed 
information  on  income,  housing,  and  household  characteristics,  the  2010  Census  is  much  more  limited  in 
scope. The Bureau of the Census also provides updated survey data for communities with populations over 
65,000  through  the  American  Community  Survey  (ACS)  process,  which  is  used  to  supplement  Census  data 
whenever possible.  ACS and Census data is supplemented with the following sources: 
      ■ Housing  market  information,  such  as  home  sales,  rents,  and  vacancies,  updated  by  home  sales  data 
            (DQNews) and regional statistical data (DQNews). 
      ■ Local  and  County  service  agency  information  on  special  needs  populations,  the  services  available  to 
            them, and gaps in service. 
      ■ Lending  patterns  were  analyzed  from  financial  institutions  based  on  an  analysis  of  the  most  recent 
            available Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data for the year 2011.1 
   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  General  Plan  is  comprised  of  the  following  chapters,  covering  all  of  the  state‐
mandated elements: 
      ■     Community Development 
      ■     Housing 
      ■     Mobility and Infrastructure 
      ■     Natural Resources 
      ■     Community Services 
      ■     Safety and Noise 
According  to  state  planning  law,  the  Housing  Element  must  be  consistent  with  the  other  General  Plan 
elements. While each of the elements is independent, the elements are also interrelated. Certain goals and 
policies of each element may also address issues that are primary subjects of other elements. This integration 
of issues throughout the General Plan creates a strong basis for the implementation of plans and programs 
and achievement of community goals. The Housing Element is most closely tied to the Land Use Element as 
residential  development  capacities  established  in  the  Land  Use  Element  are  incorporated  into  the  Housing 
Element. 
This  Housing  Element  builds  upon  other  General  Plan  elements  and  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  policies 
and proposals set forth by the General Plan. When an element in the General Plan is amended, the Housing 
Element  will  be  reviewed  and  modified  if  necessary  to  ensure  continued  consistency  among  the  various 
elements.  The  Safety  and  Conservation  Elements  of  the  recently  updated  General  Plan  include  an  analysis 
and policies regarding flood hazard and management information. The City will ensure that updates to these 
Elements achieve internal consistency with the Housing Element. 
                                                            
1
   HMDA for 2012 will not be released until the fall of 2013. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐6                                 GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING (H)
  Public Participation 
Section 65583 (c)(7) of the Government Code states that, “The local government shall make a diligent effort 
to  achieve  public  participation  of  all  economic  segments  of  the  community  in  the  development  of  the 
housing element, and the program shall describe this effort.” The City of Simi Valley encourages and solicits 
the  participation  of  its  residents  and  other  local  agencies  in  the  process  of  identifying  housing  and 
community development needs and prioritizing expenditure of funds. 
PUBLIC HEARINGS 
The  City  conducted  a  public  hearing  before  the  Planning  Commission  on  October  23,  2013  to  present  the 
Draft Housing Element and receive comments on the document. Special invitations were sent to developers, 
community  stakeholders,  and  housing  service  providers.  A  complete  list  of  those  invited  can  be  found  in 
Appendix H2.   No public comments were received. 
Furthermore, the City conducted a public hearing before the City Council on November 4, 2013 to review the 
Draft Housing Element. No comments were made at this public hearing on the Draft Housing Element.  
PUBLIC REVIEW PERIOD 
 
The Draft Housing Element was available for public review beginning on October 18, 2013 at the following 
locations: 
 
          City Hall 
          City Website 
          Simi Valley Public Library                                       
GENERAL PLAN                                              4‐7                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                      CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT 
Assuring the availability of adequate housing for all social and economic sectors of Simi Valley’s present and 
future population is an important goal of the Housing Element. To implement this goal, the City has targeted 
its programs toward those households with the greatest need. This section of the Housing Element discusses 
the characteristics and extent of Simi Valley’s unmet housing needs. 
  Population Characteristics and Trends 
Population  characteristics  affect  the  type  of  housing  needs  in  a  community.  Issues  such  as  population 
growth,  race/ethnicity,  age,  and  employment  trends  are  factors  that  combine  to  influence  the  type  of 
housing needed and the ability to afford housing. The following section describes and analyzes the various 
population characteristics and trends that affect housing need. 
POPULATION GROWTH 
Simi Valley’s current population is 124,237 as reported by the 2010 Census. Between 2000 and 2010, the City 
was one of the faster growing communities in the County. However, according to forecasts provided by the 
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), Simi Valley is expected to grow only modestly over 
the  next  ten  years.  Smaller  cities  such  as  Fillmore,  Moorpark,  and  Santa  Paula  are  expected  to  grow 
significantly over the same period. 
 
  Table H‐1           Population Growth 
                                                 Total Population                           Percent Change 
                                                                            2020                      2010–2020 
        Jurisdiction          1990           2000            2010       (Projected)  2000–2010        (Projected) 
  Camarillo                  52,303         57,077          65,201         72,200      14.2%            10.7%
  Fillmore                   11,992         13,643          15,002         18,000      10.0%            20.0%
  Moorpark                   25,494         31,415          34,421         39,300       9.6%            14.2%
  Santa Paula                25,062         28,598          29,321         35,400       2.5%            20.7%
  Simi Valley               100,217        111,351         124,237        129,700      11.6%             4.4%
  Thousand Oaks             104,352        117,005         126,683        129,700       8.3%             2.4%
  Ventura County            669,016        753,197         823,318        889,000       9.3%             8.0%
  SOURCES:  1990, 2000, and 2010 Census; SCAG 2012 Adopted RTP Growth Forecast.
 
AGE COMPOSITION 
Age  is  an  important  influence  on  housing  demand  because  people  of  different  age  groups  have  different 
housing needs. It is generally assumed that younger persons will occupy apartments, low to moderate cost 
condominiums and smaller single‐family units. Adults with higher incomes and larger household sizes provide 
the  major  market  for  moderate  to  high‐end  apartments,  condominiums  and  single‐family  homes.  Much  of 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          4‐8                                GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
the senior population tends to occupy low to moderate cost smaller homes, apartments and condominiums, 
group quarters and mobile homes. 
The City of Simi Valley has seen significant changes in its mix of age groups since 1990. The overall changes 
indicate  increases  in  the  number  of  school‐age  children  and  teenagers  as  well  as  older  adults  and  seniors. 
The 2010 Census (Table H‐2) shows that there has been an increase in the number of children. Since 1990, 
there has been a ten‐percent increase in Simi Valley residents ages 19 and under. Young adults (ages 20 to 
24) and adults ages 25 to 44 have seen decreases in population. However, the population of older adults (44 
to 64) and seniors in the City has been rapidly rising, more than doubling over the past 20 years. 
 
  Table H‐2           Age Composition and Changes 
                                  1990                      2000                      2010                   % Change 
     Age Groups          Persons        Percent    Persons        Percent    Persons         Percent       1990–2010 
      0–4 years           8,225           8.2%       8,163          7.3%       7,547           6.1%            -8.2%
     5–14 years           15,553         15.5%      18,576         16.7%      17,602          14.2%           13.2%
    15–19 years           7,672           7.7%       7,747          7.0%       9,439           7.6%           23.0%
    20–24 years           7,699           7.7%       5,979          5.4%       7,536           6.1%            -2.1%
    25–44 years          37,305          37.2%      36,627         32.9%      33,890          27.3%            -9.2%
    45–64 years          18,490          18.4%      25,755         23.1%      35,046          28.2%           89.5%
      65+ years            5,273          5.3%       8,504          7.6%      13,177          10.6%           149.9%
              Total      100,217        100.0%     111,351        100.0%     124,237         100.0%           24.0%
  SOURCE:  1990, 2000, and 2010 Census. 
 
This  information  indicates  that,  although  the  number  of  families  with  children  in  Simi  Valley  increased 
between 1990 and 2010, the number of children has declined moderately as a proportion of the City’s overall 
population. This can be explained in part by the growth of the senior population, which is an indication that 
people are aging in place and new senior residents are moving into the community. In order to provide for 
the  senior  community,  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  continues  to  approve  senior  and  affordable  senior  housing 
development and currently has 905 affordable senior units. 
RACE AND ETHNICITY 
Race/ethnicity may impact housing needs and conditions. Cultural influences of races may reflect preference 
for  a  specific  type  of  housing.  Research  has  shown  that  some  cultures  (e.g.,  Hispanic  and  Asian)  tend  to 
maintain  extended  families  within  a  single  household.  This  tendency  can  lead  to  overcrowding  or  an 
increased demand for larger housing units. 
The  1990  Census  reported  that  approximately  80 percent  of  the  population  of  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  was 
Caucasian. The second highest ethnic group in the City at that time was Hispanic (13 percent) and less than 
2 percent  of  the  population  was  African  American.  Hispanic/Latino  populations  are  considered  an  ethnic 
group but are compared with racial groups in order to get a more complete picture of the entire racial and 
ethnic composition of Simi Valley. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                4‐9                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                   CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
By  2000,  the  racial  and  ethnic  makeup  of  the  City  had  remained  mostly  the  same  with  African  Americans 
comprising a slightly smaller proportion of the population and Asians constituting a larger proportion of the 
population. Both the Hispanic/Latino and Asian populations in Simi Valley were the fastest growing groups in 
Simi  Valley  from  1990  to  2010.  The  2010  Census  estimates  that  the  Hispanic/Latino  population  made  up 
23 percent of the City’s population and 9 percent of residents were of Asian/Pacific Islander descent. 
 
  Table H‐3            Race/Ethnicity 
                                          1990                        2000                         2010                 % Change 
          Race/Ethnicity          Persons       Percent      Persons       Percent        Persons        Percent       1990–2010 
  Caucasian                        80,096        79.9%        80,908        72.7%          78,009         62.8%           -2.6%
  African American                  1,473        1.5%          1,348         1.2%           1,602          1.3%            8.8%
  Asian/Pacific Islander            5,313         5.3%         7,075         6.4%          11,328          9.1%          113.2%
  Hispanic/Latino                  12,707        12.7%        18,729        16.8%          28,938         23.3%          127.7%
  Other Race                         628         0.6%            —             —              —             —               —
      Other Race                      —            —            648          0.6%            782           0.6%             —
      Two or More Races               —            —           2,643         2.4%           3,578          2.9%             —
                          Total   100,217       100.0%       111,351       100.0%         124,237        100.0%           24.0%
  SOURCE:  1990, 2000, and 2010 Census. 
  The 1990 Census includes “other” as American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut and individuals indicating an “other” race or two or more 
  races. 
 
As of 2010, residents of Hispanic ethnicity made up a majority of the population in Fillmore and Santa Paula 
(Table H‐4), whereas Caucasian residents made up more than half of the population in many other Ventura 
County  cities.  Thousand  Oaks,  Simi  Valley,  and  Camarillo  were  more  than  60 percent  Caucasian.  African 
Americans, Native Americans and Hawaiians comprised the smallest proportion of all Ventura County cities’ 
populations. Simi Valley, Camarillo, and Thousand Oaks had the highest proportion of Asian residents in the 
County. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐10                                           GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Table H‐4             Regional Comparison of Race and Ethnicity 
                                                                                                        Thousand       Ventura
        Race/Ethnicity       Camarillo   Fillmore     Moorpark       Santa Paula      Simi Valley          Oaks        County 
  Total Population            65,201      15,002        34,421         29,321           124,237          126,683       823,318
  Hispanic/Latino             22.9%       74.7%         31.4%          79.5%             23.3%            16.8%         40.3%
  Non-Hispanic Race/Ethnicities
  Caucasian                   61.8%       22.7%         57.1%          18.5%             62.8%            70.2%         48.7%
  African American             1.7%        0.3%          1.4%           0.3%               1.3%           1.2%          1.6%
  Native American              0.2%        0.3%          0.2%           0.4%               0.3%           0.2%          0.3%
  Asian                       10.0%        0.8%          6.7%           0.6%               9.1%            8.6%          6.6%
  Native Hawaiian              0.2%        0.1%          0.1%           0.0%               0.1%            0.1%          0.2%
  Some Other Race              0.2%        0.2%          0.2%           0.1%               0.2%           0.2%          0.2%
  Two or More Races            3.0%        0.9%          2.8%           0.6%               2.9%           2.6%          2.3%
  SOURCE:  2010 Census. 
 
EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 
Educational  attainment  is  closely  linked  to  an  individual’s  ability  to  earn  a  living.  The  2010  Census  did  not 
collect this information; however, according to the 2007‐2011 ACS (Table H‐5), the proportion of Simi Valley 
residents  with  college  and  advanced  degrees  was  comparable  to  the  County  and  the  State.  ACS  data 
indicates  that,  since  2000,  the  proportion  of  Simi  Valley  residents  with  college  and  advanced  degrees  has 
increased by six percentage points. 
 
 
          Table H‐5          Comparison of Educational Attainment 
                                                  Simi Valley            Ventura County                 California 
                                               2000         2011        2000         2011           2000         2011 
          No High School                       4.1%         4.5%       10.4%        10.0%          11.5%        10.4%
          Some High School, No Diploma         9.0%         5.9%        9.5%         7.5%          11.8%         8.7%
          High School Diploma/GED             23.6%        22.5%       19.7%        19.4%          20.1%        21.1%
          Some College                        38.4%        35.8%       33.5%        32.1%          30.0%        29.5%
          BA or Above                         24.9%        31.3%       26.9%        31.0%          26.6%        30.3%
          SOURCE:  2000 Census and 2007‐2011 ACS.
 
   Employment Profile 
An assessment of the needs of the community must take into consideration the type of employment held by 
residents. Incomes associated with different jobs and the number of workers in a household determines the 
type  and  size  of  housing  a  household  can  afford.  In  some  cases,  the  types  of  jobs  themselves  can  affect 
housing  needs  and  demand  (such  as  in  communities  with  military  installations,  college  campuses  and 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐11                               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                         CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
seasonal agriculture). Employment growth typically leads to strong housing demand, while the reverse is true 
when employment contracts. 
OCCUPATION AND WAGE 
Table H‐6 shows the employment profile of residents of Simi Valley compared to those of Ventura County. 
Jobs held by Simi Valley residents are similar to those held by Ventura County residents; however, a slightly 
higher proportion of Simi  Valley residents were employed in higher income occupations.  Over one‐third of 
Simi Valley residents were working in management or professional positions, a high‐income field, and nearly 
one‐third were in the sales and office occupations, a median income field. Service industry workers made up 
16 percent of the employed residents; natural resources, construction, and maintenance made up 8 percent 
of  the  employed  residents;  and  8 percent  of  the  employed  residents  were  in  some  form  of  production, 
transportation,  and  material  moving  occupations.  Service  and  construction  industries  tend  to  earn  lower 
incomes, which can increase the need for affordable housing. 
 
Table H‐6           Employment Profile of Residents 
                                                           Simi Valley                  Ventura County 
                                                 2000                     2011          2000       2011          Mean 
       Occupations of Residents         Persons  Percent  Persons  Percent            Percent  Percent           Wage 
Management, Business, Science, and
                                         21,788        38.2%       25,400       39.9%  36.5%      37.3%        $115,260
Arts Occupations
Service Occupations                       7,051       12.4%        10,223       16.1%  13.4%      16.1%         $50,182
Sales and Office Occupations             17,505       30.7%        18,093       28.4%  27.3%      25.9%         $39,668
Natural Resources, Construction, and
                                          4,910         8.6%        4,833        7.6%  11.3%      11.1%         $49,707
Maintenance Occupations
Production, Transportation, and
                                          5,747        10.1%        5,128        8.1%  11.5%       9.7%         $34,781
Material Moving Occupations
                                  Total  57,001       100.0%       63,677     100.0%  100.0%     100.0%         $48,469
SOURCE:  2000 Census, 2007‐2011 ACS, and California Employment Development Department 2013 Labor Market Statistics –
           Occupational Wages. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐12                                  GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
MAJOR EMPLOYERS 
Simi Valley’s location makes it accessible to Santa Barbara and the greater Los Angeles area and therefore an 
attractive  place  for  various  firms  to  locate.  Table H‐7  shows  the  ten  largest  employers  in  the  City.  Major 
employers in Simi Valley include Simi Valley Unified School District, Simi Valley Hospital, and the City of Simi 
Valley. These jobs generally pay moderate incomes. 
 
            Table H‐7            Major Employers in Simi Valley 
                         Name of Employer                         Type of Service           Number of Employees 
            Bank of America                                Financial                                   ***
            Simi Valley Unified School District            Education                                 2,699
            Simi Valley Hospital                           Health Services                             868
            City of Simi Valley                            City Government                             536
            Aerovironment Inc.                             Energy/Aircraft Technology                  455
            Rancho Simi Recreation & Park District         Park Services                               403
            Vons                                           Grocery Store                               361
            Target                                         Department Store                            350
            Meggit Safety Systems                          Fire Protection Systems                     320
            Milgard Manufacturing, Inc                     Window Manufacturing                        267
            Avnet Integrated (formerly Nexicore)           Electronics Distribution                    256
            Note: *** The actual number of employees at the Bank of American Simi Valley Center is not disclosed; 
                   however, Bank of America remains a leading employer in the City. 
            SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, 2011‐12 Comprehensive Financial Report 
 
  Household Characteristics 
The Census defines a household as all persons who occupy a housing unit, which may include single persons 
living  alone,  families  related  through  marriage  or  blood  and  unrelated  individuals  living  together.  Persons 
living in retirement or convalescent homes, dormitories or other group living situations are not considered 
households. Information on household characteristics is important to understand the growth and changing 
needs of a community. 
HOUSEHOLD TYPE 
Different household types generally have different housing needs. Seniors or young adults typically comprise 
the majority of single‐person households and tend to reside in apartment units, mobile homes, condominium 
or smaller single‐family homes. Families often prefer larger single‐family homes. 
Census data in Table H‐8 shows that the total number of households in Simi Valley increased by 13 percent 
between 2000 and 2010. Family households increased by almost 10 percent during this time and continue to 
make  up  more  than  three‐quarters  of  Simi  Valley  households.  However,  married  families  with  children 
decreased  by  8 percent,  while  married  families  without  children  increased  by  nearly  26 percent.  “Other” 
families are family households (as defined above) but do not include a married couple. They could be siblings 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐13                               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
living  together  or  single  parents.  “Other”  families  in  the  City  experienced  a  large  increase,  with  a  jump  of 
almost 21 percent since 2000. 
The  most  significant  increase  during  this  time  period,  however,  was  in  the  proportion  of  single‐person 
households. The number of singles increased almost 33 percent and the most dramatic increase was in the 
number of elderly (age 65 and older) living alone, which jumped approximately 70 percent. These changes in 
household characteristics resulted in a slight decrease in the average household size. 
 
                   Table H‐8             Household Characteristics 
                                                          2000                      2010           Percent 
                         Households Type        Households  Percent  Households  Percent  Change 
                   Households                      36,421       100.0%       41,237       100.0%    13.2%
                   Family Households               28,952       79.5%        31,697       76.9%      9.5%
                        Married With Children      12,986        33.9%       11,916        28.9%    -8.2%
                        Married No Children        10,272        30.0%       12,908        31.3%    25.7%
                        Other Families              5,694        15.6%        6,873        16.7%    20.7%
                   Non-Family Households            7,469       20.5%         9,540        23.1%    27.7%
                        Singles                     5,338        14.7%        7,087        17.2%    32.8%
                           Elderly Living Alone     1,774         4.9%        3,013         7.3%    69.8%
                        Other Non-Families          2,131         5.9%        2,453         5.9%    15.1%
                   Average Household Size                 3.04                      3.00            -1.3%
                   SOURCE:  2000 and 2010 Census.
HOUSEHOLD SIZE 
Household size identifies sources of population growth and household overcrowding. A community’s average 
household size will increase over time if there is a trend towards larger families. In a community where the 
population is aging, the average household size may decline. 
According to the 2010 Census, the average household size in Simi Valley (3.0) was comparable to neighboring 
communities  and  Ventura  County  (Figure H‐1).  Fillmore,  Moorpark  and  Santa  Paula  all  have  slightly  larger 
average household sizes than Simi Valley, while Thousand Oaks and Camarillo have slightly smaller average 
household  sizes.  All  of  these  communities  experienced  little  change  in  household  size  between  2000  and 
2010, with the exception of Moorpark. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          4‐14                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                             
                          Figure H‐1           Average Household Size Comparison 
                                             SOURCE:    2000 and 2010 Census. 
HOUSEHOLD INCOME 
Household  income  is  an  important  consideration  when  evaluating  housing  and  community  development 
needs  because  lower  incomes  typically  constrain  a  household’s  ability  to  secure  adequate  housing  or 
services.  While  housing  choices,  such  as  tenure  (owning  versus  renting)  and  location  of  City  residents  are 
very  much  income‐dependent,  household  size  and  type  often  affect  the  proportion  of  income  that  can  be 
spent on housing. 
According  to  the  2007‐2011  ACS,  the  majority  (76 percent)  of  Simi  Valley  households  earned  more  than 
$50,000  a  year  (Table H‐9).  Simi  Valley’s  income  distribution  generally  skews toward  the  higher  end  of  the 
spectrum—even more so than the income distribution of Ventura County. 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐15                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                  Table H‐9            Household Income Distribution—2000 to 2011 
                                                          Simi Valley                     Ventura County 
                     Household Income               2000               2011             2000            2011 
                  Less than $15,000                6.3%                5.0%            8.8%            7.2%
                  $15,000 to $24,999               5.3%                5.1%            8.4%            7.1%
                  $25,000 to $34,999               6.7%                5.2%            9.4%            7.3%
                  $35,000 to $49,999               13.4%               9.3%            14.4%           11.0%
                  $50,000 to $74,999               21.9%              16.2%            21.2%           16.5%
                  $75,000 to $99,999               20.0%              14.6%            15.0%           13.7%
                  $100,000 or more                 26.4%              44.7%            22.8%           37.2%
                                       Total      100.0%             100.0%           100.0%          100.0%
                  Median Household Income         $70,370            $89,452          $59,666         $76,728
                  SOURCE:  2000 Census and 2007‐2011 ACS.
 
In addition to looking at income distribution, it is important to look at changes in median household income 
over  time  and  to  compare  this  growth  to  that  of  neighboring  communities  (Figure H‐2).  Simi  Valley 
experienced  a  27 percent  increase  in  median  household  income  from  2000  to  2011.  Neighboring 
communities  all  experienced  similar  increases,  and  Ventura  County  as  a  whole  experienced  a  29 percent 
increase. Camarillo and Moorpark had the largest increases at 35 and 34 percent, respectively.  
            $120,000
                                                         1990    2000     2011
            $100,000
             $80,000
             $60,000
             $40,000
             $20,000
                  $0
                                                                                              Thousand      Ventura
                         Simi Valley   Camarillo    Fillmore      Moorpark     Santa Paula
                                                                                                Oaks         County
                  1990    $53,967       $48,219     $33,482        $60,368       $31,605       $56,856      $45,612
                  2000    $70,370       $62,457     $45,510        $76,642       $41,651       $76,815      $59,666
                  2011    $89,452       $84,168     $60,605       $103,009       $53,359      $100,373      $76,728  
                           Figure H‐2           Median Household Income Comparison 
                                     SOURCE:     1990 and 2000 Census and 2007‐2011 ACS. 
                                      
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐16                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The  state  and  federal  government  classify  household  income  into  several  groupings  based  upon  the 
relationship  to  the  County  Area  Median  Income  (AMI),  adjusted  for  household  size.  The  State  of  California 
utilizes the following income groups: 
      ■     Extremely Low                         0–30% AMI 
      ■     Very Low                              31–50% AMI 
      ■     Low                                   51–80% AMI 
      ■     Moderate                              81–120% AMI 
      ■     Above Moderate                        120%+ AMI 
The 2010 Census does not collect information on the number of households belonging to each of the income 
categories  described  above.    However,  household  income  data  was  tabulated  by  the  Southern  California 
Association of Governments (SCAG) using the 2005‐2009 ACS (Table H‐10).  As shown below, between 2005 
and 2009, approximately 30 percent of the City’s households earned lower incomes, while approximately 70 
percent  had  earned  incomes  of  moderate  or  above.  The  proportion  of  lower  income  households  in  Simi 
Valley is noticeably lower than in Ventura County as a whole. 
 
        Table H‐10                      Household Income Levels—2009                                            
                                                                         Number of        Percent of          Ventura 
                                                 Income Level           Households            Total        County Percent 
        Extremely Low (0–30% AMI)                                           3,445             8.9%             12.3%
        Very Low (31–50% AMI)                                               2,872             7.4%              11.2%
        Low (51–80% AMI)                                                    5,357            13.8%             16.5%
        Moderate (81 to 120% AMI)                                           8,104            20.9%             18.6%
        Above Moderate (over 120% AMI)                                     19,002            49.0%             41.4%
                                                                  Total    38,780           100.0%             100.0%
        SOURCE:  SCAG (ACS, 2005‐2009) 
 
OVERCROWDING 
An  overcrowded  housing  unit  is  defined  as  a  unit  occupied  by  more  than  one  person  per  room2. 
Overcrowding can result when there are not enough adequately sized units within a community, when high 
housing costs relative to income force  too many individuals to share a housing unit than it can adequately 
accommodate,  and/or  when  families  reside  in  smaller  units  than  they  need  in  order  to  devote  income  to 
other necessities, such as food and health care. Overcrowding also tends to accelerate the normal wear and 
tear,  resulting  in  deterioration  of  housing.  Therefore,  maintaining  a  reasonable  level  of  occupancy  and 
alleviating  overcrowding  are  critical  to  enhancing  quality  of  life  for  residents  and  aesthetic  quality  of 
neighborhoods. 
Between 2000 and 2011, overcrowding decreased in Simi Valley. As Table H‐11 illustrates, only three percent 
of households in Simi Valley were considered overcrowded in 2011, inclusive of the one percent that were 
                                                            
2
   The Census Bureau’s definition of a “room” excludes bathroom, porch, balcony, foyer, hall or half‐room. See 2000 Census 
Long Form, Question #37. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                   4‐17                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
considered  severely  overcrowded.  In  2000,  approximately  six percent  of  households  in  the  City  were 
overcrowded, and about two percent were considered severely overcrowded. Overcrowding continued to be 
more prevalent among renter‐households in the City, as rental units are typically smaller in size and renter‐
households are more likely to earn lower incomes. In 2011, six percent of Simi Valley renter‐households were 
overcrowded  compared  to  just  one percent  of  owner‐households.  Overcrowding  in  Ventura  County  was  a 
slightly  larger  issue  than  in  Simi  Valley.  Nearly  six  percent  of  the  County’s  occupied  housing  units  were 
overcrowded, and severe overcrowding affected two percent of households countywide. 
 
             Table H‐11           Overcrowding by Tenure, Simi Valley 
                                         Owner‐Households           Renter‐Households        Total Households 
                  Overcrowding        Number  % of Owners  Number  % of Renters  Number  % of Total 
             1990
             Total Overcrowded
                                         912         3.7%           852         11.3%       1,764       5.5%
             (> 1.0 person/room)
             Severely Overcrowded
                                         264         1.1%           385          5.1%        649        2.0%
             (>1.5 persons/room)
             2000
             Total Overcrowded
                                        1,147        4.1%           984         12.0%       2,131       5.8%
             (> 1.0 person/room)
             Severely Overcrowded
                                         399         1.4%           445          5.4%        844        2.3%
             (>1.5 persons/room)
             2011
             Total Overcrowded
                                         540         1.3%           628          6.0%       1,168       2.9%
             (> 1.0 person/room)
             Severely Overcrowded
                                         144         0.4%           171          1.6%        315        0.8%
             (>1.5 persons/room)
             SOURCE:  1990 and 2000 Census and 2007‐2011 ACS.
 
COST BURDEN/OVERPAYMENT 
State  and  federal  standards  for  housing  cost  burden  are  based  on  an  income‐to‐housing  cost  ratio  of 
30 percent  and  above.  Households  paying  more  than  30 percent  of  their  income  on  housing  have  limited 
remaining income for other necessities. Above moderate‐income households generally are capable of paying 
a large proportion of income for housing; therefore, estimates of housing cost burden generally focus on low 
and moderate‐income households. 
According to Census tabulations by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), housing 
cost burden affects a significant portion of households in Simi Valley, particularly the elderly, large families, 
and those earning lower‐incomes, as shown in Table H‐30. At the lower‐income levels, cost burden impacts 
homeowners and renters fairly equally. For households with moderate or above incomes, cost burden is less 
prevalent and has a limited impact on renter‐households. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          4‐18                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Persons with Special Housing Needs 
Certain  segments  of  the  population  may  have  more  difficulty  in  finding  decent,  affordable  housing  due  to 
their  special  needs.  Special  circumstances  may  be  related  to  one’s  employment  and  income,  family 
characteristics, disability and household characteristics, among other factors. Consequently, certain residents 
in  Simi  Valley  may  experience  higher  incidences  of  housing  cost  burden,  overcrowding  or  other  housing 
problems. 
“Special needs” groups in Simi Valley include the following: senior households, persons with disabilities, large 
households, single‐parents households, persons living in poverty, the homeless, farmworkers, and students 
(Table H‐12). This section provides a detailed discussion of the housing needs facing each particular group as 
well  as  programs  and  services  available  to  address  their  housing  needs.  Table H‐17  identifies  service 
providers for special needs populations in Ventura County. 
 
  Table H‐12           Special Needs Groups in Simi Valley 
                                                    # of Persons or                                   % of Total Households 
              Special Needs Group                     Households       # of Owners    # of Renters          or Persons 
  Households w/ Members Age 65+                          9,739              N/A            N/A                23.6%
  Senior Headed Households                               7,973         6,169 (77%)    1,804 (23%)             19.3%
  Senior Living Alone                                    3,013         1,762 (59%)    1,251 (42%)              7.3%
  Persons with Disabilities**                           11,021              N/A            N/A                 8.9%
  Large Households                                       6.279         4,639 (74%)    1,640 (26%)             15.2%
  Single-Parent Households                               8,889              N/A            N/A                21.6%
  Female Headed Households w/Children                    2,158              N/A            N/A                 5.2%
  Residents Living Below Poverty*                        7,588              N/A            N/A                 6.8%
  Homeless***                                             284               N/A            N/A                 0.3%
  Farmworkers (persons)*                                  431               N/A            N/A                 0.4%
  Students (College/Graduate)                            9,210              N/A            N/A                 8.3%
  SOURCE:  2000 and 2010 Census, 2007‐2011 and 2009‐2011 ACS, and County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count. 
  Notes:2010 Census data does not provide information on these groups; 2000 Census data is used. 
  *=2010 Census data not available.  Estimate is from the 2007‐2011 ACS. 
  **=2010 Census data not available.  Estimate is from the 2009‐2011 ACS. 
  ***=2010 Census data not available.  Estimate is from County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count. 
  N/A = Data not available. 
SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS 
Many senior households have special housing needs due to their limited and/or fixed incomes, health care 
costs,  and  disabilities.  Simi  Valley’s  senior  population  increased  55 percent  between  2000  and  2010  (and 
150 percent  between  1990  and  2010)  (Table H‐2).  Approximately  19 percent  of  the  City’s  households  were 
also  headed  by  a  senior  in  2010  (Table H‐12).  According  to  CHAS  data  (Table H‐30),  32 percent  of  senior 
owners  and  43 percent  of  senior  renters  were  overpaying  for  housing.  Housing  cost  burden  is  especially 
prevalent among the City’s extremely low‐income and very low‐income senior households. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                    4‐19                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                            CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Aside from cost burden issues faced by seniors due to their relatively fixed incomes, many seniors are faced 
with various disabilities. No specific household information on income and disabilities is available from the 
2010 Census; however roughly 35 percent of Simi Valley seniors suffered from some kind of difficulty in 2011 
(Table H‐13).  Among  these,  the  most  common  were  ambulatory  and  independent  living  difficulties 
(disabilities that can make it difficult or prevent one from leaving their home alone). For senior residents that 
require assisted care, there are 57 residential care facilities (including assisted living facilities) for the elderly 
in Simi Valley that provide a total of 604 beds. There are three large senior residential care facilities in Simi 
Valley, but a majority of the residential care facilities are single‐family homes that operate as community care 
facilities. 
Resources Available 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  actively  encourages  senior  housing  development.  The  Paseo  de  las  Flores  project, 
completed in 2008, includes 36 senior condominiums, 21 of which are for low‐income seniors. Two additional 
housing projects with units reserved for lower‐income senior housing are currently in the pipeline including 
Green Park Runkle Canyon and Casden Properties’ L. A. Madera Village. Green Park Runkle Canyon is a 461‐
unit project that has been approved by the City and includes 138 senior units, 62 of which will be affordable 
to low‐income households. The L. A. Madera Village project was also approved and consists of 266 units, 67 
of  which  are  affordable  to  low‐income  households  including  27 units  reserved  for  low‐income  seniors. 
Grading began on Green Park Runkle Canyon in August 2013, while construction has not yet begun for the 
L.A. Medera Village project..  
As of July 2013, approximately 287 elderly residents participated in the Section 8 program (Housing Choice 
Voucher)  and  66  senior  residents  are  currently  on  the  Section 8  waiting  list.  However,  as  of  July  2013,  the 
Section 8 Program waiting list is closed.   
In addition to the affordable housing opportunities discussed above, senior residents in Simi Valley can also 
benefit  from  the  programs  and  services  offered  by  various  providers  located  in  the  City  and  neighboring 
communities.  Table H‐17 details these organizations. 
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
Disability is a physical or mental condition that substantially limits one or more major life activities. Physical 
disabilities can hinder access to housing units of conventional design, as well as limit the ability to earn an 
adequate income. The 2010 Census does not include information on disabilities.  However, according to the 
2009‐2011  ACS,  approximately  nine percent  of  all  residents  in  the  City  had  one  or  more  disabilities. 
Disabilities were more prevalent among the elderly population, with 35 percent of the City’s senior residents 
having  one  or  more  disabilities  (Table H‐13).  Among  the  adult  population  between  the  ages  of  18  to  64, 
seven  percent  had  one  or  more  disabilities.  Disabilities  do  not  necessarily  preclude  a  person  from  being 
employed. The ACS recorded the employment status of persons with disabilities between the ages of 18 and 
64. Among those in this age group, nearly 39 percent were employed. 
Disabilities impact the various age groups differently. The Census tallied the disabilities reported by residents 
by  age  group  (Table H‐14).  Among  children  (5  to  17),  the  most  common  disability  was  cognitive  difficulty 
(usually developmental related), while among the adult population (18 to 64), ambulatory and independent 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐20                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
living difficulties were more prevalent. Most seniors suffered from multiple disabilities, with  ambulatory and 
independent living difficulties being reported most often. 
 
                             Table H‐13        Disability Status by Age—2011 
                                                                  % of Disabled That 
                              Age Group   Persons    % Disabled     Are Employed 
                             0-5             37        0.5%              N/A
                             5–17           916        4.0%              N/A
                             18-64         5,798       7.1%             38.7%
                             65+           4,270       34.7%             N/A
                                   Total   11,021      8.9%              N/A
                             SOURCE:  2009‐2011 ACS.
 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                          4‐21                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                   CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                           Table H‐14             Disabilities Tallied – 2011 
                                         Age Group and Disability                          % Tallied 
                           Total Persons with a Disability: Ages 5 to 17                      916
                               Hearing Difficulty                                           18.3%
                               Vision Difficulty                                            19.3%
                               Cognitive Difficulty                                         65.2%
                               Ambulatory Difficulty                                        16.3%
                               Self-Care Difficulty                                         28.3%
                           Total Persons with a Disability: Ages 18 to 64                    5,798
                               Hearing Difficulty                                           23.9%
                               Vision Difficulty                                            14.0%
                               Cognitive Difficulty                                         35.6%
                               Ambulatory Difficulty                                        44.8%
                               Self-Care Difficulty                                         26.7%
                               Independent Living Difficulty                                37.7%
                           Total Persons with a Disability: Ages 65+                         4,270
                               Hearing Difficulty                                           38.9%
                               Vision Difficulty                                            20.1%
                               Cognitive Difficulty                                         20.8%
                               Ambulatory Difficulty                                        63.8%
                               Self-Care Difficulty                                         25.5%
                               Independent Living Difficulty                                49.5%
                           SOURCE:  2009‐2011 ACS.
                           Notes: 
                                1. Persons under 5 years of age are not included in this table. 
                                2. A person can suffer from multiple disabilities and the Census 
                                     allows a person to check all disabilities that apply. Therefore, 
                                     the number of disabilities tallied is greater than the number of 
                                     persons with disabilities. This table presents the number of 
                                     persons with disabilities by age group and then indicates the 
                                     proportion of persons in that age group that are impacted by a 
                                     particular disability. 
 
Persons with Developmental Disabilities 
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of persons with 
developmental  disabilities.    As  defined  by  the  Section  4512  of  the  Welfare  and  Institutions  Code, 
“developmental  disability”  means  “a  disability  that  originates  before  an  individual  attains  age  18  years, 
continues,  or  can  be  expected  to  continue,  indefinitely,  and  constitutes  a  substantial  disability  for  that 
individual. As defined by the Director of Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of 
Public Instruction, this term shall include mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term 
shall  also  include  disabling  conditions  found  to  be  closely  related  to  mental  retardation  or  to  require 
treatment  similar  to  that  required  for  individuals  with  mental  retardation,  but  shall  not  include  other 
handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.”  
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐22                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The  Census  does  not  record  developmental  disabilities.  However,  according  to  the  U.S.  Administration  on 
Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can be defined as 
developmentally  disabled  is  1.5  percent.  This  equates  to  1,864  persons  in  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  with 
developmental disabilities, based on the 2010 Census population. 
According to the State’s Department of Developmental Services, as of November 2, 2012, 1,090 Simi Valley 
residents with developmental disabilities were being assisted at the Tri‐Counties Regional Center.  Most of 
these  individuals  were  residing  in  a  private  home  with  their  parent  of  guardian,  and  620  of  these  persons 
with developmental disabilities were under the age of 21. 
Many  developmentally  disabled  persons  can  live  and  work  independently  within  a  conventional  housing 
environment.  More  severely  disabled  individuals  require  a  group  living  environment  where  supervision  is 
provided.  The  most  severely  affected  individuals  may  require  an  institutional  environment  where  medical 
attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the 
first  issue  in  supportive  housing  for  the  developmentally  disabled  is  the  transition  from  the  person’s  living 
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult. 
Resources Available 
Several factors limit the supply of housing for persons with disabilities, including affordability, accessibility, 
location  and  discrimination.  The  most  obvious  housing  need  for  persons  with  disabilities  is  housing  that  is 
adapted  to  their  needs.  Most  single‐family  homes  are  inaccessible  to  people  with  mobility  and  sensory 
limitations.  Housing  may  not  be  adaptable  to  widened  doorways  and  hallways,  access  ramps,  larger 
bathrooms,  lowered  countertops  and  other  features  necessary  for  accessibility.  The  cost  of  retrofitting  a 
home often prohibits homeownership, even for individuals or families who could otherwise afford a home. 
Furthermore,  some  providers  of  basic  home  buying  services  do  not  have  offices  or  materials  that  are 
accessible to people with  mobility, visual or hearing impairments. Location of  housing is also an important 
factor for many persons with disabilities as they often rely upon public transportation. 
Various residential facilities in Simi Valley serve those with disabilities. As of September 2013, a total of 17 
adult residential care facilities primarily serving non‐seniors, with a total capacity of 95 beds, are located in 
Simi  Valley.  The  City  also  offers  housing  rehabilitation  programs  that  can  be  used  to  make  accessibility 
improvements.    Residents  with  disabilities  can  also  benefit  from  a  range  of  services  offered  by  various 
agencies shown in Table H‐17. 
LARGE HOUSEHOLDS 
Large households are defined as households with five or more members. A large household may be a large 
family (e.g., parents with children and/or extended family members), two or more families sharing the same 
housing  unit,  more  than  five  unrelated  individuals  living  together,  or  any  of  these  combinations.  Large 
households  comprise  a  special  needs  group  because  of  their  need  of  larger  units,  which  often  command 
higher prices that are not affordable to many large households. In order to save for other necessities such as 
food, clothing and medical care, it is common for lower‐income large households to reside in smaller units, 
frequently resulting in overcrowding. 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐23                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                    CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
According to the Census, between 2000 and 2010, the number of large households in Simi Valley increased 
from  5,480  to  6,279,  a  14 percent  increase.  According  to  the  2010  Census,  most  of  the  City’s  large 
households  owned  their  homes  (4,639  households  or  74 percent  of  all  large  households),  but  a  sizable 
number were renter‐households (1,640 households or 26 percent of all large households). 
Resources Available 
Large households in Simi Valley can benefit from general housing programs and services offered by the City 
that  provide  assistance  to  lower  and  moderate  income  households  in  general,  such  as  the  Housing  Choice 
Voucher  program,  which  offers  rental  assistance  to  residents.    Households  in  need  of  assistance  can  also 
benefit from the programs and services offered by the agencies identified in Table H‐17. 
SINGLE‐PARENT FAMILIES 
Single‐parent households require special consideration and assistance because of their greater need for day 
care, health  care and other assistance. Female‐headed single‐parent households with children in  particular 
tend  to  have  lower‐incomes,  thus  limiting  housing  availability  for  this  group.  Between  2000  and  2010,  the 
number  of  single‐parent  households  in  Simi  Valley  decreased  slightly.  The  majority  of  single‐parent 
households  continued  to  be  headed  by  females.  In  2010,  approximately  one‐third  of  single‐parent 
households were male‐headed while two‐thirds were female‐headed (Table H‐15). 
 
  Table H‐15            Single‐Parent Families 
                                                    2000                                                  2010 
                                Single‐Parent Families                              Single‐Parent Families 
   Single Parent Families         #          % of Total       % of All Familiesa      #          % of Total      % of All Familiesa 
  Male Householder             1,049          32.8%                 3.6%            1,017         32.0%                 3.2%
  Female Householder           2,151          67.2%                 7.4%            2,158         68.0%                 6.8%
                      Total     3,200         100.0%               11.0%            3,175         100.0%               10.0%
  SOURCE:  2000 and 2010 Census.
  a.  Represents the percentage of single‐parent families (with male or female householders) out of the total number of families in 
      the City. 
 
Female‐headed  single‐parent  households  face  greater  financial  difficulties  because  they  often  do  not  have 
the  same  earning  power  as  their  male  counterparts.  As  shown  in  Table H‐16,  ACS  data  indicates  that 
approximately  44 percent  of  single‐parent  female‐headed  families  in  Simi  Valley  were  living  in  poverty.  By 
contrast, only 17 percent of single‐parent male‐headed families were living in poverty. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                              4‐24                                          GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                        Table H‐16           Families Living in Poverty 
                               Family Type        Number  % of Families in Poverty  % of all Families 
                        Single Male Parent           173             17.2%                   0.6%
                        Single Female Parent         439             43.7%                   1.4%
                        Married Couple Parents       392             39.0%                   1.3%
                        Total Families in Poverty  1,004            100.0%                   3.2%
                                  Total Families  31,223               —                      —
                        SOURCE:  2007‐2011 ACS.
 
Resources Available 
Simi  Valley’s  single‐parent  households  can  benefit  from  the  City’s  general  housing  programs  for  lower 
income households, such as the Housing Choice Voucher program.  Single‐parent households in the City can 
also benefit from the various programs and services offered by the agencies listed in Table H‐17. 
HOMELESS PERSONS 
In general, the definition of homelessness (if he/she is not imprisoned) includes those persons who meet one 
of the following criteria: 
    ■ Lacks a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime residence; or 
    ■ The  primary  nighttime  residence  is  a  publicly  or  privately  operated  shelter  designed  for  temporary 
        living accommodations; or 
    ■ The primary residence is an institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to 
        be institutionalized; or 
    ■ The  primary  residence  is  a  public  or  private  place  not  designed  for,  or  ordinarily  used  as,  a  regular 
        sleeping accommodation for human beings. 
Assessing a community’s homeless population is difficult because of the transient nature of the population. 
There  are  essentially  three  categories  of  homeless  populations:  the  chronically  homeless,  migrant 
farmworkers, and the situationally homeless. The chronically homeless often have problems that led to their 
homelessness  such  as  substance  abuse  and  mental  illness.  Based  on  HUD’s  definition,  the  chronically 
homeless also typically opt to live on the streets rather than participate in a case managed program. Migrant 
farmworkers, who potentially are seasonally homeless, are especially transient and their housing needs are 
addressed in the following section. The last category of homeless people, the situationally homeless, often 
find  themselves  homeless  due  to  a  combination  of  factors  beyond  their  control,  such  as  rent  increases, 
medical  bills  or  loss  of  employment.  This  is  also  the  segment  that  is  most  likely  to  seek  help  from  service 
agencies and best able to work toward becoming self‐sufficient again. 
The  County  of  Ventura  2012  Homeless  Count  was  conducted  through  a  partnership  between  the  Ventura 
County Homeless and Housing Coalition and community volunteers. The count was conducted on January 24, 
2012.  The  Survey  found  that,  out  of  1,936  homeless  adults  and  children  counted  in  Ventura  County,  284 
reported living in Simi Valley (270 adults and 14 children). This represents approximately 15 percent of the 
Ventura  County  homeless  population.  Out  of  the  284  homeless  residents  in  Simi  Valley,  263  were 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐25                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
unsheltered.  Because  Simi  Valley  has  a  limited  agricultural  industry  no  migrant  farmworkers  or  seasonal 
homeless in the City have been identified in the annual countywide homeless count. 
Resources Available 
A list of organizations that offer services for the homeless is provided in Table H‐17. 
FARMWORKERS 
Another  special  needs  groups  in  Simi  Valley  is  farmworker  households,  who  need  both  temporary  and 
permanent  housing.  Migrant  farmworkers  or  day  laborers  live  under  difficult  conditions  in  encampments 
often  adjacent  to  farming  operations.  Because  of  their  tenuous  living  conditions,  it  is  very  difficult  to 
estimate their numbers. 
In many parts of Southern California, agricultural production is an important contributor to local economies. 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  has  a  very  limited  agricultural  industry,  and  the  City  is  not  located  near  any  of  the 
farms in the coastal plains. The 2007‐2011 ACS reports that, of the total persons age 16 and older, in the City 
of Simi Valley, 431 persons (or 0.4 percent) were employed in farming, forestry, and fishing occupations. This 
category could include people employed in plant nurseries. 
Resources Available 
Because farmworkers comprise such a small proportion of the City’s population, no special housing programs 
and services are necessary for this group. The housing needs of farmworkers in Simi Valley can be addressed 
through the City’s general affordable housing programs for lower income households.  Certain programs and 
services offered by agencies in Table H‐17 can also be of assistance to Simi Valley’s farmworkers. 
STUDENTS 
Four universities and two community colleges are easily accessible to Simi Valley. California State University 
at  Northridge,  California  State  University  at  Channel  Islands,  California  Lutheran  University  and  DeVry 
University  are  all  located  within  twenty  miles  from  the  City.  Moorpark  College  in  the  Ventura  County 
Community College District and Pierce College in the Los Angeles Community College District are also located 
within  twenty  miles  of  Simi  Valley.  A  total  of  9,210  people  in  the  City  are  enrolled  in  college  or  graduate 
school, making up nine percent of the population over the age of 15. Students have unique housing  needs 
because their income is limited and they need housing that is in close proximity to their school.  
Resources Available 
Students can benefit from the general services available to all lower and moderate income residents of Simi 
Valley  and  available  rental  housing  in  the  community.    However,  for  state  and  federal  housing  program 
purposes, students typically do not qualify as lower and moderate income. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐26                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Table H‐17       Services for Special Needs Populations 
   Special Needs               Program                                   Details                           Contact 
     Services 
                  24 Hour Helpline               Referrals                                                    211
                  Adult Protective Services      Abuse and neglect investigation and mediation           805.654.3200
                                                 Supportive services and residential care for adults
                  ARC Ventura County                                                                     805.650.8611
                                                 with disabilities
                  Area Agency on Aging           Advocates on all needs of seniors                       805.477.7300
                  County of Ventura District
                                                 Senior crime prevention                                 805.654.2451
                  Attorney
                  Elderlink                      Free housing referral services                          800.613.5772
                                                 Senior outreach for those in need of mental health
                  Mental Health                                                                          805.777.3500
                                                 services
      Elderly
                  Ombudsman Services             Nursing home visits and mediation                       805.656.1986
                                                 Senior Nutrition Program, Brown Bag Program,
                  Senior Center                                                                          805.583.6363
                                                 Congregate Meal Site, Meals on Wheels
                  Senior Nutrition               Meal site information                                   805.583.6365
                                                 Available at the Senior Center by appointment;
                  Senior Resources Specialist
                                                 provides information for seniors and their families and 805.583.6363
                  (Senior Advocate)
                                                 in-home services
                                                 Provides support and linkages to community
                  Senior Support Line                                                                    800.235.9980
                                                 resources
                  Shop Ahoy, by Elderpride, Inc. Provides shopping delivery service                      805.236.1267
                                                 Counseling for children with developmental and
                  Children’s Counseling Access                                                           800.671.0887
                                                 social disabilities
                  Easter Seals of Southern       Offers medical, intervention, development, recreation,
                                                                                                         805.647.1141
                  California                     and referral services
                  Independent Living Resource    Offers a wide array of services to persons of any age
                                                                                                         805.650.5993
                  Center, Inc.                   with a disability
                                                 Provides independent living and employment support
   Persons with
                  PathPoint                      services for those with disabilities or disadvantages   805.520.8744
    Disabilities
                                                 to live and work independently
                  Tri-Counties Regional Center   Services for developmentally disabled persons           805.522.8030
                  Tri-County GLAD (Greater Los
                                                 Provides independent living and employment support
                  Angeles Agency on Deafness,                                                            805.520.8744
                                                 services
                  Inc.)
                  Ventura County Behavioral
                                                 Behavioral health services                              805.658.4450
                  Health
GENERAL PLAN                                            4‐27                                CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                          CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H‐17       Services for Special Needs Populations 
   Special Needs              Program                                    Details                          Contact 
      Services 
                                                Support for adolescents, adults and families with
                  Action Family Counseling      substance abuse issues; provides outpatient and         800.367.8336
                                                residential treatment
                                                Free information and referral activities, mental health
                  Berylwood Family Resource
                                                and dental services, parent education classes and       805.582.1214
                  Center
                                                other services for families with children ages 0 to 5
                  Big Brothers/Big Sisters of
                                                Provides children with caring adult volunteer mentors   805.484.2282
                  Ventura County
                                                After school programs for youth ages 6–17, offers a
                  Boys and Girls Club of Simi
                                                low-cost option for after school and summer             805.527.4437
                  Valley
                                                supervision
                  Child Development Resources   Referrals to child care and abuse and neglect
                                                                                                        805.485.7878
                  of Ventura County, Inc. (CDR) investigation
                  Children’s Home Society of
                                                Resource and support services for families              805.437.1910
                  California
     Children’s   Children’s Medical Services   Income qualified medical services for children          805.981.5281
     Services     Community Pregnancy Clinic    Pregnancy services and resources                        805.583.3590
                  FOOD Share                    Countywide food pantry referrals                        805.983.7100
                  Interface Children & Family   Provides temporary shelter and youth crisis
                                                                                                        805.469.5882
                  Services                      prevention services
                                                Provides support to families providing full-time
                  Kids and Families Together                                                            805.643.1446
                                                parenting to minor children who are not their own
                  Rainbow Connection Family     Provides support services for persons with special
                                                                                                        805.823.2325
                  Resource Center               needs and their families
                  Salvation Army/Care & Share   Food Bank                                               805.522.5676
                  Salvation Army                Free children’s summer camp                             805.527.1070
                                                Provides tutoring to homeless children who live in
                  School on Wheels, Inc.                                                                805.641.1678
                                                shelters
                                                Recreation, after school care and daycare programs
                  Simi Valley Family YMCA       with financial assistance available for qualified       805.583.5338
                                                families
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   4‐28                                          GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Table H‐17       Services for Special Needs Populations 
   Special Needs              Program                                      Details                      Contact 
     Services 
                  Berylwood Family Resource
                                                  Free produce is distributed once a month            805.582.1214
                  Center
                                                  A variety of clothing, food and housing options for
                  Catholic Charities                                                                  805.529.0720
                                                  low-income people
                  Centerpoint Church-Angel Food
                                                  Daily food donation and distribution                805.584.1200
                  Ministry
                  Cornerstone Church              Food distribution when available                    805.581.9532
                  Food Share                      Countywide food bank and referral information       805.983.7100
                                                  A variety of clothing, food and housing options for
                  Lutheran Social Services                                                            805.497.6207
                                                  low-income people
                  NewHeart Four Square Church     Weekly food distribution                            805.583.3433
    Food/Meal     New Hope Christian Fellowship
     Services                                     Clothing/food distribution every Sunday             805.581.1628
                  Food Pantry
                  Salvation Army/Care & Share     Provides food bank and some clothing                805.522.5676
                  Shepherd of the Valley
                                                  Prepared dinner services and canned food
                  Lutheran Church – Still Waters                                                      805.526.7577
                                                  distribution
                  Café
                  Simi Valley Food Pantry         Food distribution                                   805.584.9080
                  St. Rose of Lima, Mother
                                                  Food pantry                                         805.526.1732
                  Teresa Charitable Services
                  Trinity Lutheran and Lighthouse
                                                  Food distribution of locally donated food           805.584.8222
                  Bible Church
                  WIC (Women, Infants, and
                                                  Nutrition education and food distribution           805.981.5251
                  Children) Nutrition Program
GENERAL PLAN                                            4‐29                               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                            CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H‐17       Services for Special Needs Populations 
   Special Needs              Program                                       Details                        Contact 
      Services 
                                                   Alcohol and drug recovery, sober living homes for
                  Aanaca Program House                                                                   818.782.5326
                                                   males only
                                                   Residential treatment for adolescent males and
                  Action Family Counseling         females with drug, alcohol and mental health related  800.367.8336
                                                   problems
                  County of Ventura Homeless
                                                   Referrals and services for homeless people            805.385.8585
                  Services Program
                  Emergency Shelter Program        Mentally ill homeless services                        805.981.4200
                                                   Mental health counseling, hot meals, clothing,
                  Lutheran Social Services         vouchers, utility and rental assistance, case         805.497.6207
                                                   management and referrals and resources
                  Many Mansions/Housing
     Housing/                                      Shelters and low-income housing                       805.496.4948
     Homeless     Central
   Services and   Public Action to Deliver Shelter
      Shelters                                     Simi Valley winter warming shelter                    805.579.9166
                  (P.A.D.S.)
                  Rescue Mission Alliance          Men only shelter, year round                          805.487.1234
                  Rescue Mission
                                                   Women and children’s shelter, year round              805.240.1644
                  Alliance/Lighthouse
                  Salvation Army                   Referrals and services                                805.527.1070
                  Samaritan Center                 Drop in shelter, services and referrals               805.579.9166
                                                   Maternity home and transitional home for pregnant
                  Sarah’s House                                                                          805.581.1910
                                                   women and women with infants
                  Turning Point Foundation         Mentally-ill shelter, year round                      805.652.2151
                  Ventura County Jewish Family     Provides a wide array of social services and rental
                                                                                                         805.641.6565
                  Service                          assistance for women and children when available
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     4‐30                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Housing Stock Characteristics 
A community’s housing stock is defined as the collection of all housing units located within the jurisdiction. 
The  characteristics  of  the  housing  stock  including  growth,  type,  age  and  condition,  tenure,  vacancy  rates, 
costs  and  affordability  are  important  in  determining  the  housing  needs  for  the  community.  This  section 
details the housing stock characteristics of Simi Valley in an attempt to identify how well the current housing 
stock meets the needs of current and future residents of the City. 
HOUSING UNIT GROWTH AND TYPE 
Simi  Valley’s  housing  stock  grew  steadily  from  1990  to  2010.  Housing  growth  in  the  City  outpaced  growth 
Countywide but lagged behind that of Camarillo and Moorpark (Figure H‐3). While housing growth during the 
previous decade was significant, residential construction in the City slowed dramatically between 2008 and 
2010, primarily due to the economic recession and lack of remaining developable vacant land. 
                                                                                                                
                            Figure H‐3           Housing Unit Growth (1990–2010) 
                                          SOURCE:     1990, 2000, and 2010 Census. 
 
The  mix  of  housing  types  in  the  City  has  changed  little  between  2000  and  2010.  Detached  and  attached 
single‐family dwellings and mobile homes comprised approximately 83 percent of Simi Valley’s housing stock 
while  multi‐family  dwellings  accounted  for  the  remaining  17 percent  (Table H‐18).  The  most  noticeable 
changes  between  2000  and  2010  occurred  among  larger  multi‐family  structures  with  five  or  more  units 
(which experienced a 26 percent increase) and attached single‐family units (which increased by 20 percent). 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                4‐31                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                   CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H‐18           Housing Unit Type 
                                                   2000                               2010                     Percent Change 
         Housing Unit Type                Units            Percent           Units          Percent              2000–2010 
  Single-Family Homes                    30,288             81.3%           33,854           80.6%                 11.8%
      Detached                           27,668             74.2%           30,707           73.1%                 11.0%
      Attached                            2,620              7.0%            3,147             7.5%                20.1%
  Multi-family Homes                      6,092             16.3%            7,277           17.3%                 19.5%
      2–4 units                           1,655              4.4%            1,710             4.1%                 3.3%
      5+ units                            4,437             11.9%            5,567           13.3%                 25.5%
  Mobile Homes/Other                       892               2.4%             892              2.1%                 0.0%
                             Total       37,272            100.0%           42,023          100.0%                 12.8%
  Vacancy Rate                                      2.28                              2.28                          0.4%
  SOURCE:  State Department of Finance, 2000 and 2010.
  The 2010 Census data does not contain information on unit type. This table presents estimates from the State Department of 
  Finance. The total number of units deviated from the 2010 Census by about 480 units. 
 
HOUSING AGE AND CONDITION 
Typically,  housing  over  30  years  of  age  is  more  likely  to  have  rehabilitation  needs  that  may  include  new 
plumbing,  roof  repairs,  foundation  work  and  other  repairs.  In  Simi  Valley,  approximately  53 percent  of  the 
housing  stock  may  potentially  require  some  improvements  based  solely  on  the  age  of  the  structure 
(Table H‐19). Furthermore, approximately 32 percent of the City’s housing units are approaching 50 years of 
age or older, indicating a greater potential need for major rehabilitation. Based on the characteristics of the 
City’s  housing  stock,  Simi  Valley  has  a  need  for  continued  code  enforcement,  property  maintenance,  and 
housing  rehabilitation  programs  to  stem  housing  deterioration.  However,  given  the  moderate  to  higher 
incomes of its residents, deferred maintenance is not a pressing issue in the City. Property owners typically 
take pride in maintaining their homes and many have the financial means to do so. 
 
                                       Table H‐19             Housing Age 
                                        Year Structure Built     Number      Percent of Total 
                                            2001–2010              5176           12.2%
                                            1990–2000              6,013          14.2%
                                            1980–1989              8,974          21.1%
                                            1970–1979              8,583          20.4%
                                            1960–1969             11,984          28.2%
                                            1940–1959              1,572           3.7%
                                           1939 or earlier          204           0.5%
                                                       Total      42,506         100.0%
                                       SOURCE:  Estimates based on 2000 and 2010 Census.
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                              4‐32                                        GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
A  windshield  survey  of  housing  conditions  in  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  was  conducted  during  the  month  of 
September 1999. The purpose of this survey was to assess the overall condition of housing in the City and to 
identify any changes in housing condition trends. The results of the survey indicated that housing conditions 
in  the  City  were  good.  Nevertheless,  the  survey  found  “pockets”  of  housing  which  are  in  need  of 
rehabilitation. While an updated survey was not conducted, the City believes this conclusion still stands, with 
housing  conditions  improving  in  some  neighborhoods  where  the  recent  low  mortgage  interest  rates  have 
facilitated home improvements and infill developments that have eliminated some older, dilapidated housing 
units.  Furthermore,  the  City  has  been  working  diligently  to  improve  the  housing  conditions  through  its 
various  housing  rehabilitation  programs,  assisting  lower  and  moderate‐income  households  to  make  the 
necessary  improvements.  Overall,  the  City  estimates  that  approximately  2,400 units  in  the  City  require 
substantial  rehabilitation,  and  200 units  were  constructed  over  70  years  ago,  potentially  requiring 
replacement.  
HOUSING TENURE 
The tenure distribution of a community’s housing stock (owner versus renter) can be an indicator of several 
aspects of the housing market, including the affordability of units, household stability and residential mobility 
among  others.  In  most  communities,  tenure  distribution  generally  correlates  with  household  income, 
composition, and age of the householder. 
In 2010, 72 percent of the housing units in Simi Valley were owner‐occupied, while 25 percent were renter‐
occupied (Table H‐20). This represents a slight decrease in the homeownership rate from 2000. 
 
                                Table H‐20          Housing Tenure 
                                                          2000                 2010 
                                     Tenure           #          %         #         % 
                                Owner-Occupied     28,306    75.8%      30,560    71.9%
                                Renter Occupied     8,172    21.9%      10,677    25.1%
                                Vacant               852       2.3%      1,269     3.0%
                                           Total   37,330    100.0%     42,506    100.0%
                                SOURCE:  Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Census.
 
According  to  the  Census  (Table H‐21),  owner‐occupied  households  had  a  slightly  higher  average  household 
size than renters. Slightly over half of the rental units were occupied by one‐ or two‐person households; in 
comparison,  only  45 percent  of  the  owner  units  were  occupied  by  households  with  one‐  or  two‐person 
households. 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                              4‐33                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                           CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                      Table H‐21           Tenure by Household Size 
                                                            % of Total             % of Total 
                             Households             Owner‐Occupied Units      Renter‐Occupied Units 
                              1-Person                        14.0%                  26.3%
                              2-Person                        30.5%                  25.3%
                              3-Person                        19.7%                  18.2%
                              4-Person                        20.6%                  14.7%
                             5+ Persons                       15.2%                  15.4%
                      Average Household Size                   3.05                   2.85
                      SOURCE:  2010 Census. 
                      Overall average household size is 3.0. 
 
HOUSING VACANCY 
A vacancy rate is often a good indicator of how effectively for‐sale and rental units are meeting the current 
demand  for  housing  in  a  community.  Vacancy  rates  of  five  to  six  percent  for  rental  housing  and  one  to 
two percent  for  ownership  housing  are  generally  considered  optimum  because  they  indicate  there  is  a 
balance between the demand and supply for housing. A higher vacancy rate may indicate an excess supply of 
units and price depreciation, while a low vacancy rate may indicate a shortage of units and price inflation. 
According  to  the  2010  Census,  the  overall  vacancy  rate  in  Simi  Valley  was  three percent  (Table H‐22).  The 
rental  vacancy  rate  (for  available  units  only)  was  approximately  one percent  while  the  ownership  vacancy 
rate  (for  available  units  only)  was  just  under  one percent.  Overall,  vacancy  rates  in  the  City  were  below 
optimal, indicating a fairly tight housing market. 
 
                           Table H‐22           Vacancy Status 
                                                    Number  Percent of Total  Percent of Vacant 
                           Total Housing Units       42,506          100.0%           —
                           Total Occupied Units      41,237          97.0%            —
                           Total Vacant Units         1,269           3.0%            —
                           Vacant (Available)
                           For Rent                    512            1.2%          40.3%
                           For Sale                    375            0.9%          29.6%
                           Vacant (Unavailable)
                           Rented or Sold               89            0.2%           7.0%
                           Seasonal                     65            0.2%           5.1%
                           Other                       228            0.5%          18.0%
                           SOURCE:  2010 Census.
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐34                                  GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
   Housing Costs and Affordability 
The cost of housing is directly related to housing problems in a community. If housing costs are relatively high 
compared to household income, housing cost burden and overcrowding occur. This section summarizes the 
cost and affordability of housing to Simi Valley residents. 
HOMEOWNERSHIP MARKET 
Median home prices in cities within Ventura County ranged from $275,000 (Port Hueneme) to over $500,000 
(Thousand  Oaks)  in  2013  (Figure H‐4).  Simi  Valley’s  median  home  price  fell  in  the  middle  of  that  range  at 
$425,000 and was equal to the median home price in Ventura County ($425,000). Since 2012, median home 
prices in the City have increased by 16 percent, indicating a recovery from the housing market crash. 
     $600,000
                                                                                                                          $545,000 
     $500,000                                                          $468,000 
                                                             $460,000                                           $425,000 
                         $415,000                                                                                                   $415,000 
     $400,000                                                                                         $359,000 
                                           $310,000                              $320,000 
     $300,000                                                                              $275,000 
     $200,000
     $100,000
               $0
                         Camarillo          Fillmore Moorpark            Ojai     Oxnard     Port        Santa    Simi    Thousand  Ventura
                                                                                           Hueneme       Paula   Valley     Oaks
                                                                                                                                               
                                Figure H‐4                     Median Home Prices in Ventura County – 2013 
                                                                 SOURCE:    DQNews, Accessed July 2013. 
 
RENTAL HOUSING 
Table H‐23 summarizes current (2013) market rate rents for apartments in Simi Valley, based on a survey of 
rental  listings  on  Craigslist.org.3  The  table  shows  that  rents  in  the  City  ranged  from  $800  for  a  studio  to 
$3,650 for a five bedroom unit.  The average rent for all surveyed units in Simi Valley was $1,925. 
 
                                                            
3
   Most rental listings are posted online instead of in newspapers.  Craigslist is one of the most popular sites for rental listings 
and typically includes listings of large apartment complexes as well as small operations and individual homes. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                                     4‐35                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                  CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                Table H‐23            Average Apartment Rents—2013 
                                       # of Units        Average            Average 
                   Unit Size             Tallied           Rent              Median              Rent Range 
                    Studio                  1               ---                ---                  $800
                      1 BR                 30            $1,333              $1,364              $973-$1,536
                      2 BR                 33            $1,747              $1,722             $1,161-$2,379
                      3 BR                 25            $2,184              $2,195             $1,500-$3,200
                      4 BR                 20            $2,670              $2,600             $2,395-$3,100
                      5 BR                  5            $2,600              $2,350             $2,200-$3,650
                      Total               114            $1,925              $1,895              $800-$3,650
                SOURCE:  Craigslist.org, September 25 to October 1.
 
In  addition  to  apartments,  some  single‐family  homes  are  also  used  as  rentals.  Single‐family  homes  in  Simi 
Valley generally command higher rents than apartments due to the larger unit sizes and availability of private 
open space. Rental rates for homes are summarized in Table H‐24. 
 
                                       Table H‐24         Private Homes for Rent
                                                              # of Units 
                                                Size            Listed        Average Rent 
                                       Guesthouses                 1               $1,100
                                       One Bedroom                 1               $1,250
                                       Two Bedrooms                1               $1,295
                                       Three Bedrooms             11               $2,118
                                       Four Bedrooms              10               $2,768
                                       Five Bedrooms               1               $3,950
                                       SOURCE:  The Kitty Letter Rental Listing, July 30, 2013.
 
Rooms  for  rent  are  another  low  cost  housing  option.  As  of  July  2013,  there  were  10  listings  in  the  “Kitty 
Letter”,  the  local  rental  listing  source,  for  rooms  for  rent  in  Simi  Valley.  These  rooms  ranged  in  rent  from 
$525 to $760 a month. The average price for a room for rent in Simi Valley is $628, and the median price is 
$600.  They  also  require  a  security  deposit,  generally  about  one  months’  rent  to  secure  the  room.  Room 
rentals offer an affordable and reasonable alternative to single and two‐person extremely low‐ and very low‐
income households. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐36                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY BY INCOME 
Housing affordability is an important indicator of quality of life. Households that spend a substantial portion 
of  their  income  on  housing  costs  may  be  at  risk  of  becoming  homeless  in  the  event  of  unexpected 
circumstances  such  as  illness  or  loss  of  employment.  Based  on  the  State  Department  of  Housing  and 
Community  Development’s  2013  income  limits  for  Ventura  County4  and  current  real  estate  prices, 
homeownership in Simi Valley is beyond the reach of most lower and median‐income households, which is 
shown in Table H‐25. Some low‐income and most median and moderate‐income households can afford the 
market rents for apartments in Simi Valley. Most low‐income households and some median and moderate‐
income  households  cannot  afford  average  rents  for  single‐family  homes  or  townhomes.  Most  low‐income 
households can afford room rentals.  
 
                                                            
4
   The income limits published by the state Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) are slightly different 
than income units published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Specifically, HUD‐funded 
programs have a maximum income limit established at 80 percent of the Area Median Income (AMI), while many state‐funded 
programs may also benefit households with 120 percent of the AMI. Since the Housing Element is a state requirement, this 
report and the Housing Element of the General Plan must conform to the income limits published by the state. Specific 
housing program eligibility, however, is determined by the funding program requirements. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐37                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H‐25           Affordable Housing Cost 
                              Affordable Housing Cost           Utilities, Taxes, and Insurance                Affordable Price 
                                                                                            Taxes/ 
     Annual Income               Rent       Purchase          Rent             Sale       Insurance         Rent            Sale 
Extremely Low-income (30% of Area Median Income)
 1-Person       $18,800          $470         $470            $173             $201          $94            $297          $40,729
 3-Person       $24,150          $604         $604            $234             $275          $121           $370          $48,409
 4-Person       $26,800          $670         $670            $268             $332          $134           $402          $47,478
 5-Person       $28,950          $724         $724            $308             $383          $145           $416          $45,616
Very Low-income (50% of Area Median Income)
 1-Person       $31,300          $783         $783            $173             $201          $157           $610          $98,912
 3-Person       $40,200        $1,005        $1,005           $234             $275          $201           $771         $123,117
 4-Person       $44,650        $1,116        $1,116           $268             $332          $223           $848         $130,564
 5-Person       $48,250        $1,206        $1,206           $308             $383          $241           $898         $135,452
Low-income (80% of Area Median Income)
 1-Person       $49,850        $1,246        $1,246           $173             $201          $249          $1,073        $185,257
 3-Person       $64,100        $1,603        $1,603           $234             $275          $321          $1,369        $234,364
 4-Person       $71,200        $1,780        $1,780           $268             $332          $356          $1,512        $254,146
 5-Person       $76,900        $1,923        $1,923           $308             $383          $385          $1,615        $268,809
Median Income (100% of Area Median Income)
 1-Person       $62,500        $1,563        $1,823           $173             $201          $365          $1,390        $292,625
 3-Person       $80,350        $2,009        $2,344           $234             $275          $469          $1,775        $372,337
 4-Person       $89,300        $2,233        $2,605           $268             $332          $521          $1,965        $407,674
 5-Person       $96,450        $2,411        $2,813           $308             $383          $563          $2,103        $434,632
Moderate Income (120% of Area Median Income)
 1-Person       $75,000        $1,875        $2,188           $173             $201          $438          $1,702        $360,506
 3-Person       $96,450        $2,411        $2,813           $234             $275          $563          $2,177        $459,767
 4-Person      $107,150        $2,679        $3,125           $268             $332          $625          $2,411        $504,608
 5-Person      $115,700        $2,893        $3,375           $308             $383          $675          $2,585        $539,169
SOURCES:  California Department of Housing and Community Development 2013; Veronica Tam and Associates 
Assumptions: 2013 HCD income limits; 30% gross household income as affordable housing cost; 20% of monthly affordable cost for 
taxes and insurance; 10% down payment; and 4% interest rate for a 30‐year fixed‐rate mortgage loan. Utilities based on Ventura 
County Utility Allowance, 2013. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐38                                            GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Project‐Based Rental Housing Assistance 
State  law  requires  the  City  to  identify,  analyze,  and  propose  programs  to  preserve  housing  units  that  are 
currently restricted to low‐income housing use and that will become unrestricted and possibly be lost as low‐
income housing. Specifically, state law requires the following: 
    ■ An inventory of restricted lower income housing projects in the City and their potential for conversion; 
    ■ An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing the units “at risk” and a comparison of these 
        costs; 
    ■ An analysis of the organizational and financial resources available for preserving and/or replacing the 
        units “at risk”; and 
    ■ Programs for preserving the “at risk” units. 
TENANT BASED RENTAL ASSISTANCE 
The Area Housing Authority of the County of Ventura reports that 808 Simi Valley households or individuals 
were  receiving  Section 8  vouchers  in  July  2013  (Table H‐26).  Elderly  households  make  up  36 percent  of 
Section 8 recipients, 33 percent are householders with disabilities, and approximately 32 percent are family 
households. However, among those households on the waiting list for Section 8 assistance, the greatest need 
is among family households (60 percent). 
 
                              Table H‐26           Rental Assistance in Simi Valley 
                                                Households Currently       Households on 
                               Household         Receiving Section 8       Waiting List for 
                                   Type              Vouchers            Section 8 Assistance 
                              Family                    255                      60%
                              Elderly                   287
                                                                                 40%
                              Disabled                  266
                                       Total            808                     100%
                              SOURCE:  Area Housing Authority of the County of Ventura, 2013. 
 
INVENTORY OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND AT‐RISK 
STATUS 
The City maintains programs to provide quality housing affordable to different income groups for a healthy 
and  sustainable  community.  One  of  the  primary  means  of  providing  affordable  housing  is  through 
negotiation  with  developers  to  incorporate  affordable  units  within  new  residential  development  projects. 
The  City  offers  density  bonuses  and  financial  incentives  to  encourage  developers  to  designate  a  portion  of 
the units in their development as affordable to very low‐ and low‐income households. The City currently has 
26  affordable  rental  developments,  which  collectively  contain  over  1,500  affordable  units,  all  of  which  are 
affordable to extremely low, very low and low‐income households. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐39                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                          CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
U NITS AT  R ISK OF  C ONVERTING TO  M ARKET ‐R ATE  H OUSING  
State Housing Element law requires the analysis of housing that is government subsidized or otherwise deed 
restricted  (through  government  programs  and  policies)  that  may  change  from  lower‐income  housing  to 
market‐rate housing during the next ten years. The period of analysis for this Housing Element is October 15, 
2013 through October 15, 2023. There are a total of 251 affordable units in Simi Valley at risk of converting 
to  market‐rate  before  2023.  Table H‐27  lists  the  projects  with  units  at‐risk  of  converting  to  market‐rate 
housing. 
Table H‐27           Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing 
                                                Assisted Units                                                  Earliest 
                                  Total   Very                                                                  Date of 
           Project Name           Units    Low     Low  Moderate                 Funding Program              Conversion 
Projects at Risk of Converting between 2013 and 2023
Indian Oaks                        254      15       36         0               Tax Exempt Bond                  2015
Shadow Ridge Apartments            332      69        0         0       Density Bonus, Tax Exempt Bond           2015
Courtyard Apartments               20        2        3         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2015
Baywood Apartments                 112      14       11         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2016
Regency (S)                        23        8       14         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2016
Patricia Village (S)               36       35        0         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2019
Westgate Apartments                 31      12        6         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2019
Heywood Place Apartments           14       1        3          0                No public funding               2020
Pepper Tree Court (S)              38        7       15         0          Density Bonus, CDA Grant              2020
                      Total Units
                                   860    (163)     (88)        0             Total Restricted Units at Risk: 251
(Total Units at Risk in 10 Years)
Projects at Risk After 2023
                                                                        Density Bonus, Tax Exempt Bond,
Ashlee Manor (S)                   112      24       44         0                                                2033
                                                                                    CDA grant
Heywood Gardens (S)                75       74        0         0                CDA, Section 202                2033
                                                                         Density Bonus, LIHTC, CDA loan
Las Serenas (S)                    108      54       53         0                                                2050
                                                                          and grant, Tax Exempt Bond
                                                                        Density Bonus, HOME, CDA loan,
Sorrento Villas (S)                148      26      120         0                                                2054
                                                                            LIHTC Tax Exempt Bond
Seasons (S)                        69       68        0         0        Density Bonus, LIHTC, CDA loan          2055
Harmony Terrace (S)                136     133        1         0        Density Bonus, LIHTC, CDA loan          2054
                                                                        Density Bonus, Tax-Exempt Bond,
Hidden Valley                      324      65       16         0                                                2058
                                                                                     CDA loan
Casa de Paz                        14       14       0          0            Section 811, CDA loan               2056
Plaza de Sol                       70       14       20         0     LIHTC, Tax-Exempt Bond, CDA loan           2060
                                                                        Density Bonus, Tax Exempt Bond,
Vintage Paseo (S)                  176      43      133         0                                                2059
                                                                                 LIHTC, CDA loan
Hillview Apartments                20        2        2         0        Density Bonus, No public funding        2060
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      4‐40                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Table H‐27              Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing 
                                                         Assisted Units                                                 Earliest 
                                         Total     Very                                                                 Date of 
            Project Name                 Units     Low       Low  Moderate                   Funding Program          Conversion 
Pattywood Place                            20        2         2           0         Density Bonus, No public funding    2060
Archstone Apartments                      500        0        50           0                 No public funding           2061
Haven at Tapo Street (S)                  36        26        9            0                      LIHTC                  2063
La Rahada                                  8         8         0           0             MHSA, MHP, CDA loan             2063
Vista del Monte Apartments                  4        4         0           0                       CDA                   2058
Peppertreea                               11        11         0           0                HOME, CDA loan               2065
                          Total Units  3,551        568      450           0
SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, 2013. 
S = senior project 
a.  Project is currently in escrow and should be in service within six to nine months. 
PRESERVATION OPTIONS 
This analysis focuses on the housing projects that will expire before 2023 (ten years from 2013). 
R ENT  S UBSIDIES  
Tenant‐based  rent  subsidies  could  be  used  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  housing.  Similar  to  Section 8 
vouchers,  the  City,  through  a  variety  of  potential  funding  sources,  could  provide  rent  subsidies  to  lower‐ 
income households. 
The  level  of  the  subsidy  required  to  preserve  the  at‐risk  units  is  estimated  to  equal  the  Fair  Market  Rent 
(FMR)  for  a  unit  minus  the  housing  cost  affordable  by  a  very  low  or  low‐income  household.  Table H‐28 
estimates  the  rent  subsidies  required  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  the  251  at‐risk  units.  Based  on  the 
estimates and assumptions shown in this table, approximately $15,719 in rent subsidies would be required 
annually, per unit. Typically, the City requires a 55‐year affordability covenant, and the total subsidy is more 
than $217 million, not accounting for inflation. 
P URCHASE OF  A FFORDABILITY  C OVENANT  
Another  option  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  at‐risk  projects  is  to  provide  an  incentive  package  to  the 
owners to maintain the project as lower‐income housing. Incentives could include writing down the interest 
rate on the remaining loan balance, and/or supplementing the Section 8 subsidy amount received to market 
levels. 
T RANSFER OF  O WNERSHIP  
Long‐term affordability of lower‐income units can be secured by the purchase of these projects by non‐profit 
housing  organizations.  By  doing  so,  these  units  would  be  eligible  for  a  greater  range  of  government 
assistance. Table H‐29 shows the estimated market value of the combined at‐risk affordable housing units in 
the City. The market value of all 251 units is over $54 million. Given the high cost of so many units, relative to 
very  low  and  low‐income  rental  payment,  mortgage  assistance  would  likely  be  required  for  any  nonprofit 
GENERAL PLAN                                                        4‐41                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                    CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
organizations to purchase the project; rental income alone from the very low‐income tenants would not be 
adequate to cover the mortgage payment. 
 
  Table H‐28           Rent Subsidies Required 
                                                      At‐Risk Units                                               All Units 
  Very Low-Income Units Monthly Rental Income
  1-Bedroom (89 units)                                                                                             $98,078
  2-Bedroom (62 units)                                                                                             $91,698
  3-Bedroom (12 units)                                                                                             $24,516
                                          Total monthly rental income supported by affordable housing cost
                                                                                                                  $214,292
                                                                                  of very low-income households
  Low-Income Units Monthly Rental Income
  1-Bedroom (52 units)                                                                                             $57,304
  2-Bedroom (29 units)                                                                                             $42,891
  3-Bedroom (7 units)                                                                                              $14,301
           Total monthly rental income supported by affordable housing cost of low-income households              $114,496
  Total Annual Subsidies Required                                                                                $3,945,456
  Average Annual Subsidy per Unit                                                                                 $15,719
  Average Monthly Subsidy per Unit                                                                                 $1,310
  SOURCE:  Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013 
  Fair Market Rents are provided by HUD 2014 
 
 
                     Table H‐29             Market Value of At‐Risk Housing Units 
                                            Project Units                                     Value 
                                          1 BR (182 units)                                  $2,555,436
                                          2 BR (189 units)                                  $1,907,724
                                           3 BR (33 units)                                   $497,952
                                     Annual Operating Costs                                  $85,185
                                      Gross Annual Income                                   $4,428,056
                                       Net Annual Income                                   $4,342,8710
                                            Market Value                                   $54,285,893
                     SOURCE:  Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013
                     Market value for all projects is estimated with the following assumptions: 
                        ■ Average market rent is based on Table H‐23: 1 BR $1,333; 2 BR $1,747; 3BR $2,184 
                        ■ Average bedroom size: 1 BR 600 sf., 2 BR 900 sf.; 3 BR 1,200 sf. 
                        ■ Vacancy Rate = 5% 
                        ■ Annual Operating Expense per square foot = $4.50 
                        ■ Market Value = Net Annual Income*Multiplication Factor 
                        ■ Multiplication factor for a building in good condition is 12.5 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                               4‐42                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
R EPLACEMENT  O PTIONS  
The  cost of developing new housing depends on a variety of factors such as density, size of units, location 
and related land costs, and type of construction. Assuming an average development cost  of approximately 
$226,255  per  unit  for  multi‐family  rental  housing  ($300  per  square  foot,  assuming  average  unit  sizes  of 
600 square  feet  (sf)  for  one‐bedroom,  900 sf  for  two‐bedroom,  and  1,200 sf  for  three‐bedroom), 
replacement  of  the  251  at‐risk  units  would  require  approximately  $57  million.  This  cost  estimate  includes 
land, construction permits, on‐ and off‐site improvements and other costs. Since the City has been providing 
an  average  of  $25,000  per  bedroom  in  subsidies  for  affordable  rental  housing  projects,  this  would  require 
$10,525,000 in subsidies. 
C OST  C OMPARISON  
The  cost  estimates  provided  in  the  Housing  Element  are  intended  for  a  general  comparison  of  cost 
implications.   Specific costs involved for preservation versus new construction would depend on the specific 
market  conditions,  building  conditions,  and  financial  positions  of  the  projects.  The  cost  of  transferring 
ownership  of  the  units  is  over  $54  million  while  construction  of  new  units  would  cost  $57  million  and 
providing  rent  subsidies  for  55  years  would  result  in  a  cost  of  approximately  $217  million.  Based  on  this 
analysis,  transferring  ownership  and  new  construction  would  be  the  most  feasible  options  to  maintain  the 
long‐term affordability of the 251 at‐risk units in the City. 
R ESOURCES FOR  P RESERVATION  
Nonprofit housing providers and funding resources potentially available to the City to pursue preservation of 
the at‐risk units are discussed in the “Housing Resources” section of this Housing Element. 
  Estimated Housing Needs 
The  Comprehensive  Housing  Affordability  Strategy  (CHAS)  developed  by  the  Census  for  HUD  provides 
detailed  information  on  housing  needs  by  income  level  for  different  types  of  households  (owners  versus 
renters, elderly households, and large and small households) in Simi Valley. Detailed CHAS data based on the 
2006‐2010 ACS is displayed in Table H‐30. Housing problems considered by CHAS include: 
    ■  Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom); 
    ■  Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room); 
    ■  Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or 
    ■  Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross income. 
However,  the  CHAS  data  does  not  provide  separate  accounting  of  overcrowding  or  substandard  housing 
conditions. These are included in the overall category of households with housing problems, and a household 
can have multiple housing problems. 
The  types  of  problems  vary  according  to  household  income,  type  and  tenure.  Overall,  46 percent  of  all 
households  in  the  City  experienced  some  housing  problems.  However,  housing  problems  were  more 
prevalent among extremely low and very low‐income households, especially among large families. Within the 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐43                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                      CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
 low‐income group, housing cost burden impacted a larger proportion of owners than renters, indicating the 
 relative affordability of the rental housing stock to low‐income households, compared to ownership housing. 
  
 Table H‐30              Estimated Housing Needs  
                                                           Renters                                 Owners 
 Household Income by Type, Income                           Large          Total                    Large         Total         Total 
          and Housing Problem                  Elderly     Families      Rentersa     Elderly      Families     Ownersa  Households
Extremely Low-income
                                                 700          250          2095          835           95          1475         3570
(0–30% MFI)
     % with any housing problems               51.4%        98.0%         59.9%        76.0%       100.0%         85.1%        70.3%
     % with cost burden >30%                   51.4%        98.0%         53.9%        76.0%       100.0%         85.4%        66.9%
     % with cost burden >50%                   42.9%        98.0%         47.0%        61.1%       100.0%         73.9%        58.1%
Very Low-income
                                                 245          175         1,175          850          220         1,905        3,080
(31–50% MFI)
     % with any housing problems               51.0%       100.0%         89.8%        48.2%        97.7%         73.0%        79.4%
     % with cost burden >30%                   46.9%        97.1%         89.4%        48.2%        97.7%         73.0%        79.2%
     % with cost burden >50%                   28.6%        51.4%         59.6%        27.6%        72.7%         56.4%        57.6%
Low-income
                                                 280          270         2,220        1,120          465         3,755         5,975
(51–80% MFI)
     % with any housing problems               51.8%        72.2%         76.8%        50.0%        96.8%         70.4%        72.8%
     % with cost burden >30%                   42.9%        48.1%         69.1%        50.0%        78.5%         68.0%        68.5%
     % with cost burden >50%                    0.0%        24.1%         13.3%        21.9%        52.7%         37.4%        28.5%
Low-income
                                                 235          390         4,855        3,190        2,960        23,155        28,010
(>80% MFI)
     % with any housing problems               34.0%        14.1%         20.1%        20.8%        45.4%         35.5%        32.9%
     % with cost burden >30%                   33.2%        11.3%         17.7%        20.7%        40.4%         34.7%        31.7%
     % with cost burden >50%                    1.7%         0.0%          0.7%         4.7%         7.9%          7.5%         6.4%
Total Households                                1,460       1,085         10,345       5,995        3,740        30,290        40,635
        % with any housing problems            48.6%        61.8%         48.2%        37.9%        56.3%         44.6%        45.6%
              % with cost burden >30%          46.1%        54.3%         44.2%        37.8%        50.0%         43.7%        43.8%
              % with cost burden >50%          25.6%        36.9%         19.5%        19.0%        19.7%         17.5%        18.0%
 SOURCE:  HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), based on 2006‐2010 ACS.
 a.  Data presented in this table are based on special tabulations from sample ACS data. The number of households in each category 
     usually deviates slightly from the 100 percent count due to the need to extrapolate sample data out to total households. 
     Interpretations of these data should focus on the proportion of households in need of assistance rather than on precise numbers. 
     Totals for renters, owners and households will not add up within the table because some subcategories are not presented in the 
     table, however, all totals are accurate. 
  
                                            
 CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                4‐44                                         GENERAL PLAN 
  

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
HOUSING CONSTRAINTS 
Although the City of Simi Valley strives to ensure the provision of adequate and affordable housing to meet 
the needs of the community, many factors can constrain the development, maintenance, and improvement 
of housing. These include market mechanisms, government regulations and policies, and infrastructure and 
environmental constraints. This section addresses these potential constraints that may affect the supply and 
cost of housing in Simi Valley. 
  Non‐Governmental Constraints 
Locally  and  regionally  there  are  several  constraints  that  hinder  the  City’s  ability  to  accommodate  the 
community’s housing needs. The high cost of land, rising development costs, and neighborhood opposition 
make it expensive for developers to build affordable housing. These constraints may result in housing that is 
not  affordable  to  low  and  moderate‐income  households,  or  may  render  residential  construction 
economically infeasible for developers. 
HOUSING MAINTENANCE 
The City has no regulations and policies that would constrain housing maintenance. The City has adopted a 
Property Maintenance Ordinance, which establishes minimum standards for the maintenance of residential 
properties.  These  requirements  are  enforced  by  the  City’s  Code  Enforcement  and  Building  and  Safety 
Divisions and help maintain the City’s housing stock. 
The major constraint to housing maintenance is funding related. Often, a homeowner carries a first mortgage 
for  the  home  already  and  making  substantial  improvements  to  the  home  may  require  obtaining  a  second 
mortgage or refinancing to take equity from the home. Such financing arrangements may be challenging to 
lower  and  moderate  income  households  whose  debt‐to‐income  ratio  may  be  too  high  to  qualify  for 
additional financing for home improvements. To assist lower and moderate income households in making the 
necessary improvements, the City offers rehabilitation assistance to income‐qualified households.  However, 
with the dissolution of redevelopment and significant reductions in federal funds, the City has limited ability 
to provide assistance for housing rehabilitation. 
LAND AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS 
High  development  costs  in  the  region  stifle  potential  affordable  housing  developments.  Construction  costs 
for  residential  units  have  increased  rapidly  over  the  last  decade,  particularly  the  land  costs.  Furthermore, 
neighborhood  resistance  to  some  developments  lengthens  development  time,  driving  up  costs  for  holding 
the  property.  The  difficulty  of  developing  small,  infill  sites  can  also  constrain  housing  development  in 
communities such as Simi Valley. 
One  cost  factor  associated  with  residential  building  is  the  cost  of  building  materials,  which  can  comprise  a 
significant portion of the sales price of a home. An indicator of construction costs is Building Valuation Data 
compiled  by  the  International  Code  Council  (ICC).  The  unit  costs  compiled  by  the  ICC  include  structural, 
electrical, plumbing, and mechanical work, in addition to interior finish and normal site preparation. The data 
is national and does  not  take into account regional differences,  and does not include the  price of  the land 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐45                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
upon which the building is built. The national average for development costs per square foot for apartments 
and single‐family homes in August 2013 are as follows: 
 
      Type I or II, Multi‐Family: $131.94 to $150.25 per sq. ft. 
      Type V Wood Frame, Multi‐Family: $100.18 to $104.74 per sq. ft. 
      Type V Wood Frame, One and Two Family Dwelling: $110.29 to $117.71 per sq. ft. 
The  unit  costs  for  residential  care  facilities  generally  range  between  $126.72  and  $177.76  per  square  foot. 
These costs are exclusive of the costs of land and soft costs, such as entitlements, financing, etc. Reduction in 
amenities  and  the  quality  of  building  materials  (above  a  minimum  acceptability  for  health,  safety,  and 
adequate  performance)  could  lower  costs  and  associated  sales  prices  or  rents.  In  addition,  prefabricated 
factory‐built housing may provide for lower priced housing by reducing construction and labor costs. Another 
factor related to construction costs is development density. As the number of units increases, overall costs 
generally decrease due to economies of scale. The City's ability to mitigate high construction costs is limited 
without direct subsidies. 
While  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  is  extensively  developed,  there  are  vacant  and  underutilized  areas  that  can 
accommodate  new  housing.  The  largest  concentrations  of  undeveloped  land  for  new  residential 
development are along the City’s north and southwestern periphery extending into the hillsides of the City’s 
sphere of influence. However, these areas are likely to contain important wildlife habitats and constraints on 
development  such  as  steep  slopes,  and  fire  or  seismic  hazards,  which  are  discussed  below.  Historically, 
development  has  varied in these areas according  to the degree and sensitivity of  constraints encountered. 
Most  recent  housing  developments  have  been  planned  to  respect  and  maintain  the  hillside’s  unique 
character and resources. For the most part, development on hillsides has been very limited and the unique 
site  preparation  costs  associated  with  such  development  have  rendered  such  housing  affordable  to  only 
above moderate‐income households. 
Vacant or underutilized areas that could accommodate additional housing are primarily located on the City’s 
valley  floor.  However,  many  of  these  sites  are  small.  Other  larger  sites  are  primarily  in  mountain  side 
locations and are constrained by environmental factors and the City’s Hillside Performance Standards. 
The price of raw land and any necessary improvements is a key component of the total cost of housing. The 
City’s  supply  of  vacant  residential  land  is  limited.  A  survey  of  listings  on  Realtor.com  in  September  2013 
found  32  vacant  parcels  in  lower  density  residential  neighborhoods  of  Simi  Valley,  priced  at  approximately 
$62,500 per acre. Properties that have received entitlement permits, however, are typically more expensive.  
Under the City’s current Development Code, a density bonus up to 35 percent over the otherwise maximum 
allowable  residential  density  under  the  applicable  zoning  district  is  available  to  developers  who  provide 
affordable housing as part of their projects. The City may, at its election, award additional density bonuses up 
to a maximum of 50 units per acre. Developers of affordable housing are also entitled to receive incentives 
on a sliding scale to a maximum of three, where the amount of density bonus and number of incentives vary 
according to the amount of affordable housing units provided. Density bonuses, together with the incentives 
and/or concessions, result in a lower average cost of land per dwelling unit (as more units can be built on the 
property), thereby making the provision of affordable housing more feasible. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐46                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
AVAILABILITY OF MORTGAGE FINANCING 
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to disclose information 
on the disposition of loan applications and the income, gender, and race of loan applicants. The data for Simi 
Valley  was  compiled  by  census  tract  and  aggregated  to  the  area  that  generally  approximates  the  City 
boundaries. 
With the influx of bad loans many banks are now facing bank failure and securing home financing is difficult 
for even credit worthy applicants. Interest rates have again been cut by the federal government but credit is 
still  scarce  because  banks  remain  wary  to  lend.  With  the  recent  approval  of  the  American  Recovery  and 
Reinvestment Act, it is expected that banks will once again start lending and properly qualified households 
will  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  the  new  lower  home  prices.  The  HMDA  information  in  Table H‐31  is  a 
summary of loan applications submitted in 20115, the most recent year for which data are available as of the 
writing of this Housing Element. 
 
   Table H‐31                     Disposition of Home Purchase, Refinance and Improvement Loans—2011 
                                                                                    Approved 
                                  Total Applications            Originated         Not Accepted       Denied          Other 
       Loan Type                      #                %       #         %         #         %     #          %    #         % 
   Government
   Backed                           730            100.0%     520      71.2%      50       6.8%   94       12.9%  66       9.0%
   Purchase Loans
   Conventional
                                   1,232          100.0%      819      66.5%      99       8.0%   171      13.9%  143     11.6%
   Purchase Loans
   Refinance                       6,616          100.0%     4,294     64.9%      412      6.2%  1,005     15.2%  905     13.7%
   Home
   Improvement                      259            100.0%     152      58.7%      19       7.3%   43       16.6%  45      17.4%
   Loans
                    Total          8,837          100.0%     5,785     65.5%      580      6.6%  1,313     14.9% 1,159    13.1%
   SOURCE:  www.LendingPatterns.comTM, 2013.
   “Approved Not Accepted” are those applications approved by the lenders but not accepted by the applicants. 
   “Other” includes loan applications that were either withdrawn or closed for incompleteness. 
 
Conventional home mortgages in Simi Valley accounted for only 14 percent of all loan applications in the City 
in 2011. The largest proportion of applications was for refinancing (75 percent). Approximately 66 percent of 
all applications were originated.6 Government backed loans followed by conventional loans had the highest 
rate of origination. The highest denial rate was in home improvement loans due probably to the high debt‐
to‐income  ratio  when  taking  the  mortgage  loan  into  consideration.  However,  home  improvement  loans 
accounted approximately 3 percent of all applications. 
There  were  730  government‐backed  loan  applications  in  Simi  Valley  in  2011,  accounting  for  approximately 
8 percent  of  all  applications.  Government‐backed  loans  are  provided  through  private  lenders  and  are 
guaranteed  by  the  federal  government  (the  Federal  Housing  Administration).  In  Simi  Valley  the  mortgage 
                                                            
5
   2012 HMDA data will not be available until the end of 2013. 
6
   An originated loan is one that is approved by the lender and accepted by the applicant. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                                 4‐47                       CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
limit for a FHA loan is $729,750 for a single‐family home. There are no income limits on who can obtain an 
FHA loan, and FHA loans do offer some flexibility in credit scores and downpayment requirements. However, 
applicants must still qualify for a loan through the traditional methods of income verification and a reputable 
credit  history.  While  FHA  loans  are  an  important  option  in  the  mortgage  market,  they  do  not  make 
homeownership more attainable for lower‐income households because the households must still be earning 
an adequate income to support monthly mortgage payments.  
F ORECLOSURES  
Foreclosure  occurs  when  households  fall  behind  on  one  or  more  scheduled  mortgage  payments.  The 
foreclosure  process  can  be  halted  if  the  homeowner  is  able  to  bring  their  mortgage  payments  current.  If 
payments  cannot  be  resumed  or  the  debt  cannot  be  resolved,  the  lender  can  legally  use  the  foreclosure 
process  to  repossess  (take  over)  the  home.    If  the  home  is  worth  less  than  the  total  amount  owed  on  the 
mortgage  loan,  a  deficiency  judgment  could  be  pursued.  The  homeowner  would  lose  their  home  and  also 
would owe the home lender an additional amount. 
Figure H‐5 illustrates the location of all the properties within the City that were in the foreclosure process as 
of August 2013.  As shown, foreclosures are not concentrated in any specific neighborhoods.  Homes can be 
in  various  stages  of  foreclosure.    Typically,  the  foreclosure  process  begins  with  the  issuance  of  a  Notice  of 
Default  (NOD).    An  NOD  serves  as  an  official  notification  to  a  borrower  that  he  or  she  is  behind  in  their 
mortgage  payments,  and  if  the  payments  are  not  paid  up,  the  lender  will  seize  the  home.    In  California, 
lenders will not usually file an NOD until a borrower is at least 90 days behind in making payments.  As of 
August 2013, 123 properties in Simi Valley were in this pre‐foreclosure stage. 
Once an NOD has been filed, borrowers are given a specific time period, typically three months, in which they 
can bring their mortgage payments current.  If payments are not made current at the end of this specified 
time  period,  a  Notice  of  Trustee  Sale  (NTS)  will  be  prepared  and  published  in  a  newspaper.    An  NTS  is  a 
formal notification of the sale of a foreclosure property.  In California, the NTS is filed 90 days following an 
NOD  when  a  property  owner  has  failed  to  make  a  property  loan  current.    Once  an  NTS  has  been  filed,  a 
property can then be sold at public auction.  According to foreclosure records, 84 properties in Simi Valley 
were in the auction stage of the foreclosure process. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐48                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                             
                               Figure H‐5        Foreclosures (August 2013) 
                                       SOURCE:   Foreclosure Radar, August 2013 
                                                           
  Governmental Constraints 
City development standards and policies can have an impact on the price and availability of housing in Simi 
Valley. Land use controls, site improvement requirements, building codes, fees, and other local programs to 
improve the overall quality of housing may serve as constraints to housing development. The following can 
affect overall housing availability, adequacy, and affordability. The following discusses the constraints: 
LAND USE CONTROLS 
G ENERAL  P LAN AND  Z ONING  
The Simi Valley General Plan and Development Code provide for a range of land use designations/zones that 
accommodate residential units: 
Open Space: 1 unit per 40 Acres 
It is intended that land use patterns in Open Space areas will be dominated by recreational uses, agricultural 
uses, grazing and very large lot estate or farm homes. To encourage the keeping of areas designated as Open 
GENERAL PLAN                                            4‐49                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Space  in  a  largely  undeveloped  state,  allowable  dwelling  units  (i.e.,  1  dwelling  unit/40 acres)  may  be 
transferred to portions of the subject parcel which are not designated Open Space. 
Residential Estate: 0–1 unit per acre; 1 acre minimum lot size 
This  designation  is  intended  to  create  a  residential  environment  typified  by  lots  of  1 acre  and  over  and 
houses of an individual design. Residential Estate lots should be grouped and be of such a number so as to 
form an identifiable neighborhood and image. 
Residential Very Low Density: 0–2 units per acre; 20,000 square feet 
minimum lot size 
This designation is intended to create a single‐family residential environment typified by half‐acre or larger 
sized  lots  that  are  not  clustered.  It  is  intended  that  this  designation  be  used  in  areas  proposed  for  animal 
keeping and similar semi‐rural uses. 
Residential Low Density: 2.1–3.5 units per acre 
This designation is intended to encourage a single‐family suburban and rural residential environment with a 
wide range of lot sizes but a low overall density. Clustering of smaller lots in order to achieve both affordable 
housing  and  to  minimize  hillside  grading  is  intended,  especially  within  larger  developments  and  outlying 
canyon areas. The Low Density designation is intended for use in the peripheral areas of the valley floor as 
well as in the outlying canyon areas, which are under 20 percent slope. 
Residential Medium Density: 3.6–5.0 units per acre 
This designation is intended to encourage a predominantly single‐family residential environment with a wide 
range of lot sizes, but an overall density similar to the bulk of single‐family developments on the valley floor. 
8,000 sf min. lot sizes are intended in this classification. The Medium Density designation is intended for use 
on the valley floor as well as in the outlying canyon areas which are under 20 percent slope. 
Residential Moderate Density: 5.1–10.0 units per acre 
This  designation  is  intended  to  create  residential  areas  composed  primarily  of  detached,  single‐family 
dwelling  units  on  small  lots.  The  Moderate  Density  designation  is  intended  for  use  mainly  on  the  central 
portion of the valley floor with limited use in outlying canyon areas. 
Residential High Density: 10.1–20 units per acre 
This designation is intended to encourage a residential environment typified by higher density townhouses, 
low‐density garden apartments and other multiple unit developments. This designation is intended for use in 
the more central areas near shopping, transit and on arterial or collector streets. 
Residential Very High: 20.1–35 units per acre 
This  designation  is  intended  to  provide  for  a  relatively  high  density  residential  environment.  Very  High 
Density  areas  are  intended  to  result  in  garden  apartments  or  similar  structures,  usually  of  two  stories  in 
height. It is intended that this designation will be limited in its use to only the central portion of the valley 
floor, on arterial streets, and near shopping, transit, and other public facilities. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐50                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
Mobile Home: 0–8 units per acre 
This designation is intended to provide areas set aside specifically for mobile home subdivisions or parks. It is 
intended that this designation will result in well‐designed mobile home projects at densities typical of most 
recent mobile home developments. 
Mixed‐Use 
This  designation  accommodates  mixed‐use  of  general  commercial  or  office  commercial  development  with 
residential uses. A maximum density of 35 units per acre for residential is provided. 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The  City’s  Development  Code  contains  development  standards  for  each  zoning  district  consistent  with  the 
land use designations of the General Plan. Residential development standards can sometimes unnecessarily 
constrain  the  development  of  housing  and  therefore  must  be  analyzed  as  part  of  the  Housing  Element 
process.  When  standards  are  too  restrictive,  they  can  limit  the  number  of  units  to  be  achieved  on  site  or 
present challenges in site planning. The Simi Valley Development Code establishes residential development 
standards for each zone to ensure quality development in the community. Development criteria, as specified 
in the Development Code, are presented in Table H‐32. Overall, the City’s residential development standards 
are  typical  to  suburban  developments  in  Ventura  County.  The  City  adopted  development  standards  to 
implement the mixed‐use designations created as part of this General Plan update. In addition, in 2012, the 
City increased the allowable densities in a number of its residential zones in order to maintain consistency 
with the updated General Plan and State law regarding density bonuses. 
M IXED ‐U SE  (MU)   O VERLAY  D ISTRICT  
As part of the General Plan update, the City created a Mixed‐Use Overlay designation. To implement this land 
use  designation,  the  City  adopted  a  Mixed‐Use  (MU)  Overlay  district.  The  Mixed‐Use  Overlay  allows 
properties  to  be  developed  with  commercial  retail  or  offices  uses  on  the  ground  floor  and  housing  on  the 
second floor or above; a mix of differing land uses distributed horizontally on a site; or a single land use, as 
designated on the Community Subareas and Districts Maps. Single‐use developments, however, must meet 
development standards prescribed for that land use type (i.e., commercial retail development must meet all 
required commercial development standards). The MU Overlay district provides an opportunity to increase 
the variety of housing types and to revitalize deteriorating commercial areas by integrating infill residential 
uses. The specific development standards for the MU Overlay district are described below: 
    ■ Residential Density: 20.1 to 35 units per acre. 
    ■ Percentage of Project as Residential Uses: A minimum of 50 percent of the project's floor area must 
       be developed and maintained as residential uses. 
    ■ Percentage of Project as Commercial Uses: A minimum of 25 percent of the project's floor area must 
       be developed and maintained as commercial uses. 
    ■ Setbacks: Setback requirements are the same as for developments in the RVH zone. 
GENERAL PLAN                                              4‐51                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                                   CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H‐32             Basic Residential Development Standards 
                                                                                                             Zoning Designation 
       Development Standard               OS              RE          RVL              RL             RM          RMod             RH                  RVH            MH             MU 
  Minimum Net Lot Area                 40 acres         1 acre     20,000 sf        10,000 sf      8,000 sf      5,000 sf                    5,000 sf               2 acres           —
  Density Maximum (du/acre)           1/40 acres         1.0          2.0            2.1-3.5        3.6-5.0      5.1-10.0       10.1-20.0           20.1-35.0       0.0-8.0      20.1-35.0
  Minimum Lot Width                       —             125 ft.      100 ft.          80 ft.                                          40 ft.
      Minimum Setbacks (feet)
       Fronta                             50              20                                  20                                   20                   20            20             20
       Side                               50              10                               6 to 10                                 15                   10           none            10
       Rear                               50              20                                  20                                   20                   20            20             20
  Maximum Height                                                               2 stories/ 30 feet                                               3 stories/ 40 feet  25 feet   4 stories/55 feet
  SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, 2013. 
  sf = square feet 
  a.  Front setback in the RH and RVH zones is 20 ft. plus an additional 1 ft. for each 1 ft. portion of building over 15 ft. in height. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                               4‐52                                                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
H EIGHT  L IMITS  
The  City’s  Development  Code  currently  limits  building  heights  in  the  Very  High  Density  Residential  zone  to 
three  stories  or  40 feet.  The  Land  Use  Element  indicates  that  building  heights  for  Very  High  Density 
development  (up  to  50 units  per  acre  with  a  density  bonus)  are  intended  for  structures  of  three  or  more 
stories. The expectation is that affordable housing projects over three stories or 40 feet in height can request 
a concession from the Development Code requirement to exceed the height limit of three stories or 40 feet. 
Also, the Development Code allows the height limit to be exceeded subject to the approval of a Conditional 
Use Permit. 
P ARKING  R EQUIREMENTS  
All residential uses are required to provide the number of parking spaces specified in Table H‐33. In 2013, the 
City amended the Municipal Code to establish new parking requirements for multi‐family housing. The City 
now varies parking requirements for multi‐family housing by the number of bedrooms in a unit (instead of by 
unit  size)  to  accommodate  a  lower  parking  requirement  for  projects  intended  to  serve  smaller  households 
including seniors and persons with disabilities. Furthermore, only one space is required to be covered. 
 
  Table H‐33           Simi Valley Parking Requirements 
                Use                                                     Parking Requirement 
  Single-Family                    2 car enclosed garage per unit.
                                   Studio: 1 space per unit
                                   One-Bedroom: 1.5 spaces per unit
  Multi-Family, Condominiums       Two-Bedroom: 2 spaces per unit
  or attached dwelling units       Three or More Bedrooms: 2.5 spaces per unit
                                   Plus 0.5 guest spaces per unit
                                   A minimum of one space per unit must be covered.
  Secondary Dwelling Units         1 covered space per unit or one per bedroom, whichever is greater.
                                   2 spaces per unit, which may be in tandem, 1 of which shall be covered;
  Mobile Home Parks                1 space per 5 mobile homes as a guest space; and
                                   1 space per 5 mobile homes as a recreational vehicle storage space.
  Senior Citizen Dwelling Units    1.2 covered space per unit
                                   1.5 spaces per sleeping room or 1 space per 100 sf of gross floor area, whichever is
  Boarding Houses, Dormitories,
                                   greater. (This parking requirement does not apply to transitional or supportive housing that
  and Rooming Houses
                                   is developed as regular housing.)
                                   1 space per unit for studios and seniors-only units;
                                   1.5 spaces per unit for one-bedroom units;
                                   2 spaces per unit for two-bedroom units; and
  Mixed-Use Development            2.5 spaces per unit for units with three or more bedrooms.
                                   A minimum of one guest parking space shall be provided for every 5 units, regardless of
                                   unit type. A minimum of one guest parking space shall be provided for complexes with
                                   fewer than five units.
  SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley Municipal Code, 2013.
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                   4‐53                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                           CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Developers  of  affordable  housing  who  are  eligible  for  a  density  bonus  pursuant  to  Government  Code 
Sections 65919–65918  may  receive  a  reduction  in  required  parking.  The  City  has  adopted  a  density  bonus 
ordinance  to  inform  prospective  developers  about  incentives  that  are  available  to  qualifying  affordable 
and/or senior housing projects. 
PROVISION FOR A VARIETY OF HOUSING TYPES 
State Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions identify adequate sites to be made available through 
appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the development of various types of housing 
for  all  economic  segments  of  the  population.  This  includes  single‐family  housing,  multi‐family  housing, 
factory‐built  or  manufactured  housing,  emergency  shelters,  and  transitional  housing  among  others. 
Table H‐34  summarizes  the  housing  types  permitted  and  conditionally  permitted  under  the  Development 
Code. 
 
         Table H‐34           Use Regulations for Residential Districts 
                         Uses                    OS     RE     RVL      RL     RM  RMod   RH  RVH  MH     MU 
         Single-Family Dwellings                 P      P       P       P       P    P    —    —    —      —
         Multi-Family Dwellings                  —      —       —       —      —     P     P   P    —      P
         Mobile Home Parks                       —     CUP     CUP    CUP     CUP   CUP  CUP  CUP  PD      —
         Manufactured Housing                    P      P       P       P       P    P    —    —    —      —
         Residential Care Facility (6 or less)   P      P       P       P       P    P     P   P     P     P
         Residential Care Facility (7 or more)   —      —       —     CUP     CUP   CUP  CUP   —    —     CUP
         Secondary Dwelling Unit                 P      P       P       P       P    —    —    —    —      —
         SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley Development Code, 2011.
         P = Permitted; CUP = Conditional Use Permit required; — = Not permitted 
 
S INGLE ‐F AMILY  D WELLINGS  
Single‐family homes are permitted in the OS, RE, RVL, RL, RM and RMod zones. All of these zones (except the 
RMod zone) are designed for single‐family dwellings of various size and density. The RMod zone is for single‐
family  and  multi‐family  dwellings.  The  Simi  Valley  Development  Code  defines  a  single‐family  dwelling  as  a 
building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family. This includes factory‐built, modular housing 
units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code, and mobile homes/manufactured housing 
units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 
places on permanent foundations. Therefore, manufactured housing units or mobile homes on a permanent 
foundation are permitted where single‐family housing units are permitted by right. 
M ULTI ‐F AMILY  D WELLINGS  
As of January 2011, multi‐family housing units constituted approximately 17 percent of Simi Valley’s housing 
stock.  The  Development  Code  provides  for  multi‐family  developments  in  the  RMod,  RH,  RVH,  and  MU 
Overlay zones. The maximum density for the RVH zone is 35 units per acre. Density bonuses are permitted in 
zones permitting multi‐family housing. Therefore, the allowable densities in Simi Valley are sufficient to allow 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                             4‐54                             GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
for the development of affordable housing. Multi‐family projects with fewer than 4 units can be approved by 
staff. 
M OBILE  H OME  P ARKS  
Mobile homes offer an affordable housing option to many low and moderate‐income households. According 
to the California Department of Finance, there are 892 mobile homes in the City. Mobile Home Parks require 
a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in most residential districts and a Planned Development Permit (PD) in the 
MH district. 
M ANUFACTURED  H OUSING  
Factory‐built, modular homes constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile 
homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and 
Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundations, are considered single‐family dwellings and 
treated as such. 
S ECOND  D WELLING  U NITS  
Second  dwelling  units  are  attached  or  detached  dwelling  units  that  provide  complete  independent  living 
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation. 
Second units may be an alternative source of affordable housing for lower‐income households and seniors. 
California  law  requires  local  jurisdictions  to  adopt  ordinances  that  establish  the  conditions  under  which 
second  dwelling  units  are  permitted  (Government  Code,  Section 65852.2).  A  jurisdiction  cannot  adopt  an 
ordinance  that  precludes  the  development  of  second  units  unless  findings  are  made  acknowledging  that 
allowing second units may limit housing opportunities of the region and result in adverse impacts on public 
health, safety, and welfare. An amendment to the state’s second unit law in September 2002 required local 
governments to use a ministerial, rather than discretionary process for approving second units (i.e., second 
units otherwise compliant with local zoning standards can be approved without a public hearing). 
The  City  established  a  ministerial  process  for  approving  second  dwelling  units  on  lots  containing  a  single‐
family home or multi‐family units. Second dwelling units that do not meet state law standards for ministerial 
approval can be approved with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in all single‐family residential zones (OS, RE, 
RVL, RL and RM) in Simi Valley. 
R ESIDENTIAL  C ARE  F ACILITIES  
Residential care facilities can be described as any family home, group care facility or similar facility, including 
some  transitional  housing  facilities,  for  24‐hour  non‐medical  care  of  persons  in  need  of  personal  services, 
supervision,  or  assistance  essential  for  sustaining  the  activities  of  daily  living.  In  accordance  with  state  law 
(Lanterman  Developmental  Disability  Services  Act,  AB  846,  compiled  of  divisions  4.1,  4.5  and  4.7  of  the 
Welfare  and  Institutions  Code  and  Title  14  of  the  Government  Code),  Simi  Valley  allows  residential  care 
facilities serving six or fewer persons within all residential zones. Residential care facilities serving more than 
six persons are conditionally permitted in the RL, RM, RMod and RH zones. Any residential care facility may 
be allowed in the CO and CC zones with approval of a CUP. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                4‐55                                 CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
G ROUP  H OMES  
The Simi Valley Development Code defines a group home as a dwelling licensed or supervised by any federal, 
state, or local health/welfare agency which provides 24‐hour non‐medical care of unrelated persons who are 
not handicapped but are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the 
activities  of  daily  living  or  for  the  protection  of  the  individual  in  a  family‐like  environment.  This  includes 
children's  homes;  rehabilitation  centers;  and  self‐help  group  homes.  Convalescent  homes,  nursing  homes 
and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of "Medical Services—Extended 
Care." Group homes of six or fewer residents are permitted by right in all residential zones. Groups Homes 
for seven or more residents are treated as residential care facilities and are permitted with CUP in  the RL, 
RM, RMod and RH zones. 
The Development Code differentiates between group homes and residential care homes, which are defined 
as  a  single‐dwelling  unit  or  multiple‐unit  facility  licensed  or  supervised  by  any  federal,  state,  or  local 
health/welfare  agency  that  provides  24‐hour  non‐medical  care  of  unrelated  persons  who  are  handicapped 
and in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living 
or  for  the  protection  of  the  individual  in  a  family‐like  environment.  State  law  includes  group  homes  in  the 
definition  of  residential  care  homes.  The  City  recently  amended  the  Development  Code  to  include  group 
homes  in  the  “residential  care  facility”  definition.  This  use  is  now  treated  the  same  as  residential  care 
facilities for zoning purposes. The amendment was adopted on January 13, 2014.  
T RANSITIONAL  H OUSING  
Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families 
to  permanent  housing.  Transitional  housing  can  take  several  forms,  including  group  quarters  with  beds, 
single‐family  homes,  and  multi‐family  apartments,  and  typically  offers  case  management  and  support 
services to return people to independent living (usually between six and 24 months). 
California  Government  Code  Section  65582  (h)  defines  “transitional  housing”  and  “transitional  housing 
development”  as  buildings  configured  as  rental  housing  developments,  but  operated  under  program 
requirements  that  require  the  termination  of  assistance  and  recirculating  of  the  assisted  unit  to  another 
eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from 
the beginning of the assistance. Pursuant to SB 2, which amended Sections 65582, 65583 and 65589.5 of the 
Government  Code,  transitional  housing  that  is  configured  as  regular  housing  developments  should  be 
permitted by right where regular housing is permitted. 
The Development Code was recently amended to specifically define transitional housing. Transitional housing 
pursuant to Government Code Section 65582 (h) is now permitted in the same manner as other residential 
dwellings  of  the  same  type  in  the  same  zone  per  the  Development  Code  and  applicable  State  law.    The 
amendment was adopted on January 13, 2014.  
S UPPORTIVE  H OUSING  
State law requires local jurisdictions to address the provisions for supportive housing. California Government 
Code  Section  65582  (f)(g)  defines  “supportive  housing”  as  housing  with  no  limit  on  length  of  stay,  that  is 
occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐56                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability 
to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
The Development Code was recently amended to specifically define supportive housing. Supportive housing 
pursuant to Government Code Section 65582 (f)(g) is now permitted in the same manner as other residential 
dwellings  of  the  same  type  in  the  same  zone  per  the  Development  Code  and  applicable  State  law.  The 
amendment was adopted on January 13, 2014.   
E MERGENCY  S HELTER  
An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families and/or homeless individuals on a 
limited short‐term basis. The Development Code permits emergency shelters by right in the CO, CC, CPD, LI 
and  GI  zones,  which  requires  only  the  issuance  of  a  zone  clearance  and  no  environmental  review.  The 
residential  sites  inventory  included  in  Appendix H3  of  this  Housing  Element  includes  approximately  128 
vacant  and  underutilized  parcels.  Among  these  parcels,  70  are  zoned  CO,  CPD,  or  LI,  totaling  more  than 
120 acres (inclusive of 10 acres of vacant land). These properties are located along transportation corridors 
and provide easy access to public transportation. These zoning districts offer adequate capacity for at least 
one emergency shelter as required by law. Although emergency shelters are also conditionally permitted in 
all residential zones, no emergency shelters are currently located within Simi Valley. 
Pursuant to recent changes in state law, Government Code Sections 65582, 65583, 65589.5, and Chapter 614 
of the Government Code, local jurisdictions must make provisions in the zoning code to permit emergency 
shelters by right in at least one zoning district where adequate capacity is available to accommodate at least 
one  year‐round  shelter.  The  City  recently  established  the  following  development  standards  for  emergency 
shelters: 
    ■ Overnight occupancy shall be limited to one bed per 70 square feet of sleeping area, with maximum 
         occupancy of 30 beds per facility. 
    ■ The length of stay for any emergency shelter resident shall not exceed 180 days. 
    ■ Off‐street parking must be provided at one space per staff person during the largest shift plus 1/5 of a 
         parking space for each resident. 
    ■ On‐site  management  shall  be  provided  at  all  times  while  the  shelter  remains  open,  consisting  of  a 
         minimum of one staff person per 15 clients. 
    ■ No emergency shelter shall be located within 300 feet of another emergency shelter. 
S INGLE ‐R OOM  O CCUPANCY  
With  high  housing  costs,  many  communities  in  California  are  exploring  the  use  of  Single  Room  Occupancy 
(SRO)  units  to  fulfill  the  affordable  housing  needs  of  certain  segments  of  the  community,  such  as  seniors, 
students, and single workers. An SRO unit is small, usually 200 to 350 sf, and consists of one habitable room 
in  a  structure  of  other  SRO  units,  also  known  as  a  residential  hotel.  Residents  typically  share  bathrooms 
and/or  kitchens  while  some  SRO  units  include  kitchenettes,  bathrooms  or  half‐baths.  The  City  recently 
amended the Development Code to permit SROs in the MU and CPD zones via a CUP. Conditions for approval 
will  relate  to  the  performance  of  the  facility,  such  as  parking,  security,  and  management.  The  amendment 
was adopted on January 13, 2014.   
GENERAL PLAN                                                  4‐57                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
A GRICULTURAL  W ORKER  H OUSING  
Under  California  Health  and  Safety  Code  17021.5,  farmworker  housing  up  to  12  units  or  36  beds  must  be 
considered  an  agricultural  use  and  permitted  in  any  zone  that  permits  agricultural  uses.  In  addition, 
employee housing for six or fewer employees are to be treated as a single family structure and permitted in 
the same manner as other dwellings of the same type in the same zone. While the City has no agriculturally 
designated  land  uses,  all  residential  zones  allow  agricultural  use  by  right,  while  the  OS  (Open  Space) 
designation  is  intended  for  agricultural  uses.  The  City’s  Development  Code  is  in  the  process  of  being 
amended to comply with State law. This amendment is expected to be completed by spring 2014.   
HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
Both the federal Fair Housing Amendment Act (FHAA) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act 
direct  local  governments  to  make  reasonable  accommodations  (i.e.,  modifications  or  exceptions)  in  their 
zoning laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled 
persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
The  City  conducted  an  analysis  of  the  Development  Code,  permitting  procedures,  development  standards, 
and  building  codes  to  identify  potential  constraints  for  housing  for  persons  with  disabilities.  The  City’s 
policies and regulations regarding housing for persons with disabilities are described below. 
Z ONING AND  L AND  U SE  
Restrictive land use policies and zoning provisions can constrain the development of housing for persons with 
disabilities. 
Under the state Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (compiled of divisions 4.1, 4.5 and 4.7 of 
the  Welfare  and  Institutions  Code  and  Title  14  of  the  Government  Code),  small  licensed  residential  care 
facilities  for  six  or  fewer  persons  must  be  treated  as  regular  residential  uses  and  permitted  by  right  in  all 
residential  districts;  Simi  Valley  is  compliant  with  the  Lanterman  Act.  The  Land  Use  Element  and 
Development  Code  provide  for  the  development  of  multi‐family  housing  in  the  RMod,  RH  and  RVH  zones. 
The City’s land use policies and zoning provisions do not constrain the development of such housing. 
Furthermore,  the  Development  Code  will  be  amended  to  address  the  provision  of  transitional,  supportive, 
and  single‐room  occupancy  housing  –  housing  types  that  are  suitable  for  occupancy  by  persons  with 
disabilities (see discussions on the provision of a variety of housing types earlier). 
D EFINITION OF  F AMILY  
Local  governments  may  restrict  access  to  housing  for  households  failing  to  qualify  as  a  “family”  by  the 
definition  specified  in  the  Development  Code.  A  restrictive  definition  of  “family”  can  illegally  limit  the 
development  and  siting  of  group  homes  for  persons  with  disabilities.  The  City  of  Simi  Valley  Development 
Code was recently amended to remove the definition of family.  The amendment was adopted on January 13, 
2014.   
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                          4‐58                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
R EASONABLE  A CCOMMODATION  
It  may  also  be  reasonable  to  accommodate  requests  from  persons  with  disabilities  to  waive  a  setback 
requirement  or  other  standard  of  the  Development  Code  to  ensure  that  homes  are  accessible  for  the 
mobility impaired. Whether a particular modification is reasonable depends on the circumstances, and must 
be decided on a case‐by‐case basis. The City adopted a reasonable accommodations ordinance in February 
2009  that  allows  for reasonable  accommodation  requests  to  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Director  of 
the Environmental Services Department in most cases. The ordinance provides a procedure for residents to 
follow  to  ensure  that  all  reasonable  accommodations  can  be  adequately  met.  Reasonable  accommodation 
will be granted if: 
    ■ The  request  for  reasonable  accommodation  is  necessary  to  make  specific  housing  available  to  an 
       individual with a disability. 
    ■ Be in full compliance with the City Development Code and Municipal Code. 
    ■ Be  consistent  with  the  purpose,  intent,  goals,  policies,  programs,  and  land  use  designations  of  the 
       General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
B UILDING  C ODES  
The City enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that regulates the access and adaptability of 
buildings  to  accommodate  persons  with  disabilities.  Government  Code  Section 12955.1  requires  that 
10 percent of the total dwelling units in multi‐family buildings without elevators consisting of three or more 
rental units or four or more condominium units are subject to the following building standards for persons 
with disabilities: 
    ■ The  primary  entry  to  the  dwelling  unit  shall  be  on  an  accessible  route  unless  exempted  by  site 
       impracticality tests. 
    ■ At  least  one  powder  room  or  bathroom  shall  be  located  on  the  primary  entry  level  served  by  an 
       accessible route. 
    ■ All rooms or spaces located on the primary entry level shall be served by an accessible route. Rooms 
       and  spaces  located  on  the  primary  entry  level  and  subject  to  this  chapter  may  include  but  are  not 
       limited to kitchens, powder rooms, bathrooms, living rooms, bedrooms, or hallways. 
    ■ Common use areas shall be accessible. 
    ■ If common tenant parking is provided, accessible parking is required. 
The City has not adopted unique restrictions that would constrain the development of housing for persons 
with disabilities. Compliance with provisions of the Code of Regulations, California Building Standards Code, 
and federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is assessed and enforced by the Building and Safety Division 
of the Environmental Services Department as a part of the building permit submittal. 
C ONCLUSION  
The City recently amended the Development Code  to facilitate and encourage the provision of transitional 
housing,  supportive  housing,  and  SRO  units  consistent  with  state  law,  Government  Code  Sections  65582, 
65583, 65589.5, and Chapter 614 of the Government Code. 
GENERAL PLAN                                             4‐59                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT FEES 
The  City  charges  a  variety  of  fees  and  exactions  to  cover  the  cost  of  processing  permits  and  providing 
necessary services and facilities for new development. In general, these fees can be a constraint on housing 
development  and  compromise  market‐rate  affordability  because  the  additional  cost  borne  by  developers 
contributes  to  overall  increased  housing  unit  cost.  However,  the  fees  are  necessary  to  maintain  adequate 
planning  services  and  other  public  services  and  facilities  in  the  City.  The  City’s  fee  schedule  for  a  typical 
residential project is displayed in Table H‐35. 
While  Table H‐35  shows  typical  planning  fees  in  Simi  Valley,  Table H‐36  compares  the  Simi  Valley  planning 
fees  to  those  of  surrounding  communities.  Simi  Valley’s  planning  fees  are  mid‐range  when  compared  to 
those  in  Camarillo,  Thousand  Oaks,  Santa  Paula  and Fillmore.  In  general  Simi  Valley’s  fees  are  towards  the 
lower end. The City has not raised its planning fees since 2008. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐60                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
  Table H‐35            Schedule of Typical Residential Development Processing Fees 
                        Action                                                          Fee 
  Plan Check                                              $2,025 (min. filing) to $2,735 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
  Conceptual Grading Permit                                                          $2,554
  Landscape Architect Plan Review                    $500 (min. filing) to 1.5% of estimated landscape construction costs
  Pre-Application/Preliminary Review                                          $1,927 + $10 per unit
  Conditional Use Permit
       Administrative                                                                $1,667
       Planning Commission                                $5,424 (min. filing) to $7,322 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
  Development Agreement                                                              $5,000
  General Plan Amendment
       Prescreening                                                                  $3,694
       w/ Environmental Impact Report                            $7,670 (min. filing) to $10,355 (max. billable)
       w/ Negative Declaration                                    $4,136 (min. filing) to $5,584 (max. billable)
       Affordable Housing                                         $3,145 (min. filing) to $4,245 (max. billable)
  Subdivisions
       Lot Line Adjustment                                                             $164
       Parcel Map                                         $2,551 (min. filing) to $3,445 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
       Tentative Tract Map                                $5,716 (min. filing) to $7,717 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
       Vesting Tentative Tract Map                                      $6,445 (min. filing) + $10 per unit
  Planned Development Permit
       Residential                                       $8,282 (min. filing) to $11,181 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
       Non-Residential                                   $5,997 (min. filing) to $8,096 (max. billable) + $200 per acre
  Housing
       Affordable Housing Agreement                               $5,392 (min. filing) to $7,280 (max. billable)
       Senior Housing Agreement                                   $2,372 (min. filing) to $3,202 (max. billable)
  Zone Change                                                     $3,001 (min. filing) to $4,051 (max. billable)
  Specific Pan                                           $24,972 (min. filing) to $33,712 (max. billable) + $5 per unit
  Variance                                                        $2,599 (min. filing) to $3,509 (max. billable)
  CEQA Exemption                                                                       $160
  Initial Environmental Study (developer requested)       $3,016 (min. filing) to $6,033 (max. billable) + $10 per unit
  Environmental Impact Report or Extended EIS                                Consultant Fees + 30%
  SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, Department of Environmental Services, Adopted 2008 fees.
 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                              4‐61                                  CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                     CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H‐36             Comparison of Planning Fees 
                                   Simi Valley              Camarillo          Thousand Oaks        Santa Paula             Fillmore 
Minor CUP                            $1,667                  $5,038            $1,161–$8,193      $3,599+FAHR1            $480+FAHR
Major CUP                        $5,424–$7,322               $5,038           $15,000 (Deposit)    $3,599+FAHR           $3,200+FAHR
General Plan Amendment          $4,136–$10,355               $7,587                $6,500          $3,213+FAHR           $2,750+FAHR
Variance – Minor                 $2,599–$3,509               $4,898                $1,520          $1,200+FAHR           $1,000+FAHR
Variance – Major                 $2,599–$3,509               $4,898                $2,915          $3,213+FAHR           $2,860+FAHR
Zone Change                      $3,001–$4,051               $6,936                $8,600          $5,623+FAHR           $4,725+FAHR
Parcel Map                       $2,551–$3,445                 —                     —             $3,213+FAHR           $2,200+FAHR
Tract Map                        $5,716–$7,717                 —              $12,000 (Deposit)    $3,213+FAHR           $2,550+FAHR
SOURCE:  Cities of Simi Valley (2008), Santa Paula (2013), Camarillo (2013), Thousand Oaks (2013), and Fillmore (2011). 
a.  FAHR: Fully Allocated Hourly Rates for staff time spent on applications. 
     
    Development impact fees are established for mitigating various development impacts based on the specific 
    existing  conditions  of  and  projected  needs  for  infrastructure  and  public  facilities.  Fees  for  public 
    improvements  (streets,  sidewalks,  storm  drains,  grading,  etc.)  can  vary  significantly  even  within  the  City 
    depending upon the characteristics of the project site. The City of Simi Valley’s impact fee structure considers 
    the extent to which the developer constructs off‐site improvements (discussed below). Off‐site improvement 
    fees are assessed on a case‐by‐case basis and are intended to offset impacts to drainage and sewer facilities, 
    schools, parkland, watershed protection, and other public facilities. A summary of estimated impact fees for 
    typical residential types is included in Table H‐37. 
    While these fees add to the cost of housing development, they are established to cover the costs of providing 
    public infrastructure, facilities and improvements to serve the development. Since impact fees are subject to 
    the requirements of state law for ensuring reasonableness and a proportionate share of responsibility, these 
    fees are considered necessary to ensure quality of life for existing and future residents.  
     
    CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                              4‐62                                       GENERAL PLAN 
     

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
  Table H‐37           Development Impact Fees (Typical Projects) 
                                  Single‐Family                           Multi‐Family                               Senior 
      Fee Type              Market            Affordable            Market            Affordable           Market           Affordable 
  Parks and                $2,986 to            $880 to            $1,732 to            $468 to           $1,571 to           $379 to
  Recreation              $3,890/unit        $1,385/unit          $3,967/unit        $2,060/unit         $2,141/unit         $919/unit
          Traffic         $33 per trip       $33 per trip         $33 per trip       $33 per trip        $33 per trip       $33 per trip
                                                                   $7,240 +            $7,240 +
          Water           $4,374/unit        $4,374/unit
                                                                  $2,537/unit        $2,537/unit
          Sewer           $4,374/unit        $4,374/unit          $3,280/unit        $3,280/unit         $2,624/unit        $2,624/unit
          Fire            $1,050/unit        $1,050/unit           $525/unit           $525/unit
          Schools           $3.20/sf           $3.20/sf             $3.20/sf           $3.20/sf            $0.42/sf           $3.20/sf
          Flood
              Contro       $600/unit           $600/unit          $2,400/acre        $2,400/acre
              l
  SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley Estimated Construction Fees, 2013.
  School impact fees are collected for the school district and flood control fees are collected for the County. Fire fees are variable 
  based on square footage and other factors. The Fire fees in the table are averages. 
 
Table H‐38  provides  the  actual  development  fees  for  three  recent  development  projects  in  Simi  Valley. 
Spanish Villas at the Park is a 38‐unit multi‐family development while Los Arboles was a development of 43 
single‐family  homes.  The  Marketplace  is  a  mixed  use  project  that  includes  72  townhomes,  36  senior 
apartments  and  a  commercial  component.  Table H‐38  shows  the  breakdown  of  all  fees  from  planning  to 
offsite  improvements  to  public  safety  and  impact  fees.  The  total  fees  are  moderate  and  represent  only  a 
small portion of total development costs (less than 10 percent) and do not constrain housing development in 
the City.  
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                       4‐63                                 CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H‐38          Actual Development Fees for Recent Projects 
                                                   Multi‐Family Project      Single‐Family Project      Mixed Use Project  
                  Fee Type                          (Spanish Villas)             (Los Arboles)          (The Marketplace) 
Planning and Housing                                      $24,140                       $58,457                 $43,879
Building and Safety                                      $103,365                      $168,020               $239,978**
Public Works                                              $50,370                       $85,844                $150,445
Water and Sewer                                          $227,910                    $188,082***               $357,712
City Traffic Fees                                          $6,272                       $13,596                  $6,747
County Traffic Fees                                         $811                         $1,681                  $4,496
Flood Control                                             $6,240                       $25,800                  $13,200
Calleguas                                                 $96,486                      $96,105                  $41,908
Fire Department                                           $19,950                       $45,150                 $56,700
Police                                                      $66                           $66                     $66
Schools                                                  $128,954                      $160,551                $349,281
Parks                                                    $137,082                      $152,104                $304,776
                                   Total Fees            $801,646                      $995,456               $1,569,188
                                        Units                38                            43                     108
                                Cost per Unit            $20,921                       $23,150                  $14,530
SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, 2013.
 
ON‐ AND OFF‐SITE IMPROVEMENTS 
Requirements for on‐ and off‐site improvements vary depending on the presence of existing improvements, 
as well as the size and nature of the proposed development. Most residential areas are already served with 
infrastructure;  however,  some  areas  of  the  City  will  require  infrastructure  improvements.  The  City  has 
established specific standards for improvements and facilities to serve new development, including: concrete 
curbs, gutters, asphalt concrete street pavement, sidewalks and streetlights. The City adopted the American 
Public Works Association Standards. 
GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLANS 
R EGIONAL  A IR  Q UALITY  M ANAGEMENT  P LAN  
Regional growth management plans, which regulate population growth, have been adopted by the Board of 
Supervisors as well as most of the incorporated cities in Ventura County. Pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act 
Amendments  of  1990  (CAAA),  the  Ventura  County  2007  Air  Quality  Management  Plan  (AQMP)  presents 
Ventura  County’s  strategy  to  attain  the  federal  8‐hour  ozone  standard,  attainment  demonstration  for  the 
federal  8‐hour  ozone  standard;  reasonable  further  progress  demonstration  for  the  federal  8‐hour  ozone 
standard;  and  transportation  conformity  emissions  budget  for  federal  transportation  conformity  purposes. 
The  City  uses  the  population  limits  in  the  AQMP  to  establish  a  limit  on  the  number  of  dwelling  units  that 
could  be  built  in  the  City,  using  upon  an  assumed  number  of  persons  per  unit,  consistent  with  Census 
information.  If  future  housing  demand  surpasses  the  limits  established  by  the  countywide  growth 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐64                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
management policies, the cost of housing in the City of Simi Valley will be affected, because limited supply in 
conjunction with increasing demand creates a marketplace susceptible to high unit prices. 
R EGIONAL :   S AVE  O PEN  S PACE AND  A GRICULTURAL  R ESOURCES  
The  Save  Open  Space  and  Agricultural  Resources  (SOAR)  and  City  Urban  Restriction  Boundary  (CURBs) 
resulted  from  several  voter‐approved  ballot  initiatives  in  the  unincorporated  areas  of  Ventura  County  and 
eight  of  the  County’s  ten  cities,  including  Simi  Valley.  The  SOAR  initiatives  require  voter  approval  in  the 
affected  jurisdictions  before  specified  General  Plan  land  use  designations,  such  as  agriculture  and  open 
space, can be up‐zoned to urban designations. The CURB initiatives define a boundary around the affected 
jurisdictions  and  require  voter  approval  before  urban  development  can  occur  outside  the  CURB  lines.  The 
SOAR and CURB measures work together to direct urban growth to within existing city boundaries, thereby 
restricting urban sprawl, encouraging infill and higher density development, and protecting agricultural, open 
space, and natural lands in Ventura County. 
C ITY :   M ANAGED ‐G ROWTH  P LAN  
The City of Simi Valley adopted a Managed Growth Plan to ensure that the rate of residential development is 
metered in an effort to control the rate of ozone generated within the City. Simi Valley is a non‐attainment 
area for meeting the 1996 Federal Clean Air Act ozone standard,s and managing the rate of growth will assist 
in attaining these standards. 
The City’s Managed Growth Plan, initially adopted by a popular vote in 1986 and amended at the ballot in 
1996, 2004, and 2012, is implemented to encourage orderly development within the City while reducing air 
pollution,  protecting  the  hillsides  and  promoting  affordable  housing.  In  March  2013,  the  City  adopted  a 
replacement implementation ordinance for the Managed Growth Plan that will ensure that the City is able to 
meet its Regional Housing Need Allocation. The current Managed Growth Plan covers the period January 1, 
2013 to December 31, 2023.  
The  primary  implementing  tool  for  the  Managed  Growth  Plan  is  the  Residential  Building  Permit  Allocation 
System (codified in Ordinance No. 1209), also referred to as the RBPAS. The RBPAS manages population by 
limiting the number of residential building permits that may be issued on an annual basis. This limitation is 
balanced against local housing needs. The RBPAS currently provides 292 EDUs per year, which is more than 
sufficient to meet the City’s RHNA. 
The RBPAS provides two exemptions: 
    ■ Class 1 Exemption: These projects are not subtracted from the allocation grants and are immediately 
       eligible and able to be awarded residential building permits: 
       > Rehabilitation  and  remodeling  of  an  existing  dwelling  unit  or  conversion  of  apartments  into 
            condominiums,  so  long  as  no  additional  dwelling  units  are  created  except  as  authorized  by  GC 
            Section 65852(a) and Section 9‐44.150 of the Simi Valley Municipal Code. 
       > Replacement  of  existing  single‐family  or  multi‐family  structures  that  have  been  damaged  or 
            destroyed through accident, fire, flood, or other “act of God.” 
    ■ Class 2 Exemption: Residential development of one residence on a lot that is not part of an approved 
       but  unbuilt  Planned  Development  or  Cluster  Development  Permit  is  immediately  eligible  to  be 
       awarded  an  allocation  grant.  This  Class  2  exemption  shall  apply  only  to  two  such  projects  per 
GENERAL PLAN                                                4‐65                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
       developer,  or  his  or  her  agent,  per  calendar  year,  provided  such  developments  are  not  on  adjacent 
       sites. When allocation grants from Class 2 exemptions are awarded, their number shall be subtracted 
       from  the  available  grants  before  grants  are  awarded  to  any  residential  projects  in  the  allocation 
       system. 
Other  types  of  projects  are  placed  in  a  queue  upon  approval  by  the  City.  Annually,  292  grants  enter  the 
system.  Projects  are  awarded  grants  on  a  first‐come,  first‐served  basis.  Unused  grants  roll  over  and  are 
added to the next year’s allotment. A single‐family residence or condominium is considered one residential 
allocation grant (1.0 EDU), which is equivalent to 1.4 apartment units and 1.9 senior units.  
All  new  dwelling  units  require  allocation  grants.  Projects  that  have  been  placed  into  the  allocation  system 
may  receive  up  to  one‐half  of  the  available  grants  during  that  calendar  year.  If  a  project  requires  more 
allocation grants, the project will maintain its place in the allocation system and will be eligible to receive up 
to one‐half of the available grants for each subsequent calendar year until all allocation grants required for 
the  project  have  been  issued.  All  allocation  grants  are  valid  for  four  years.  The  four‐year  period  will 
commence when a project, or phase of a project, receives its last grant. If a developer fails to establish vested 
rights within four years, the allocation grants shall be returned to the allocation system for distribution. If the 
project’s Planned Development or Cluster Development Permit has not expired, the project will be placed at 
the end of the list of projects awaiting allocation grants. 
Due  to  low  demand  for  residential  development  in  the  last  several  years,  there  has  been  little  or  no 
competition for residential allocation grants. At the end of the previous allocation system, 1,690 allocation 
grants were unused. As of October 1, 2013, the number of unused allocation grants accumulated to 192.5. 
After awarding grants to all approved residential projects, 192.5 grants remain unawarded and will be added 
to the 292 grants entering the system in January 2014.  
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES 
Development  review  and  permit  procedures  are  necessary  steps  to  ensure  that  residential  construction 
proceeds  in  an  orderly  manner.  The  following  discussion  outlines  the  level  of  review  required  for  various 
permits and timelines associated with those reviews. The timelines provided are estimates; actual processing 
time may vary due to the volume of applications and the size and complexity of the projects. 
The  City  works  to  assist  the  public  in  understanding  the  plan  review  process  by  outlining  the  timelines  for 
different projects and offering guidelines to assist in the type of information that is needed to conduct a plan 
review.  The  extent  of  the  review  required  to  issue  permits  for  a  project  depends  on  the  use  or  occupancy 
type  of  the  structure,  its  location  and  the  impact  of  its  construction  on  the  environment.  The  applicant’s 
responsiveness to comments or questions from staff and outside agencies can also have a significant effect 
on project timeframes. 
P LANNED  D EVELOPMENT  P ERMITS  
The Planned Development Permit (PD) facilitates development of land as a single unit by taking advantage of 
modern site planning techniques, resulting in a more efficient use of land and a better living environment. All 
new residential development in Simi Valley consisting of 2 units or more requires approval of a PD prior to 
issuance of a building permit. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐66                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
Residential projects of 2 to 4 dwelling units, requiring an Administrative PD, can be approved by the Director, 
but  larger  residential  projects  require  Planning  Commission  approval.  Senior  and  affordable  residential 
developments  require  City  Council  approval  because  only  the  City  Council  can  approve  the  affordable 
agreements  (specifying  requirements  and  conditions  such  as  the  number  of  affordable  units,  level  of 
affordability,  length  of  affordability  covenant,  location  and  quality  of  affordable  units,  monitoring  and 
reporting,  etc.)  If  City  affordable  housing  funds  are  involved,  only  the  City  Council  can  approve  the 
commitment for funding. Projects that require a zone change and/or General Plan amendment also require 
City Council approval, pursuant to State law. 
Preliminary Review 
The  Preliminary  Review  process  is  a  means  for  a  developer  to  gauge  impacts  and  issues  that  a  proposed 
project may have on the City’s infrastructure, allowing preliminary analysis on a project’s compatibility with 
the General Plan, Development Code, and Citywide Design Guidelines. Preliminary plans are reviewed by a 
Development Advisory Committee (DAC), and the City provides written  comments to the developer, which 
may assist in a decision to proceed with the Formal Application process. 
Formal Application 
A  Formal  Application  is  required  for  subdivisions  and  all  land  developments,  excluding  construction  of  one 
single‐family home. Formal Application processing procedures and approximate timelines for typical single‐
family and multi‐family development projects proposed in Simi Valley are summarized in Table H‐39 and the 
narrative below.  
 
  Table H‐39          Approvals and Processing Times for Typical Developments 
                          Single‐        Single‐Family     Single‐Family       Multi‐Family     Multi‐Family 
                          Family          (2–4 units)        (5+ units)         (2–4 units)      (5+ units)    Mixed Use 
                                            Planned                              Planned
                                                              Planned                             Planned       Planned
  Approvals              Building        Development                          Development
                                                           Development                          Development   Development
  Required                Permit            Permit –                             Permit –
                                                            Permit – PC                         Permit – PC   Permit – PC
                                             Admin                                Admin
          Processing
                       2–3 months         4–6 months       6–12 months         4–6 months       6–12 months   6–12 months
              Time
  PC = Planning Commission. Senior or affordable housing requires approval by the City Council.
 
Planned Development Review and Approval 
All PD applications are reviewed by the Director to ensure completion of the application, and a staff report 
and recommendation will be created and provided to the approval body. In the case of an Administrative PD, 
a public hearing is not required unless the Director determines that the proposed project could potentially 
affect the property rights of others. If a Commission action is required, the Commission will conduct a public 
hearing  to  decide  approval  or  disapproval  of  the  permit.  The  Commission  will  approve  a  PD  based  on  the 
following four findings: 
    ■ The proposed project must be consistent with the purpose, intent, goals, policies, programs and land 
        use designations of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
GENERAL PLAN                                                   4‐67                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                        CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
    ■ The project must be in full compliance with the City of Simi Valley Development Code and Municipal 
       Code; 
    ■ The  project  must  be  consistent  with  applicable  design  guidelines  (for  residential  development,  the 
       applicable  design  guidelines  are  the  City’s  Residential  Design  Guidelines  and  Landscape  Design 
       Guidelines); and 
    ■ Ensure that the proper standards and conditions have been imposed which protect the public health, 
       safety, and welfare. 
In  approving  a  PD  Permit,  the  applicable  review  authority  may  impose  conditions  (e.g.,  buffers, 
environmental  protection,  landscaping  and  maintenance,  lighting,  parking,  performance  guarantees, 
property  maintenance,  public  infrastructure  improvements,  time  limits,  etc.)  deemed  reasonable  and 
necessary  to  ensure  that  the  approval  would  be  in  compliance  with  the  findings  required  above.  These 
findings are objective and based on established City policies, regulations, and guidelines, and therefore offer 
clear direction for developers and property owners. 
Based on a review of PD permits approved in recent years, typical conditions are summarized below: 
    ■ For  an  affordable  housing  project,  the  project  must  maintain  affordability  for  a  duration  set  forth  in 
       the Affordable Housing Agreement. 
    ■ For a senior housing project, the project must meet the handicap accessibility requirements set forth 
       in the California Building Code, and the required path of travel must have a slip‐resistant surface. The 
       property owner must also allow for the conversion of the unit into a handicap accessible unit at the 
       tenant’s expense. 
    ■ Other project requirements include: payment of required impact and permit fees; securing of required 
       permits  (grading,  NPDES);  proof  of  adequate  water  and  sewer  services;  replacement/relocation  of 
       mature trees; landscaping and maintenance plans; stormwater and erosion control plans; and public 
       improvements and infrastructure plans. 
These conditions are typical performance‐based conditions. Only in very rare occasions had the City denied a 
PD permit. 
C ONDITIONAL  U SE  P ERMITS  
Conditional  Use Permits  (CUP) are intended to allow for activities and uses,  which may be desirable in the 
applicable  zoning  district  and  compatible  with  adjoining  land  uses,  but  whose  effect  on  a  site  and  its 
surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location. 
The  Director  of  Environmental  Services  (Director)  reviews  all  CUP  applications  for  consistency  and 
appropriate requirements. After giving proper notice, the Planning Commission will hold a public hearing and 
decide whether to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application. In order to approve a CUP, 
the Planning Commission must make the following findings: 
    ■ The proposed use is allowed with a Conditional Use Permit within the zoning district and complies with 
       all applicable provisions of the Development Code; 
    ■ The  proposed  use  is  consistent  with  the  purpose,  intent,  goals,  policies,  programs  and  land  use 
       designations of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
    ■ The proposed site plan and design would ensure consistency with applicable design guidelines; and 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      4‐68                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
    ■ The design, location, operating characteristics and size of the proposed use would be compatible with 
       the  existing  and  future  land  uses  in  the  vicinity,  in  terms  of  aesthetics,  character,  scale  and  view 
       protection. 
In approving a CUP, the Planning Commission may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to 
ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the required findings. The applicant may appeal the 
Planning Commission’s decision to the City Council. 
The  City  also  offers  applicants  the  opportunity  to  combine  multiple  permits  into  one  application.  For 
example,  a  proposed  development  which  requires  a  Planned  Development  Permit  and  a  CUP  can  be 
combined into a single CUP. 
D ESIGN  G UIDELINES  
The City’s Residential Design Guidelines are intended to promote excellence in the design and development 
of  new  residential  projects  in  the  City  of  Simi  Valley.  The  Guidelines  do  not  seek  to  impose  a  particular 
architectural  theme,  color  palette,  or  particular  style.  Rather,  they  seek  to  promote  positive  quality‐based 
design  that  will  have  enduring  appeal.  The  Guidelines  complement  mandatory  development  standards  by 
providing  examples  of  design  solutions  and  design  interpretations  of  various  mandatory  regulations.  These 
Guidelines, however, are less quantitative than mandatory development standards and may be interpreted 
with some flexibility for specific applications. 
Specific  design  guidelines  vary  depending  on  the  type  of  residential  development,  but  generally  cover  the 
following the topics: 
    ■  Lot design and arrangement 
    ■  Streets and circulation 
    ■  Common areas and amenities 
    ■  Walls and fences 
    ■  Trash receptacles, utilities, and equipment screening 
    ■  Façades 
    ■  Roof design 
    ■  Garages and accessory buildings 
Design  review  for  projects  up  to  4 units  is  performed  at  the  staff  level.  Any  residential  project  requiring  a 
discretionary  permit  application  is  subject  to  the  City’s  Residential  Design  Guidelines.  The  design  review 
process  runs  concurrently  with  the  discretionary  permit  application  process  and  will  not  increase  overall 
processing time. 
CEQA   C OMPLIANCE  
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) compliance process determines the timeframes for approval 
of  many  discretionary  projects.  Most  projects  are  either  Categorically  Exempt  or  handled  through  the 
negative  declaration  process,  which  is  processed  concurrently  with  other  discretionary  approval  processes. 
However, if an Environmental Impact Report is required a minimum of six months is added to the approval 
process.  The  EIR  process  requires  additional  time  depending  on  the  number  and  variety  of  impacts  or  the 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐69                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                         CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
level  of  controversy  around  a  project.  Large  and  complex  residential  projects  with  a  variety  of  potentially 
significant impacts may take a year or more to complete the CEQA review process. 
B UILDING  P ERMITS  
The  goal  of  the  Building  and  Safety  Division  of  the  Environmental  Services  Department  usually  completes 
residential plan reviews within 10 to 15 working days for initial reviews and 8 to 10 days for re‐submittals. 
Small  residential  additions  and  minor  initial  improvements  of  commercial  space  may  be  reviewed  and 
permits issued in one visit (over‐the‐counter plan review). The availability of over‐the‐counter plan reviews 
depends on the current daily workload of the Plans Examiner. 
A Building Permit is written permission from a local jurisdiction such as the City, for the construction, repair, 
alteration or addition to a structure. The issuance of building permits helps the City of Simi Valley enforce the 
duly adopted California Building and Fire Codes and thus ensures that those standards of health and safety 
are followed. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐70                                    GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
                                                                           
                 Figure H‐6  Development Review Process 
GENERAL PLAN                      4‐71                  CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
C ONCLUSION  
All projects with 5 units or more require the processing of a Planned Development Permit and review by the 
Planning Commission. To assist developers to navigate the development application and review process, the 
City  developed  an  application  package  that  clearly  outlines  the  required  information  and  procedures 
required  for  various  types  of  applications.  The  City’s  goal  is  to  schedule  the  proposed  project  before  the 
decision  makers  within  45–60  days  for  environmentally  exempt  projects  and  75–90  days  for  those  with  a 
Negative  Declaration.  The  timeframe  for  projects  that  require  Council  approval  (projects  with  affordable 
agreements,  zone  change,  and/or  General  Plan  amendment)  is  extended  by  approximately  three  weeks. 
Those  with  Environmental  Impact  Reports  (EIR)  must  have  the  EIR  prepared  first.  The  flow  chart  on  the 
following page is provided to outline the processing steps for development projects. This timeframe is typical 
and is compliant with the Permit Processing and Streamlining Act from date when the application is deemed 
complete. 
BUILDING CODES AND ENFORCEMENT 
The City of Simi Valley building codes are based upon the California Uniform Building, Plumbing, Mechanical 
and Electrical Codes and are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public’s health, safety 
and welfare. The codes are determined by the International Conference of Building Officials and the State of 
California.  Substandard  housing  conditions  within  the  City’s  existing  housing  stock  are  abated  primarily 
through code compliance. Identification of code violations is based on resident complaints. Property owners 
are advised by the City of available rehabilitation programs to assist in the correction of code violations. In 
order  to  facilitate  the  code  compliance  process  for  property  maintenance,  the  City  has  adopted  an 
administrative  abatement  process  in  an  effort  to  expedite  compliance  and  reduce  the  City’s  enforcement 
costs. 
In December 2010 the City adopted the following codes: 
    ■   2010 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2 
    ■   2010 California Electric Code 
    ■   2010 California Mechanical Code 
    ■   2010 California Plumbing Code 
    ■   2010 California Energy Code 
    ■   2010 California Historical Building Code 
    ■   2010 California Elevator Safety Code 
    ■   2009 International Existing Building Code 
    ■   2010 California Referenced Standards Code 
    ■   2009 International Property Maintenance Code 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  actively  pursues  reported  code  violations  in  the  City  through  its  Code  Enforcement 
Section  of  the  Community  Services  Department.  The  Code  Enforcement  Section  enforces  municipal 
ordinances and permit compliance by promoting voluntary compliance through working in partnership with 
the  citizens  and  businesses  of  Simi  Valley.  The  City  encourages  residents  to  work  with  their  neighbors, 
homeowners’ association and business community to resolve problems. However, if a resolution cannot be 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐72                                        GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
achieved,  a  complaint  may  be  filed  with  Code  Enforcement  in  person,  by  mail  or  by  telephone.  Code 
Enforcement Officers respond proactively and reactively to violations of the Municipal Code. 
The  City  also  adopted  the  California  Green  Building  Standards  Code  in  its  entirety  with  the  following  local 
amendments: 
     ■ Minimum  energy  performance  standards  for  low‐rise  residential  buildings  –  New  low‐rise  residential 
       buildings in the City are required to exceed the minimum performance standard required by the 2008 
       California Energy Code by 10 percent. 
     ■ Storm water drainage and retention management – The City requires residential development projects 
       which  disturb  more  than  1 acre  of  soil  to  develop  and  implement  a  plan  to  manage  storm  water 
       drainage  during  construction  and  design  and  implement  post‐construction  control  measures  (on‐site 
       retention of 85th percentile). 
     ■ Potable  water  reduction  –  The  City  requires  builders  to  provide  water  efficient  landscape  irrigation 
       design that reduces the use of potable water by 50 percent over maximum allowable water application 
       standards. 
     ■ Construction  Waste  Diversion  –  The  City  requires  builders  to  recycle  or  salvage  a  minimum  of 
       75 percent of non‐hazardous construction and demolition debris. 
  Infrastructure and Public Service Constraints 
Another factor adding to the cost of new home construction is the cost of providing adequate infrastructure 
such  as  streets,  curbs,  gutter,  sidewalks,  water  and  sewer  lines,  and  street  lighting.  The  cost  of  these 
additions or improvements is borne by developers and then, to the extent possible, added to the cost of new 
housing units, impacting affordability. 
WATER SERVICE 
Each year, approximately 25,000 acre‐feet of water is provided to residents of the City of Simi Valley by the 
Southern  California  Water  Company  and  Ventura  County  Waterworks  District  No.  8.  These  two  agencies 
receive  their  water  from  the  California  Aqueduct  System  through  the  Calleguas  Municipal  Water  District. 
These  two  water  purveyors  have  determined  that  although  water  is  relatively  scarce,  adequate  supply  is 
available to serve the buildout population under the General Plan. The Public Works Department has recently 
hired  a  consultant  and  a  water  supply  analysis  is  currently  being  produced.  Facilities  also  exist  to  deliver 
Colorado River water in the event service is disrupted from the California Aqueduct System. Approximately 
33  million  gallons  of  water  is  kept  in  storage  tanks  within  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  area  for  operational 
purposes, fire protection, or other emergency services. Bard Reservoir, which serves the eastern portion of 
Ventura County, including the City of Simi Valley, has a total storage capacity of 10,000 acre‐feet and is also 
intended to be an emergency water supply for this area. 
The  2006  Senate  Bill  1087  (Chapter  727,  amended  Government  Code  Section 65589.7  and  Water  Code 
Section 10631.1)  requires  that  water  providers  develop  written  policies  that  grant  priority  to  proposed 
development  that  includes  housing  affordable  to  lower  income  households.  The  legislation  also  prohibits 
water providers from denying or conditioning the approval of development that includes housing affordable 
to  lower  income  households,  unless  specific  written  findings  are  made.  The  City  will  provide  a  copy  of  the 
adopted 2013–2021 Housing Element to applicable  water supply agencies and purveyors within 30 days of 
GENERAL PLAN                                                4‐73                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
adoption.  The  City  will  also  continue  to  coordinate  with  these  agencies  to  ensure  affordable  housing 
developments  receive  priority  water  service  provision  if  and  when  development  is  restricted  by  water 
shortages within the region. 
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT 
The  Sanitation  Services  Division  of  the  City  of  Simi  Valley  (City)  Department  of  Public  Works,  operates  the 
City’s  sanitary  sewer  system  and  Water  Quality  Control  Plant.  The  treatment  plant  is  located  in  the  Public 
Services Center at the west end of the City adjacent to the Arroyo Simi. The treatment plant was expanded in 
1990 and upgraded in 2005. The capacity of the treatment plant is 12.5 million gallons per day (MGD) and 
currently treats 10 MGD a day. 
Senate  Bill  1087  described  above  also  mandates  priority  wastewater  collection  and  treatment  service  to 
housing  developments  providing  units  affordable  to  lower  income  households.  The  City  will  continue  to 
ensure priority service provision to affordable housing developments. 
  Environmental Constraints 
The unique character of Simi Valley and many aspects of quality of life in the community are influenced by 
the substantial amount of hillside areas, canyons, open space and rural and agricultural lands that surround 
the community. Maintaining a balance between the natural resources of the community and the residential 
needs can be challenging. In addition to the constraints of developing within a biologically diverse area, the 
City also faces natural hazards due to soils and other geological factors. 
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 
The  Simi  Valley  planning  area  contains  significant  natural  features  such  as  hillsides,  canyons  and  valleys, 
which contain a variety of ecosystems ranging from wildlife corridors to wetlands. Predominant vegetation 
types  include  coastal  sage  scrub,  oak  woodland,  and  non‐native  grassland  and  chaparral  vegetation  types. 
Open areas of vegetation are predominantly restricted to the outer portions of the Planning Area, especially 
the northern and southern regions. 
Wildlife  within  the  City  is  diverse  with  a  special  abundance  in  undeveloped  high  quality  habitats,  including 
populations of native mammals, birds, amphibians and reptiles. Sensitive habitats within the City also include 
endangered and protected species. The City enforces an Urban Restriction Boundary and Tree Preservation 
Ordinance to ensure the continued viability of protected and endangered species. 
SOIL AND SLOPE CONSTRAINTS 
Various  soil  associations  exist  within  the  City,  and  much  of  the  planning  area  consists  of  steep  slopes  and 
hillsides,  creating  potential  constraints  for  the  development  of  housing  in  Simi  Valley.  Soil  associations 
prevalent  in  the  planning  area  include  the  Pico‐Anacapa‐Salinas,  Soper‐Chesterton‐Rincon,  San  Benito‐
Castaic‐Calleguas,  Sespe‐Lodo‐Malibu,  Badland‐Calleguas‐Lithic‐Xerorthents  and  Hambright‐Lithic‐
Xerothents‐Rock Outcrop associations. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                           4‐74                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
Development  within  hillside  areas  is  regulated  by  the  City’s  Hillside  Performance  Standards,  found  in 
Chapter 9‐32 of the Simi  Valley Development Code. Design guidelines related to slope design and ridgeline 
development  are  provided,  as  well as requirements  for  geologic and  soils  engineering  reports  for any  area 
proposed for development within the jurisdiction of the performance standards. According to provisions set 
forth in Chapter 9‐32, development within designated slope categories are restricted to a maximum number 
of residential dwelling units per acre, according to Table H‐40. 
 
            Table H‐40            Slope and Density 
               Slope                                             Maximum Density 
              0–10%      Underlying General Plan designation at target density or 7 units per acre, whichever is less
             10–15%                           2 units per acre or target density, whichever is less
             15–20%                                  1 unit per 4 acres (0.25 units per acre)
               20+%                                 1 unit per 40 acres (0.025 unit per acre)
            All slopes                              1 unit per 40 acres (0.025 unit per acre)
            SOURCE:  Chapter 9‐32 of the Simi Valley Development Code, 2009.
 
GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS 
Simi Valley is located in the seismically active Los Angeles Basin where numerous active and potentially active 
faults have been identified. The City is located in proximity to several major regional faults systems, including 
the San Andreas and Santa Susana Faults. The Simi‐Santa Rosa fault is a local active fault. It is the only known 
active  fault  within  the  Simi  Valley  Planning  Area;  therefore,  it  is  the  only  fault  that  poses  a  seismic  hazard 
related to surface rupture. The state has designated the Simi‐Santa Rosa fault as an Earthquake Fault Zone, 
thereby prohibiting structures on fault traces. Structures located on or near this fault zone have the greatest 
potential to experience future ground water displacement. Several critical facilities (which include police and 
fire stations; hospitals, electrical, water and communication facilities; schools and transportation structures) 
are  currently  located  within  a  one‐half  mile  radius  of  the  Simi‐Santa  Rosa  Fault.  The  potential  for  strong 
ground shaking in Simi Valley, as a result of seismic activity, is high. The northern portion of the City is more 
likely to experience stronger ground shaking than the southern portion. 
FLOODING 
A  100‐year  flood  is  a  flood  so  great  in  size  that  is  has  a  1 percent  chance  of  happening  in  any  single  year. 
Major flood events are conveyed in and through Simi Valley by a system of flood control facilities located in 
the  Arroyo  Simi  and  its  tributaries.  At  present  capacities  some  of  the  flood  control  facilities  would  not 
adequately contain the runoff from a 100‐year flood. New residential development is regulated and may be 
constrained within the boundary of the 100‐year flood plain. 
Additionally, there are five dams that would have the potential to result in significant impacts in the City of 
Simi Valley. The City Council considers the development of residential uses that might be impacted by dams 
on a case by case basis, and mitigation is required as part of the City’s Multi‐Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP). 
GENERAL PLAN                                                      4‐75                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
WILDFIRES 
Generally,  there  are  three  major  factors  that  sustain  wildfires  and  allow  for  predictions  of  a  given  area’s 
potential to burn. These factors include fuel, topography and weather. In addition, other factors complicate 
the  issues,  including  the  wild  land/urban  interface,  diversified  responsibility  for  wild  land  vegetation 
management, and destructive insects and diseases. 
Cities such as Simi Valley are considered to have the wild land/urban interface because they are built within 
and adjacent to mountainous areas and have increased the number of people living near heavily vegetated 
areas  where  wild  lands  meet  urban  development.  A  fire  along  the  wild  land/urban  interface  can  result  in 
major losses of property and structures unless adequate protection measures have been provided. The State 
of  California  is  in  the  process  of  adopting  new  Wild  land/Urban  Interface  (WUI)  regulations  as  part  of  the 
California Building Code. The City of Simi Valley recognizes and refers to this Building Code as discussed in the 
Building Codes section of this document above. 
Fuel,  topography  and  weather  also  impact  fire  risks  in  Simi  Valley.  Chamise  Chaparral  is  a  plant  that  is 
common  on  the  south  flank  of  the  City  and  has  the  most  significant  fire  fuel  potential  in  the  area.  Coastal 
sage  scrub  is  the  most  common  vegetation  found  in  Simi  Valley  and  is  a  lesser  fire  hazard  than  Chamise 
Chaparral,  however,  it  is  still  a  substantial  hazard.  Simi  Valley’s  hilly  topography  has  led  to  homes  built  on 
mountainsides and in canyons. Homes built in steep, narrow canyons and at canyon rims face an increased 
fire risk. The Santa Ana winds are a frequent occurrence in Southern California and create a particularly high 
risk. Because they are heated by compression as they flow down to Southern California from Utah, they can 
rapidly spread what might otherwise be a small fire. 
                                         
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                            4‐76                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
HOUSING RESOURCES 
The extent of housing needs in a community often far exceeds the resources available. The City of Simi Valley 
must pull together limited resources and use them efficiently in order to address the current and projected 
housing  needs  of  Simi  Valley  residents.  This  section  of  the  Housing  Element  provides  an  overview  of 
resources available to the City. 
   Residential Development Potential 
REGIONAL HOUSING NEED ALLOCATION 
Pursuant  to  state  law,  every  jurisdiction  in  the  state  has  a  responsibility  to  accommodate  a  share  of  the 
projected  housing  needs  in  its  region.  The  process  of  allocating  regional  housing  needs  to  individual 
jurisdictions is called the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). The RHNA for jurisdictions in Ventura 
County was developed by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and Ventura Council of 
Governments (VCOG). 
The  RHNA  is  distributed  by  income  category.  For  the  2013–2021  Housing  Element  cycle,  the  City  of  Simi 
Valley has been assigned a RHNA of 1,256 units, divided into the following income categories as follows: 
      ■     Extremely Low‐Income (up to 30 percent AMI) – 155 units7 (12 percent) 
      ■     Very Low‐Income (up to 50 percent AMI) – 155 units (12 percent) 
      ■     Low‐Income (51–80 percent AMI) – 208 units (17 percent) 
      ■     Moderate Income (81–120 percent AMI) – 229 units (18 percent) 
      ■     Above Moderate Income (>120 percent AMI) – 509 units (41 percent) 
While the Housing Element covers the planning period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021, the 
RHNA  planning  period  is  slightly  different  –  January  1,  2014  through  October  31,  2021  (i.e.,  2014‐2021 
RHNA). To comply with State law, the City must identify adequate sites to accommodate this RHNA. 
P ENDING  P ROJECTS AND  A PPLICATIONS  
Applications for a number of new projects have been approved and/or are currently pending in Simi Valley 
(Table H‐41). These projects are expected to add a total of 866 units to the City’s housing stock, a substantial 
portion of which (166 units) will be affordable to lower and moderate income households. 
                                                            
7
    State  law  requires  that  local  jurisdictions  also  plan  for  the  housing  needs  of  extremely  low‐income  households  (up  to  30 
percent  AMI).  In  estimating  the  projected  housing  needs  of  extremely  low‐income  households,  state  law  allows  for  two 
methodologies: based on Census data or split the very low‐income households into two groups. Using the latter methodology, 
the City of Simi Valley has a future housing need of 155 extremely low‐income units and 155 very low‐income units. 
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                             4‐77                                CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
 Table H‐41          Pending and Approved Residential Projects 
                     Very Low         Low     Moderate     Market 
  Project Name        Income        Income     Income        Rate                          Project Description 
                                                                        A 16-unit condominium project with 3 units reserved
                                                                        for moderate-income households. Building permits
 Mehdi Humkar            0              0         3           13
                                                                        are not expected to be issued for this project until
                                                                        after January 1, 2014.
                                                                        This 461-unit project also includes a 138-unit senior
                                                                        attached single-family component, with 62 units
 Green Park                                                             affordable to low-income seniors. As of October
                         0             62         0           399
 Runkle Canyon                                                          2013, grading has just begun on the site. Building
                                                                        permits are not expected to be issued for this project
                                                                        until after January 1, 2014.
                                                                        This 266-unit project includes 67 units affordable to
                                                                        low-income households (27 affordable units for
                                                                        seniors and 40 affordable units for families). This
 LA Madera                                                              project was recently sold, and the new owner is
                         0             67         0          199
 Village                                                                currently in negotiations with the City to reduce the
                                                                        density on a portion of the site. Building permits are
                                                                        not expected to be issued for this project until after
                                                                        January 1, 2014.
                                                                        This 26-unit townhome development will include
 SMV Patricia                                                           4 units affordable to low-income households. Building
                         0              4         0           22
 Townhomes                                                              permits are not expected to be issued for this project
                                                                        until after January 1, 2014.
                                                                        This 66-unit condominium project originally included
                                                                        seven units affordable to low income households.
 Palmdale 47th                                                          The project was recently sold, and the new owner is
                         0              0         0           66
 LLC                                                                    currently seeking a buy-out of the affordable housing
                                                                        agreement. Building permits are not expected to be
                                                                        issued for this project until after January 1, 2014.
                                                                        This project was approved in August 2012 and
                                                                        proposes the development of 30 one-bedroom
                                                                        apartments for very low income seniors and one
 Camino                                                                 manager’s unit. The project received a density bonus
 Esperanza              30              0         1            0        of six units from the City and the developer (Cabrillo
 Senior Project                                                         Economic Development Corporation) is currently
                                                                        awaiting a response to their application for HOME
                                                                        funds. Building permits are not expected to be issued
                                                                        for this project until after January 1, 2014.
             Total       30           133         4           699
 SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, October 2013. 
 
AVAILABILITY OF LAND SUITABLE FOR RESIDENTIAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
This  section  provides  an  inventory  of  land  supply  in  Simi  Valley.  Under  present  law,  the  Housing  Element 
must include a listing of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having the 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐78                                             GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to 
those sites.  
O PPORTUNITY  A REAS  
Several  areas  have  been  identified  by  the  City  as  areas  that  could  potentially  change  in  the  future 
(Table H‐42). These portions of the City include areas that are vacant, those that offer opportunities for infill 
and  intensification,  and  those  with  economically  or  physically  obsolete  development.  These  Opportunity 
Areas  were  identified  by  the  City  through  an  extensive  community  outreach  process.  These  areas  were 
initially  identified  as  part  of  the  City’s  comprehensive  General  Plan  update  program  during  the  initial 
reconnaissance  process.  The  General  Plan  Advisory  Committee  (GPAC)  evaluated  the  various  areas 
extensively  during  multiple  meetings  with  the  community  to  discuss  the  existing  conditions,  past  trends 
(including approved projects and development proposals), and how these areas align with the overall vision 
for the City. Field surveys were conducted to verify the status of individual parcels, and the appropriateness 
of  including  these  parcels  into  the  Opportunity  Areas.  The  GPAC  then,  upon  in‐depth  discussions  and 
community input, established a desired mix of land uses for each Opportunity Area. The final boundaries of 
the Opportunity Areas were confirmed in a public hearing before the City Council, where each individual area 
was evaluated again based on existing uses, compatibility with surrounding uses, and potential for change. 
The GPAC started from an inventory of 226 vacant and underutilized properties within the Opportunity Areas 
and  through  the  process  of  evaluation  and  community  input,  the  adopted  Opportunity  Areas  contain  128 
properties that could accommodate residential and mixed use developments. 
Through the General Plan update and Zoning Amendment, the City significantly expanded the potential for 
recycling  to  higher  intensity  uses  in  these  areas  by  creating  a  Mixed  Use  overlay  that  allows  mixed  use 
development up to 35 units per acre and a new Very High Density Residential category that also allows up to 
35 units  per  acre.  Such  changes  in  land  use  policies  would  typically  result  in  increases  in  land  value  and 
enhance the feasibility of private redevelopment of properties. 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐79                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                    CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                                                                     
                     Figure H‐7  Opportunity Areas 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY              4‐80                    GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
T APO  S TREET  C ORRIDOR  
The existing land uses in this area consist of a mixture of residential uses, commercial, office, and industrial 
uses.  Development  north  of  the  SR‐118  Freeway  is  a  mixture  of  office,  lower‐density  single‐family  homes, 
and small lots of vacant land. Development south of the freeway is characterized by one‐ to two‐story strip 
commercial  buildings  along  the  Tapo  Street  corridor  with  larger  commercial  centers  located  at  key 
intersections including the Santa Susana Plaza shopping center at the southeast corner of Cochran and Tapo 
Streets. The Santa Susana Plaza has a number of vacancies including the loss of its anchor grocery store. The 
loss  of  this  major  grocery  store  on  this  site  has  contributed  to  a  decline  in  the  vitality  of  this  center  but 
presents an opportunity for its future redevelopment. 
In  2008,  the  City  worked  with  Western  Community  Housing  to  develop  the  36‐unit  Haven  at  Tapo  Street 
project, located at 2245 Tapo Street within the Tapo Street Corridor. This development included 35 units for 
low‐income  senior  households  and  demonstrates  the  neighborhood’s  feasibility  for  affordable  housing 
development. 
Approximately  three acres  of  land  in  the  Tapo  Street  Corridor  are  vacant  and  readily  available  for 
development.  Underutilized  properties  are  developed  with  older  and  smaller  single‐family  homes  and 
commercial  uses  that  have  seen  increased  vacancies  and  recycling  to  other  uses.  Most  homes  in  the  Tapo 
Street  Corridor  area  were  constructed  more  than  40  years  ago  in  the  1940s,  1950s,  and  1960s,  potentially 
requiring substantial improvements to meet current codes. Many of these are small homes on large lots, and 
therefore redevelopment of these properties would yield increased number of housing units. Along with the 
changing economic conditions, this area has seen some changes in land uses (such as closed gasoline service 
stations  being  converted  to  other  uses  or  left  vacant,  and  single‐family  homes  being  uses  as  offices).  Also, 
some commercial tenants have left the area, leaving spaces vacant for lease.  
Parts  of  the  Tapo  Street  Corridor  already  allowed  for  mixed  use  development  under  the  City’s  zoning  and 
general  plan  policies  prior  to  the  General  Plan  2030  update  as  the  City  saw  development  interests  and 
opportunities in this area. 
There are also a number of large vacant and/or underutilized properties along Tapo Street north of the SR‐
118  Freeway  that  provide  the  opportunity  for  infill  development,  including  opportunities  for  mixed‐use 
commercial/residential uses to satisfy the City’s regional fair share requirement.  
L OS  A NGELES  A VENUE  A REA  
The  predominant  land  use  within  the  area  is  retail  commercial  uses,  including  the  Mountain  Gate  Plaza  . 
More  recently,  the  Mountain  Gate  Plaza  has  experienced  several  commercial  vacancies  and  underutilized 
businesses.  This  area  also  contains  a  limited  amount  of  light  industrial  and  office  commercial  properties 
located along First Street, north of East Los Angeles Avenue. Most properties were developed in the 1950s, 
1960s,  and  1970s  and  therefore,  have  antiquated  configurations  and  amenities  that  cannot  accommodate 
updated commercial/retail activities without significant improvements. Usually the lots contain large parking 
areas,  making  the  properties  significantly  underutilized  and  conducive  to  redevelopment.  Given  the 
underutilized  character  (small  structures  and  large  parking  areas),  redevelopment  of  properties  does  not 
necessarily  require  the  demolition  of  existing  uses.  Often,  a  large  development  project  can  be  designed  to 
incorporate some of the existing viable uses. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                  4‐81                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
The  City  has  limited  vacant  land  zoned  for  new  development.  The  underutilized  lots  in  this  area  offer  the 
potential for providing additional development within the City. Furthermore a potential transit station/stop 
could  be  located  within  the  area  at  some  future  date,  offering  an  opportunity  to  create  a  transit‐oriented 
village  within  the  area.  The  opportunity  for  mixed‐use  development  and  a  transit‐station  complement  the 
existing services and employment centers located within the nearby West End Industrial Area, providing new 
housing opportunities and transit access. 
P ATRICIA  A VENUE /H EYWOOD  S TREET  A REA  
This  neighborhood,  located  in  the  west‐central  portion  of  Simi  Valley,  is  generally  bounded  by  Patricia 
Avenue to the north (extending north approximately half a block), Erringer Road to the east, the Arroyo Simi 
to the south, and just east of First Street to the west. Existing uses within this subarea consist primarily of 
single‐family detached and multi‐family residential uses along Patricia Avenue and Heywood Street, including 
several senior apartment projects. 
Most homes in this area were constructed in the 1950s and 1960s. This area has been undergoing significant 
changes. For the past twenty years, the residential portion of this area, historically characterized as a semi‐
rural area of single‐family homes, large lots, and the keeping of farm animals, has been changing to a more 
urbanized  area  with  multi‐family  housing.  Much  of  the  remaining  multi‐family  zoned  property  is  likely  to 
develop in the near term based on a current demand for housing, and the limited available supply. Several 
townhome projects have been approved in this area in recent years, resulting in the redevelopment of single‐
family homes into multi‐family housing. Due to the slowdown in the housing market, some approved projects 
have  expired.  Nonetheless,  these  projects  demonstrate  the  feasibility  and  interest  of  recycling  existing 
properties  into  high‐density  housing  developments  and  most  approved  projects  achieved  close  to  the 
maximum density permitted, including projects that are on small lots. 
The Patricia Avenue/Heywood Street area is proposed for high density residential uses offering a diversity of 
housing choices for Simi Valley’s residents that complement adjacent proposed mixed‐use development and 
the  existing  Arroyo  Simi.  Incentives  for  lot  consolidation  are  proposed  for  the  merging  of  lots  to  allow  for 
more cohesive, better‐designed projects.  
O LD  T OWN  
Old Town Simi Valley is located within the west‐central portion of the City, south of Los Angeles Avenue and 
west of First Street. The area includes a group of blocks bordered by California Avenue and the Arroyo Simi to 
the north, First Street to the east, Ventura Avenue to the south, and Sinaloa Road to the west. The large lots 
and subdivision pattern in this area contribute to the semi‐rural character of Old Town, which dates back to 
the late 1800s, when the City was originally settled. 
Approximately  20 percent  of  the  identified  sites  in  this  area  are  vacant.  Infill  housing  development  can  be 
expected.  The  existing  residential  uses  within  Old  Town  range  from  older  single‐family  homes  (built  more 
than 50 years ago and include some homes of historical significance) to newer multi‐family subdivisions on 
small  parcels.  Some  of  the  older  homes  have  maintenance  issues  and  marginal  landscaping.  New 
development in this area will need to be sensitively designed to maintain the unique historic character of this 
area  and  to  assure  compatibility  and  cohesiveness  of  the  neighborhood  character.  Therefore,  the  General 
Plan designates this area for Residential High (up to 18 units per acre). As the City has substantially reached 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐82                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
buildout,  opportunities  for  additional  housing  to  accommodate  growth  will  likely  result  from  infill 
development on vacant and/or underutilized sites such as those within the Old Town area. 
P ARKER  R ANCH  E XPANSION  A REA  
This area is located in the southeastern portion of the City and consists of five undeveloped parcels, totaling 
approximately 11.5 acres, generally located between the Union Pacific Railroad to the north, Crinklaw Lane 
to the south, Hidden Ranch Drive to the west, and Rainey Road to the east, as shown in Figure H‐6. There are 
several single‐family detached units within this subarea with horses and farm animals allowed by the zoning. 
A majority of the land is undeveloped. 
This  area  is  currently  characterized  as  semi‐rural,  but  is  surrounded  by  suburban  single‐family 
neighborhoods,  which  provides  an  opportunity  to  intensify  development  in  this  area  consistent  with 
surrounding development.  
L OS  A NGELES  A VENUE  T RANSIT ‐O RIENTED  D EVELOPMENT AND  I NDUSTRIAL 
A REA  
The  Los  Angeles  Avenue  Transit‐Oriented  Development  and  Industrial  Area  is  located  along  Los  Angeles 
Avenue, between Tapo Street to the west and Stearns Street to the east. Existing land uses include industrial 
and business park uses related to the Tapo Canyon Business Park, vacant land, and a commercial shopping 
center.  The  shopping  center  has  the  typical  1980s  configuration  (isolated  buildings  among  vast  surface 
parking lots). This configuration is outdated and cannot accommodate the modern trend of retail shopping. 
One building in the shopping center site has been vacant for some time. Other existing land uses include the 
Metrolink rail line, which bisects this area and Metrolink station located west of Stearns Street, south of Los 
Angeles  Avenue.  An  existing  mobile  home  park  is  also  located  in  this  area,  which  presents  significant 
potential for redevelopment given the age and condition of the park and the underutilized character. 
This is the community’s only Metrolink Station, and it provides a unique opportunity to target higher density 
and intensity, mixed‐use development near transit use. 
T RENDS OF  R ECYCLING  
As the City becomes increasingly built out, recent developments in the City have also involved the recycling 
of existing underutilized and non‐performing commercial uses: 
    ■ The  Haven  at  Tapo  Street  (108 units,  including  36  affordable  units  for  very  low  and  low  income 
       households) was approved on properties that were previously developed with retail and commercial 
       uses. This project achieved an overall density of approximately 24 units per acre. 
    ■ The 16‐unit condominium development by Mehdi Humkar has 3 units reserved for moderate income 
       households. This project was approved on properties previously with commercial and office uses. The 
       project will be developed at 8.5 units per acre. 
    ■ The 26‐unit SMV Patricia Townhomes development includes 4 units set aside as affordable housing for 
       low  income  households.  The  project  will  be  developed  by  recycling  two  single‐family  homes  and 
       achieved a density of 15 units per acre. 
GENERAL PLAN                                           4‐83                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
These  projects  were  approved  prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  City’s  new  Mixed  Use  Overlay  zoning  and 
therefore do not necessarily represent the density that can be achieved under the new zoning. Nonetheless, 
they demonstrate a trend of recycling in the community. 
The  City  was  contacted  by  a  developer  to  develop  a  115‐unit  multi‐family  residential  project  on  a  4.5‐acre 
site that is zoned Commercial Office and previously developed as the Simi Valley Hospital. The Hospital was 
vacated  and  demolished  in  2008.  Had  the  project  proceeded,  the  effective  density  would  have  equated  to 
approximately 26 units per acre. 
These recycling activities are representative of the conditions within the Opportunity Areas. As the economy 
improves and with the incentives offered by the new Mixed Use Overlay zoning, the City anticipates resumed 
interest in recycling activities. 
A VAILABILITY OF  I NFRASTRUCTURE AND  S ERVICES  
All  of  the  Opportunity  Areas,  with  the  exception  of  the  Parker  Ranch  Expansion  Area,  are  located  in 
developed  areas  of  the  City.  These  areas  are  served  with  infrastructure  and  services.  However,  as 
intensification of these areas occurs as envisioned in the  General Plan, improvements and/or expansion to 
the  existing  infrastructure  and  services  will  be  required.  In  addition,  the  City  charges  development  fees  to 
provide for parks and recreation facilities, fire services, flood control facilities, traffic improvements, schools, 
and water and sewer facilities. 
E STIMATING  C APACITY IN  O PPORTUNITY  A REA  
In  estimating  development  capacity  in  these  Opportunity  Areas,  the  City  developed  a  set  of  guiding 
assumptions for the distribution of various land uses in these areas. These assumptions are summarized in 
Table H‐42. These land use assumptions were developed with extensive community input, particularly with 
the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC), Planning Commission, and City Council, based on the existing 
conditions, redevelopment trends, and vision for these areas. 
Vacant  and  underutilized  sites  were  then  identified  utilizing  the  data  from  the  Ventura  County  Assessor’s 
Office, and refined with site visits and staff knowledge. Specifically, underutilized properties are defined as 
those  with  improvements  older  than  30  years  of  age  and  improvement‐to‐land  value  less  than  one 
(improvements  are  worth  less  than  the  land).  This  improvement‐to‐land  value  ratio  is  frequently  used  by 
economists and real estate professionals to identify potential sites for development. 
The land use distribution assumptions are then applied to these vacant and underutilized properties within 
individual subareas of the Opportunity Areas. For example, the Patricia Avenue/Heywood Street Opportunity 
Area  is  designated  for  residential  uses  only.  Therefore  100 percent  of  the  vacant  and  underutilized  sites  in 
this  area  are  anticipated  to  be  redeveloped  with  High  and  Very  High  Density  residential  uses.  However, 
Subarea D of Tapo Street Corridor is anticipated to be developed with 20 percent residential and 60 percent 
mixed‐use,  with  the  remaining  20 percent  being  commercial‐only  developments.  Vacant  and  underutilized 
properties  in  this  area  are  apportioned  accordingly.  Therefore,  the  estimated  capacity  already  takes  into 
consideration that mixed use areas may not always include a residential component. 
Average development density is assumed at 80 percent of the maximum density identified for each type of 
development for each subarea according to Table H‐43. To calculate the potential number of units that can 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         4‐84                                        GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
be  accommodated  on  each  parcel  in  the  MU  Overlay  District,  estimates  were  calculated  for  a  variety  of 
different  development  scenarios  (senior  housing,  small  apartments,  large  apartments,  and  townhomes) 
based on the residential square footage realized by recent projects and City survey of average unit sizes by 
type of housing. 
Under the senior housing development scenario, all residences were assumed to be one‐bedroom units with 
an approximate gross square footage of 850 sf per unit. This gross area was estimated based on apartment 
size data from a 2008 citywide survey of rental housing units. According to this survey, the average size of a 
non‐senior market‐rate one‐ to two‐ bedroom apartment in the City was 839 sf. To produce a conservative 
estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  850 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by  approximately 
20 percent) to 1,020 sf to account for hallways, lobby, and other common areas. Based on an average gross 
square footage of 1,020 sf per unit, a maximum density of 42 du/acre can reasonably be achieved under this 
development scenario. 
Under  the  small  apartment  scenario,  residences  were  assumed  to  be  one‐  to  two‐bedroom  units  with  an 
approximate gross square footage of 1,050 sf per unit. This gross area was estimated based on the inflated 
square  footage  estimate  for  senior  housing  units  (1,020 sf  per  unit  discussed  above).  To  produce  a 
conservative  estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  1,050 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by 
approximately  20 percent)  to  1,260 sf  to  account  for  common  areas.  Based  on  an  average  gross  square 
footage  of  1,260 sf  per  unit,  a  maximum  density  of  34 du/acre  can  reasonably  be  achieved  under  this 
development scenario. 
Under  the  large  apartment  scenario,  all  residences  were  assumed  to  be  three‐bedroom  units  with  an 
approximate  gross  square  footage  of  1,620 sf  per  unit.  This  gross  area  was  estimated  based  on  apartment 
size data from the citywide survey of rental housing units. According to the survey, the average size of a non‐
senior market‐rate three‐bedroom apartment in the City was just under 1,200 sf. To produce a conservative 
estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  1,350 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by  approximately 
20 percent) to 1,620 sf to account for common areas. Based on an average gross square footage of 1,620 sf 
per unit, a maximum density of 26 du/acre can reasonably be achieved under this development scenario. 
Under the townhome scenario, all residences were assumed to be three‐bedroom townhome units with an 
approximate  gross  square  footage  of  2,460 sf  per  unit.  This  gross  area  was  estimated  based  on  a  recently 
approved mixed‐use townhome project within the original MU Overlay District that covers only a small area 
of  the  City.  In  this  development,  the  average  size  of  a  townhome  unit  was  2,040 sf.  To  produce  a 
conservative  estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  2,050 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by 
approximately  20 percent)  to  2,460 sf.  Based  on  an  average  gross  square  footage  of  2,460 sf  per  unit,  a 
maximum density of 18 du/acre can reasonably be achieved under this development scenario. 
These  density  assumptions  yield  an  average  density  of  30 du/acre.  However  to  be  conservative,  future 
residential  development  in  the  newly  created  Mixed  Use  Overlay  is  estimated  at  28 du/acre,  80 percent  of 
the maximum density of 35 du/acre permitted. Based on these assumptions, vacant and underutilized areas 
in the Opportunity Areas can accommodate 1,119 units in residential‐only developments and 2,094 units in 
mixed‐use developments. 
GENERAL PLAN                                             4‐85                              CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                              CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
   Table H‐42          Opportunity Areas—Land Use Assumptions 
                                                                                                               Percentage of Land Use 
                                                                                                   MU: MU:                                   Bus 
               Area             Subarea                Land Use Options                   Res     O/Res C/Res  Coml  Office Indus Pk  Hotel Other Assumptions for Land Uses 
                                           Mixed-Use: Retail/Residential and/or                                                                                 3-story MU; 3-story office; 3-
                                    A                                                     20%      10%       30%      —      40%      —       —      —      —
                                           Commercial, and/or Office                                                                                            story MFR
  Tapo Street Corridor                      Mixed Use: vertical or horizontal,
                                                                                                                                                                3-story MU; 3-story MFR; 3-
                                   D        and/or Commercial, and/or Multi-              20%       —        60%     20%      —       —       —      —      —
                                                                                                                                                                story commercial
                                            Family Residential
                                                                                                                                                                4–5-story MU; 3–4-story
                                            Mixed Use: vertical or horizontal,
                                                                                                                                                                commercial; 3-story
   Los Angeles Ave                  B       and/or Commercial, and/or Multi-               —       20%       40%     30%      —       —     10%      —      —
                                                                                                                                                                business park; new transit
                                            Family Residential
                                                                                                                                                                station
                                           Multi-Family Residential (High and Very
  Patricia Ave/Heywood St           A                                                    100%       —         —       —       —       —       —      —      —   MFR
                                           High Density)
                                            Mixed-Density Residential/Master
   Old Town                         B                                                    100%       —         —       —       —       —       —      —      —   2-story MFR or SFR
                                            Planned Development
   Los Angeles Avenue                       Mixed-Use: Commercial/Residential
                                                                                                                                                                4-story mixed use; Metrolink
   Transit-Oriented                C        and/or Office/Residential, or                  —        —       100%      —       —       —       —      —      —
                                                                                                                                                                TOD
   Development and                          Commercial, or Office
   Industrial Area                 D        Residential Very High                        100%       —         —       —       —       —       —      —      —   4-story MFR
   MU = mixed‐use residential; MFR = multi‐family residential; du/ac = dwelling unit per acre; SFR = single‐family residential; TOD = transit‐oriented development
 
                                       
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                           4‐86                                                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

 HOUSING RESOURCES
Table H‐43           Development Potential 
                                                                   Potential                                                   Apportioning V & UU Sites                    V & UU Sites 
                                              Maximum               Density                                                     by Anticipated Land Use                   Redeveloped as 
                                                Density         (at 80% Max)                        Acres                              Distribution                  Residential or Mixed Use 
                                                                                                   Under‐      Total V 
                                                                                     Vacant        utilized    and UU                                                MFR        MU        Total 
            Objective Area                   MFR      MU        MFR        MU       (V) Sites     (UU) Sites     Sites       Residential Acres       MU Acres        Units     Units      Units 
Tapo Street Corridor A                        35       35        28        28         0.83           6.71        7.54               1.51                3.02          42         83        125
Tapo Street Corridor D                        35       35        28        28         2.63          35.43        38.06              7.61               22.84          213       639        852
Los Angeles Ave.                               0       35         0        28         0.93          60.40        61.33              0.00               36.80           0       1,020      1,020
Patricia Ave./Heywood St. A                   35        0        28          0        1.45           8.55        10.00             10.00                0.00          270         0        270
Patricia Ave./Heywood St. A                   20        0        16          0        2.56           9.04        11.60             11.60                0.00          172         0        172
Old Town                                      15        0        12          0        0.00           9.97        9.97               9.97                0.00          119        0         119
Parker Ranch                                   5        0         4          0        7.34           4.00       11.34              11.34                0.00          45         0         45
Los Angeles Ave. TOD/Ind’l C                   0       35         0        28         0.00          12.60        12.60              0.00               12.60           0        352        352
Los Angeles Ave. TOD/Ind’l D                  35        0        28          0        0.00           9.22        9.22              9.22                 0.00          258        0         258
                                 Totals                                              15.74         155.92       171.66             61.25               75.26         1,119     2,094      3,213
The total number of units in each area is capped by the total number of units that can be developed in the area on a parcel‐by‐parcel basis, not by multiplying the aggregated acreage with the 
average density. Refer to the detailed sites inventory in the appendix to parcel‐by‐parcel estimate. 
  
 GENERAL PLAN                                                                                  4‐87                                                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
  

The  Mixed Use Overlay zoning regulates development based on  a number of standards, including setbacks 
and height limits. It does not require a minimum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for the nonresidential component in 
a  mixed  use  development.  Therefore,  inclusion  of  commercial/retail  uses  in  a  development  would  not 
preclude the project from achieving the maximum allowable density of 35 units per acre. The actual density 
achievable for each project can vary depending on the mix of unit sizes, the treatment of parking, and the 
level of amenities offered, among other factors. The City will continue to monitor the implementation of the 
Mixed Use Overlay zoning and make appropriate changes as necessary to facilitate the development of high‐
density residential and mixed use developments as envisioned by the General Plan. Such intensity was not 
previously allowed in the City. 
Because  the  Opportunity  Areas  are  comprised  of  contiguous  parcels  that  exhibit  similar  conditions  of 
underutilization, lot consolidation is feasible and encouraged. Furthermore, the key site in the Old Town Area 
is owned by one owner, as is the site identified in the Los Angeles Avenue TOD/Industrial Area. These sites 
are included in the inventory due to their potential and interest expressed by developers. Within the Tapo 
Street and Los Angeles Avenue Opportunity Areas, several property owners own multiple properties. Overall, 
42 owners in these Opportunity Areas own 61 properties. 
By creating the Mixed Use Overlay on the Opportunity Areas, contiguous parcels are able to take advantage 
of the density increase, reduced parking, and other flexible development standards offered by the Mixed Use 
Overlay. 
ADEQUACY OF SITES INVENTORY IN MEETING RHNA 
As discussed  before, the City has a RHNA of 1,256 units.  The vacant and underutilized sites can potentially 
accommodate  4,079 units  under  the  General  Plan  within  the  2013–2021  Housing  Element  period. 
Specifically, 3,040 units can be built at densities that can facilitate the development of lower‐income housing. 
Sites are also available at densities that are appropriate for moderate‐income housing. All of the City’s lower 
income  RHNA  can  be  accommodated  on  pending  and  approved  residential  projects  and  properties  zoned 
Residential  Very  High  (up  to  35 units  per  acre).  The  City  also  has  additional  capacity  to  accommodate 
its lower‐income RHNA in areas zoned Mixed Use Overlay. The capacity within the Mixed Use Overlay areas 
has already been adjusted, based on the GPAC recommended distribution of land uses within the Mixed Use 
Overlay areas. The adjustments were made to recognize not all properties within Mixed Use Overlay areas 
would  be  redeveloped  as  mixed  use  developments  and  the  City’s  desire  to  see  some  residential‐only 
developments within these mixed‐use areas (see Table H‐42 for the distribution factors). Overall, the City has 
adequate capacity to accommodate its RHNA. 
These  areas  for  future  residential/mixed  use  developments  were  identified  as  part  of  the  City’s 
comprehensive General Plan update through extensive community outreach and consultation with planning 
and development professionals. The capacity for future development presented in this Housing Element and 
General  Plan  has  already  taken  into  account  environmental  constraints  such  as  topography.  No  other 
significant environmental constraints are present to preclude redevelopment of these sites. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       4‐88                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
            Table H‐44           Adequacy of Sites in Meeting RHNA 
                                                  Extremely                              Above 
                                                     Low/         Low       Moderate  Moderate          Total 
                                                   Very Low 
            RHNA                                      310         208          229        509           1,256
            Residential Sites Inventory
            Approved and Pending Projects                  163                  4         699            866
            Multi-Family (35 du/ac)                        783                  0          0             783
            Mixed Use (35 du/ac)                          2,094                 0          0            2,094
            Multi-Family (18–20 du/ac)                      0                  172         0             172
            Multi-Family (5–15 du/ac)                       0                   0         164            164
                                           Total          3,040                176        863           4,079
 
  Financial Resources 
A  variety  of  existing  and  potential  funding  sources  are  available  for  affordable  housing  activities  in  Simi 
Valley.  Sources  of  funding  include  federal  Community  Development  Block  Grant  program  funds,  the  Local 
Housing fund, and HOME Program and CalHome funds. 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT (CDBG) FUNDS 
The City of Simi Valley receives an annual allocation of U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. The CDBG program allows the City to use federal 
funds to address local housing and community development needs. Specifically, CDBG funds can be used for 
a range of activities, including the following: 
    ■ Public services benefiting lower‐income residents and those with special needs; 
    ■ Residential or commercial rehabilitation; 
    ■ Public improvements and facilities benefiting lower‐income neighborhoods or lower‐income residents. 
The  City  anticipates  receiving  an  Entitlement  Grant  of  $540,000  annually.  However,  given  the  budgetary 
constraints at the federal level, the City’s CDBG allocation has been decreasing over the years. 
HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM (HOME) 
The  HOME  Program  was  created  under  Title  II  of  the  Cranston‐Gonzales  National  Affordable  Housing  Act 
enacted on November 28, 1990. The City of Simi Valley is not eligible to receive HOME funds directly from 
HUD. Instead, the City participates in the competitive HOME funds programs administered by the California 
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). Funds are also potentially available through the 
Ventura  County  HOME  Consortium.  Eligible  activities  include  acquisition,  rehabilitation,  construction,  and 
rental  assistance.  In  addition,  the  Program  provides  for  eligible  local  “matches”  such  as  cash  contributions 
from  non‐federal  sources,  from  state  and  local  governments  and  private  agencies,  organizations,  and 
individuals. 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐89                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                            CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
The City had previously participated in the State‐administered HOME program. Funds were used to assist in 
the  rehabilitation  of  older  homes  and  to  provide  monthly  senior  rent  subsidies.    A  potential  constraint  to 
continuing use of HOME funds is the requirement for a 25‐percent local match with non‐federal funds.  With 
the  dissolution  of  redevelopment  and  therefore  loss  of  redevelopment  funds,  the  City  may  have  difficulty 
securing the required local match. 
SECTION 8 HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS 
The  federal  Section 8  Housing  Choice  Voucher  program  provides  rental  assistance  to  very  low‐income 
households  in  need  of  affordable  housing.  The  Section 8  program  assists  a  very  low  income  household  by 
paying  the  difference  between  30 percent  of  the  gross  household  income  and  the  cost  of  rent.  Section 8 
assistance  is  structured  as  vouchers;  this  allows  the  voucher  recipients  to  choose  housing  that  may  cost 
above the fair market rent as long as the recipients pay for the additional cost. The City contracts with the 
Housing  Authority  of  the  County  of  Ventura  to  administer  its  share  of  the  Section 8  program.  The  Housing 
Authority manages an allocation of approximately 800 vouchers for people living in Simi Valley. 
  Administrative Resources 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT 
The Planning Division of the Environmental Services Department provides information, technical assistance, 
and  project  review  of  development  proposals.  The  Division’s  General  Plan  Section  prepares  updates  and 
amendments to the General Plan, which serves as the “blueprint” and City’s vision for future development of 
the community. This section is also responsible for researching and analyzing  population/growth forecasts. 
The Division's Environmental Planning Section conducts environmental reviews of all development activities 
within  the  City,  and  prepares  environmental  documents  for  General  Plan  implementation  measures  and 
other  City‐initiated  projects.  The  Division's  Current  Planning  Section  processes  applications  for  residential, 
commercial, and industrial development through a formal review and public hearing process. 
The Housing Division works with property developers to assist in bringing affordable housing to the City. The 
Housing Division also creates and monitors various programs such as: the Home Rehabilitation Program and 
the  Fair  Housing  Outreach  and  Counseling  Program.  In  addition,  the  Division  administers  the  Community 
Development Block Grant Program (CDBG). 
HOUSING AUTHORITY OF THE COUNTY OF VENTURA 
The  Housing  Authority  of  County  of  Ventura  administers  the  Section 8  Housing  Choice  Voucher  Program 
(HCVP) for the City of Simi Valley. Participants of the HCVP may also participate in the County’s Family Self‐
Sufficiency (FSS) program. The objective of the FSS program is to reduce or eliminate the dependency of low‐
income families on welfare assistance and on Section 8, public assistance, or any federal, state, or local rent 
subsidy program or homeownership program. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐90                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING RESOURCES
HOUSING DEVELOPERS 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  works  with  both  non‐profit  and  for‐profit  developers  to  produce  quality  affordable 
housing in the City. Table H‐45 shows the different developers the City has partnered with or attempted to 
partner with to develop affordable housing. 
 
  Table H‐45           Housing Developers 
             Developer	                           Housing Development	                         Type of Housing	
                                   Casa de Paz                                      Apartments
  Many Mansions                    La Rahada                                        Apartments
                                   Peppertree                                       Apartments
                                   Kuehner Homes                                    Ownership Housing
  Cabrillo Economic
                                   Apricot Ranch                                    Ownership Housing
  Development Corporation
                                   Plaza del Sol                                    Apartments
  Habitat for Humanity             Royal Avenue and Sequoia                         Ownership Housing
  LINC Housing MCA Housing         Harmony Terrace                                  Senior Apartments
  Partners; MW Development         Seasons/ Haven at Tapo St.                       Senior Apartments
  Christian Senior Housing
                                   Heywood Gardens                                  Senior Apartments
  Foundation
  The Olsen Company                Proposed affordable project, later withdrawn
                                   Meadowood Apartments                             Apartments (affordability has expired)
  Essex Property Trust, Inc.
                                   Hidden Valley Apartments                         Apartments
  Leff Development LLC             Paseo de las Flores                              Senior Apartments
                                   L.A. Madera Village                              Ownership Housing (unbuilt)
  Casden Properties LLC            Creekside Apartments                             Apartments
                                   Indian Oaks Apartments                           Apartments
  Jefferson Properties             Jefferson Apartments aka Archstone Apartments    Apartments
                                   Las Serenas                                      Senior Apartments
  USA Properties Fund
                                   Vintage Paseo Apartments                         Senior Apartments
                                   Patricia Village                                 Senior Apartments
  Carlito Construction             Pattywood                                        Apartments
                                   Hillview                                         Apartments
  Corporation for Better Housing   Wood Ranch Senior Condominiums                   Senior for Sale
  AMCAL                            Sorrento Villas                                  Senior Apartments
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                 4‐91                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                          CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Opportunities for Energy Conservation 
COMMUNITY DESIGN 
General Plan 2030 will guide development decisions for the next 20 years. Sustainability is a key theme of the 
Simi Valley General Plan 2030, and the goals and policies are designed to locate housing, jobs, and services 
closer to one another to reduce automobile traffic, congestion, pollution, and resource consumption, while 
increasing  the  viability  of  businesses  and  social  interaction,  energy  efficiency,  water  conservation,  and 
recycling. Simi Valley's plans for future growth and development are guided by a commitment to protect the 
natural environment and to maintain and enhance the quality of life for all people in Simi Valley. 
SUSTAINABLE SIMI VALLEY 
The Sustainable Simi Valley Committee was formed in December of 2007 to serve in an advisory capacity to 
the  City  Council  on  sustainability  matters  in  the  City.  One  of  the  Committee's  main  duties  is  to  develop 
policies and regulations "to provide a framework that can be used to create a healthy living environment, to 
manage the efficient use and conservation of natural and economic resources, and to preserve the unique 
way of life in our community for present and future generations." 
The Sustainable Simi Valley Committee includes many different community members, including City Council 
and  Planning  Commission  officials,  members  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  the  Building  Industry 
Association,  representatives  from  Simi  Valley  Unified  School  District,  Rancho  Simi  Recreation  and  Park 
District, Southern California Edison, Southern California Gas, Waste Management, Calleguas Municipal Water 
District, and two at‐large members from the public. 
Since  its  formation,  the  Sustainable  Simi  Valley  Committee  has  developed  the  City’s  Green  Building 
Ordinance  and  the  Green  Community  Action  Plan  for  adoption  by  the  City  Council,  and  contributed  to  the 
creation of the City’s Live Green webpage. 
The Live Green webpage contains information on resources available for energy conservation such as: 
   ■ Energy Upgrade California—Find projects, rebates, and State‐certified energy efficiency contractors 
   ■ Flex  Your  Power—Get  quick  tips  for  easy  things  to  save  energy,  and  find  rebates  for  appliances, 
       lighting, heating and cooling, and energy audits 
   ■ Cool California—Find rebates and incentive programs for making the home more energy efficient 
                                     
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐92                                    GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
HOUSING PLAN 
  Goals and Policies 
GOAL HE‐1 
Balanced Community. A balanced community with services and housing opportunities is created for 
all. 
Policies 
HE‐1.1  Variety of Housing Types. Provide a wide choice of new housing featuring a range of styles, types, 
        densities,  and  amenities  to  accommodate  the  needs  of  all  socioeconomic  segments  of  the 
        community. 
HE‐1.2  Workforce and Executive Housing. Coordinate residential development strategies with economic 
        development efforts to provide housing not only for the general workforce but also to executives 
        and business owners who could be instrumental in creating and retaining jobs in the community. 
HE‐1.3  Housing  on  Underutilized  Sites.  Encourage  the  addition  of  new  dwelling  units  (multifamily 
        housing)  on  existing  parcels  in  underutilized  residential  areas  of  the  City  where  supported  by 
        existing zoning and parcel sizes. 
HE‐1.4  Lot  Consolidation.  Promote  good  site  planning  techniques  by  encouraging  lot  consolidations  in 
        areas where small and/or narrow parcels constrain development. 
HE‐1.5  Review Building Guidelines. Periodically reexamine local building design requirements, in light of 
        technological advances and changing public attitudes, for possible amendments to reduce housing 
        construction costs without sacrificing basic health and safety considerations. 
HE‐1.6  Private‐Public Partnerships. Continue to work with other public agencies and private enterprises, 
        which provide human service or housing within the City. 
HE‐1.7  Monitor  Lending  Institutions.  Monitor,  through  the  City’s  fair  housing  service  provider,  the 
        performance  of  local  lending  institutions  in  regard  to  meeting  the  credit  needs  of  all  economic 
        segments of the community. 
HE‐1.8  Incentives  for  Lower‐Income  Housing.  Continue  to  offer  financial  and  regulatory  incentives  to 
        developers of lower‐income housing projects as funding permits. 
HE‐1.9  Expedited Processing for Affordable Housing. Continue to expedite the processing of residential 
        development  proposals  and  permits  and  granting  priority  queuing  to  permit  applications  for 
        affordable housing projects. 
GENERAL PLAN                                          4‐93                             CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                           CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
GOAL HE‐2 
Existing  Housing  Stock.  The  existing  residential  housing  stock  is  maintained  and  improved  where 
necessary. 
Policies 
HE‐2.1     Code  Enforcement.  Utilize  the  City’s  code  enforcement  capabilities  to  ensure  that  landlords 
           renting unsanitary and unsafe housing units correct identified code violations. 
HE‐2.2     Housing  Maintenance.  Encourage  continued  maintenance  of  currently  sound  housing  through  a 
           local information and assistance program. 
HE‐2.3     Preserve  Existing  Affordable  Housing.  Continue  to  implement  programs  that  preserve  the  City’s 
           existing affordable housing stock. 
HE‐2.4     Home  Rehabilitation.  Continue  to  offer  home  rehabilitation  programs  to  lower  and  moderate‐
           income homeowners to maintain and improve existing neighborhoods. 
HE‐2.5     Rehab of Substandard Units. Encourage the rehabilitation of substandard dwelling units instead of 
           requiring their demolition, whenever possible, to preserve the existing affordable housing stock. 
HE‐2.6     Energy Conservation in New Housing. Encourage the use of energy conserving techniques in the 
           siting and design of new housing. 
HE‐2.7     Enforce  Energy  Conservation  Laws.  Actively  enforce  all  state  energy  conservation  requirements 
           for new residential construction. 
HE‐2.8     Promote  Solar  Power.  Encourage  and  promote  the  maximum  use  of  passive  solar  heating  and 
           cooling opportunities in housing units throughout the City. 
GOAL HE‐3 
Affordable Housing. A wide range of housing types and an adequate supply of affordable housing is 
provided while maintaining the quality of life for all residents. 
Policies 
HE‐3.1     Density  Bonuses.  Make  necessary  density  bonuses  or  other  incentives  available  consistent  with 
           state law and community interests to: 
              ■ Encourage affordable rental housing targeted for lower‐income households; and 
              ■ Encourage  affordable  ownership  housing  targeted  for  low‐  and  moderate‐income 
                  households. 
HE‐3.2     Affordable Housing Agreements. Require developers to enter into affordable housing agreements 
           to  ensure  the  continuation  of  affordability  of  units  in  those  projects  that  have  received  density 
           bonuses, regulatory incentives, and/or financial assistance for the provision of affordable housing. 
HE‐3.3     Affordable  Housing  Design.  Encourage  attractive  and  functional  designs  for  affordable  housing 
           during the development review process through: 
              ■ Designs that blend harmoniously with the surrounding neighborhood; 
              ■ Exterior treatment that is compatible with market rate housing; 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      4‐94                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
            ■ Project designs that minimize safety and maintenance problems; and 
            ■ Provision of amenities such as recreational facilities or enriched landscaping. 
HE‐3.4   Inclusive  Affordable  Housing.  Continue  to  review  the  design  of  all  housing  developments  to 
         ensure  that  units  designed  to  be  affordable  complement  the  character  of  the  surrounding 
         neighborhood and do not separate lower‐income families from the community. The City may allow 
         unit  clustering  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  development  of  affordable  ownership  units  and 
         senior housing. 
HE‐3.5   Incentives  for  Special  Needs  Affordable  Housing.  Provide  incentives  to  developers  of  affordable 
         housing  to  construct  affordable  housing  for  groups  with  special  needs  in  relationship  to  the 
         amount of affordable units provided whenever possible. 
HE‐3.6   Flexibility  in  Housing  Design.  Continue  to  utilize  the  planned  or  cluster  development  permit 
         process to provide for flexibility in housing design. 
HE‐3.7   Quality Affordable Housing. To the extent feasible, require affordable units to be provided in the 
         same  quality  and  design  as  other  units  in  the  development  and  to  be  evenly  distributed 
         throughout the development. 
GOAL HE‐4 
Special Needs Groups. Programs to meet the special needs of target groups are available. 
Policies 
HE‐4.1   Equitable  Special  Needs  Housing.  Work  to  provide  housing  for  special  household  groups  in  an 
         equitable and balanced manner including the provision of Universal Design improvements in new 
         construction and in rehabilitation projects where feasible. 
HE‐4.2   Housing for Low‐income Seniors. Encourage housing programs, which address the special financial 
         needs of lower‐income senior citizens. 
HE‐4.3   Senior Community Housing. Encourage the construction of specialized housing for senior citizens 
         in the community, including planned senior communities. 
HE‐4.4   Transit  Accessible  Senior  Housing.  Encourage  the  placement  of  senior  housing  on  public  transit 
         routes and within a short walking distance of daily shopping facilities and near medical facilities. 
HE‐4.5   Second Dwelling Units. Work with individuals who want to build second dwelling units on existing 
         residential lots, in accordance with state law, in order to increase the supply of housing for elderly 
         households. 
HE‐4.6   Low‐Income Housing for Large Households. Encourage the construction of lower‐income housing 
         units of three bedrooms or more for large family households. 
HE‐4.7   Handicap Accessible Housing. Review developments receiving financial incentives to ensure that a 
         reasonable number of units are designed and equipped for handicapped persons. 
HE‐4.8   Housing  Designed  for  Disabled.  Encourage  construction  of  affordable  housing  units  which  meet 
         the design needs of the disabled (including those with developmental disabilities). 
GENERAL PLAN                                             4‐95                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                        CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
HE‐4.9      Emergency  Shelter  Sites.  Encourage  the  development  of  emergency  shelters  by  identifying  the 
            appropriate potential sites for such development. 
HE‐4.10  Eliminate  Housing  Discrimination.  Continue  fair  housing  outreach  efforts  to  eliminate  housing 
            discrimination based on race, color, creed, national origin, age, handicap, sex, or marital status. 
HE‐4.11  Investigate Discrimination Complaints. Utilize local fair housing agencies to promptly investigate 
            complaints involving housing discrimination. 
HE‐4.12  Tenant‐Landlord Relations. Promote greater awareness of tenant and landlord rights. 
HE‐4.13  Funding for Homeless Housing. Continue to assist and support local social service agencies in their 
            applications for federal funds to provide emergency shelters for homeless individuals and families. 
HE‐4.14  Housing  for  all  Household  Sizes.  Promote  the  provision  of  both  purchase  and  rental  housing  to 
            meet the needs of families of all sizes. 
  Housing Programs 
PROGRAM 1: HOME REHABILITATION PROGRAM 
The  Home  Rehabilitation  Program  offers  low  interest  deferred  loans  to  low  and  median‐income 
homeowners. Qualified owners of detached single‐family residences are eligible for a deferred 2 percent loan 
of up to $50,000 with no monthly payments.  
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Continue to provide loans to qualified low and median‐income homeowners. 
   ■ Disseminate  information  to  homeowners  regarding  rehabilitation  standards  and  the  Home 
       Rehabilitation Program. 
   ■ Improve 15 housing units annually. 
Responsible Agency: 
               Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
               HOME (program income); Local Housing Fund; CalHome; Energy Efficiency & Conservation Block 
               Grant 
Relevant Policies: 
               HE‐2.3, HE‐2.4, HE‐2.5, and HE‐4.2 
PROGRAM 2: CODE ENFORCEMENT 
The  City  of  Simi  Valley  has  adopted  municipal  codes  to  enhance  the  quality  of  life  for  its  residents  and 
provide equitable standards for the business community. The City enforces municipal ordinances and permit 
compliance  by  promoting  voluntary  compliance  through  working  in  partnership  with  the  citizens  and 
businesses  of  Simi  Valley.  This  is  accomplished  through  administering  programs,  responding  to  citizen 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                      4‐96                                       GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
questions  and  concerns,  and  enforcing  regulations  that  preserve,  protect  and  enhance  the  livability, 
appearance, and the social and economic conditions of the community. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Continue code enforcement activities and connect households in need of City rehabilitation programs. 
Responsible Agency: 
               Community Services Department 
Funding Sources: 
               General Fund 
Relevant Policies: 
               HE‐2.1, HE‐2.2, and HE‐2.5 
PROGRAM 3: PRESERVATION OF AT‐RISK UNITS 
Nine  affordable  housing  projects  in  the  City  –  Indian  Oaks,  Shadow  Ridge,  Courtyard,  Baywood,  Regency, 
Patricia Village, Westgate, Heywood Place, and Pepper Tree Court – are considered at risk of converting to 
market‐rate housing during the planning period of this at‐risk analysis (October 15, 2013 through October 15, 
2023).  Combined,  these  nine  projects  offer  251 units  affordable  to  very  low‐  and  low‐income  households.  
Two of these projects were financed with tax exempt bonds and the seven other projects set aside affordable 
units  in  exchange  for  a  density  bonus  from  the  City.    No  more  than  20  percent  of  the  units  among  these 
projects are affordable. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Annually monitor the status of at‐risk units by maintaining contact with property owners and pursue 
        extension of affordability covenants in exchange of incentives, if feasible. 
   ■ Work  with  property  owners  intending  to  opt  out  of  the  affordability  covenants  to  ensure  tenants 
        receive adequate notice. 
   ■ Support  and  assist  property  owners  in  applying  for  state  and  federal  at‐risk  housing  preservation 
        funds. 
   ■ Provide  technical  assistance  to  tenants  to  access  other  affordable  housing  resources,  such  as 
        assistance  to  tenants  of  at‐risk  affordable  housing  developments  by  referring  them  to  the  Area 
        Housing  Authority  of  the  County  of  Ventura;  the  Affordable  Housing  Guide,  which  contains  a  list  of 
        affordable  apartments  in  the  City;  and  Community  Action  of  Ventura  County,  which  administers  the 
        City’s Eviction Prevention and Security Deposit Assistance programs. 
Responsible Agency: 
               Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
               Local Housing Fund; State At‐Risk Housing Preservation funds; CDBG 
Relevant Policies: 
               HE‐2.3 
GENERAL PLAN                                               4‐97                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                        CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
PROGRAM 4: SECTION 8 HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS 
The  Area  Housing  Authority  of  the  County  of  Ventura administers  the  Section  8  Housing  Choice  Voucher 
Program  for  Simi  Valley  residents  on  behalf  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development. 
Section 8 requires a very low‐income renter to pay up to 30 percent of their gross monthly income towards 
rent and picks up the balance on the renter’s behalf. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Continue to participate in the federally sponsored Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program. 
    ■ Disseminate information to the public regarding the Section 8 Program and promote participation by 
        rental property owners. 
    ■ Promote programs to extremely low‐income households. 
    ■ Continue to provide Section 8 Vouchers to approximately 800 households annually. 
Responsible Agency: 
                Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
                HUD Section 8 funds 
Relevant Policies: 
                HE‐4.1 and 4.2 
PROGRAM 5: FORECLOSURE PREVENTION ASSISTANCE 
In  2008,  the  NeighborWorks®  Home  Ownership  Center  (HOC)  team  launched  its  “A  New  Way  Home” 
campaign  in  conjunction  with  its  sister  agency,  the  Ventura  County  Community  Development  Corporation 
(VCCDC), to increase awareness of its foreclosure prevention assistance. Under the program, HOC counselors 
assist  local  homeowners  with  one‐on‐one  counseling,  leading  to  action  plans  to  avoid  foreclosure  or  offer 
alternatives  to  foreclosure  if  homeownership  cannot  be  maintained.  The  HOC  also  offers  workshops  to 
educate  people  about  the  dangers  of  abusive  real  estate  and  lending  practices  and  steps  to  avoid  the 
foreclosure process.  
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Disseminate information to the public regarding foreclosure prevention assistance. 
    ■ Provide assistance to 30 households annually. 
Responsible Agency: 
                Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
                NeighborWorks 
Relevant Policies: 
                HE‐1.6, HE‐4.1, HE‐4.2, and HE‐4.14 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       4‐98                                    GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
PROGRAM 6: ENERGY CONSERVATION/GREEN BUILDING 
The City has taken a strong stand for energy efficiency in new construction. On December 7, 2009, the City 
Council  adopted  the  California  Green  Building  Standards  Code  with  local  amendments  that  include  energy 
efficiency performance standards for all new residential construction and residential remodeling over 500 sf 
to  exceed  current  Title  24  energy  code  requirements  by  5  and  10 percent  respectively.  The  City  strongly 
encourages  applicants  for  publicly  subsidized  home  rehabilitation  projects  to  prioritize  energy  efficiency 
improvements,  including  windows,  water  heaters,  cooling  system  repairs  or  upgrades,  weatherization,  and 
other measures that will save money and energy. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Offer  education  and  provide  outreach  to  residents  and  developers  regarding  energy  efficiency  and 
       greenbuilding requirements (ongoing). 
    ■ Increase long‐term affordability of housing by improving energy efficiency (ongoing). 
    ■ Participate  in  Energy  Leader  Partnership  Program  with  SCE  and  participation  in  first  Green 
       Communities Challenge by the Institute for Local Government. 
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
              Federal and Utilities 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐2.6, HE‐2.7, and HE‐2.8 
PROGRAM 7: AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT 
Through Affordable Housing Agreements, the City negotiates with developers for the inclusion of affordable 
housing in new developments. The City has been successful in achieving hundreds of affordable rental and 
ownership housing units for lower‐income households using this mechanism. In addition, the City utilizes a 
variety of funding sources to assist in the development of affordable housing. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Continue to facilitate affordable housing using regulatory incentives. 
    ■ Continue to offer nonprofit housing developers up to two rounds of review by the Affordable Housing 
       Subcommittee at no fees. 
    ■ Annually explore funding availability at the state and federal levels and pursue funding as appropriate. 
    ■ Facilitate the development of 100 units affordable to lower‐income households (with a portion being 
       targeted for extremely low‐income households).  
    ■ As funding permits, prioritize affordable housing funds for projects that set aside a portion of the units 
       for  extremely  low  income  households  and  persons  with  disabilities,  including  developmental 
       disabilities. 
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Planning Division 
GENERAL PLAN                                            4‐99                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                         CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Funding Sources: 
              HOME funds and HOME (program income); Local Housing Fund 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐1.1,  HE‐1.3,  HE‐1.4,  HE‐1.6,  HE‐1.8,  HE‐1.9,  HE‐2.6,  HE‐2.7,  HE‐2.8,  HE‐3.1,  HE‐3.2,  HE‐3.3, 
              HE‐3.4, HE‐3.5, HE‐3.7, HE‐4.1, HE‐4.2, HE‐4.3, HE‐4.4, HE‐4.6, and HE‐4.8 
PROGRAM 8: ADEQUATE SITES INVENTORY 
The City has a Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) of 1,256 units, including 310 extremely low/very 
low‐income, 208 low‐income, 229 moderate‐income, and 509 above moderate‐income units for the period of 
2013  through  2021.  The  City  will  ensure  that  an  adequate  supply  of  vacant  and  underutilized  sites  at 
appropriate  densities  and  development  standards  to  accommodate  the  remaining  RHNA  is  available  by 
maintaining an inventory of vacant and underutilized sites. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Monitor the development trends in the City, particularly on the sites identified in this Housing Element 
       to ensure continued ability to accommodate the RHNA. 
    ■ Assist in the identification of sites with potential for lot consolidation and housing development. 
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Planning Division 
Funding Sources: 
              Departmental budget 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐1.2, HE‐1.3, HE‐1.4, HE‐1.6, and HE‐3.6 
PROGRAM 9: MIXED‐USE 
Mixed‐use  developments  incorporate  a  variety  of  commercial  uses  in  close  proximity  to  residential  units. 
Currently, mixed‐use developments are not very common in Simi Valley. However, the City recognizes that 
because  vacant  land  within  the  City  is  limited,  future  housing  growth  will  need  to  include  a  significant 
amount  of  multi‐family,  attached  and  mixed‐use  development.  The  City  recently  completed  a  mixed‐use 
development  (Haven  at  Tapo  Street)  that  included  72  townhomes,  36  senior  apartments  and  a  12,000‐
square‐foot retail component. This project is currently under construction. The City’s Metrolink station also 
offers  opportunities  for  transit‐oriented  uses,  including  mixed‐use  development,  new 
commercial/entertainment uses, and new housing. During the implementation of General Plan 2030, the City 
will work to focus higher density developments and mixed‐use projects in areas adjacent to transit stations, 
along transit corridors and commercial corridors, near job centers, and in other appropriate areas throughout 
the City. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                       4‐100                                    GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Encourage  mixed‐use  development  along  transit  corridors  and  other  appropriate  areas  through  the 
        following incentives: 
        > Shared parking. 
        > Reduced  parking  requirements  –  The  City  revised  the  Development  Code  to  provide  reduced 
            parking for mixed‐use developments (see Table H‐33). 
        > Height  limits  –  The  City  revised  the  Development  Code  to  provide  for  a  building  height  limit  of 
            55 feet and four stories (compared to 48 feet and three stories in commercial zones). 
        > Reduced  setbacks  –  The  City  revised  the  Development  Code  to  reduce  setbacks  for  mixed‐use 
            developments (see Table H‐32). 
Responsible Agency: 
               Environmental Services Department/Planning Division 
Funding Sources: 
               Departmental Budget 
Relevant Policies: 
               HE‐1.1,  HE‐1.2,  HE‐1.3,  HE‐1.4,  HE‐1.6,  HE‐2.6,  HE‐2.7,  HE‐2.8,  HE‐3.1,  HE‐3.4,  HE‐3.6,  HE‐4.1, 
               HE‐4.7, and HE‐4.14 
PROGRAM 10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REVIEW 
PROCESS 
The  City  continues  to  monitor  its  development  standards  and  development  review/approval  process.  To 
facilitate  development  within  the  community,  the  City  has  established  a  Permit  Processing  Review 
Committee. The objective of the Committee is to review and recommend changes to the City’s Development 
Code in order to streamline the review process and remove constraints to development. The Committee has 
recommended the revision of the City’s residential parking requirements to be consistent with neighboring 
jurisdictions, establishing the parking requirements based on the number of bedrooms per unit. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
    ■ Continue to review and improve the City’s development standards and review process. 
    ■ Monitor  the  implementation  of  the  Mixed  Use  Overlay  to  ensure  the  adopted  standards  facilitate 
        residential and mixed use developments at the maximum allowable density. 
Responsible Agencies: 
               Environmental Services Department/Planning Division; Permit Processing Review Committee 
Funding Sources: 
               Departmental Budget 
Relevant Policies: 
               HE‐1.1 and HE‐1.3 
GENERAL PLAN                                              4‐101                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                       CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
PROGRAM 11: ZONING ORDINANCE 
Extremely low‐income households and households with special needs have limited housing options. Housing 
types  appropriate  for  these  groups  include:  emergency  shelters,  transitional  housing,  supportive  housing, 
and single‐room occupancy (SRO) units. The City of Simi Valley recently amended its Development Code to 
specifically address the provision of transitional housing, supportive housing, and SRO housing. The City will 
continue  to  monitor  the  Development  Code  for  potential  constraints  and  amend  the  Code  as  necessary  to 
address any potential issues. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Continue  to  monitor  the  Development  Code  for  potential  constraints  and  amend  the  Code  as 
       necessary to address any potential issues. 
   ■ Annually review state and federal regulations to ensure the Development Code complies with current 
       regulations. 
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Planning Division 
Funding Sources: 
              Departmental Budget 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐1.1, HE‐4.1, HE‐4.3, HE‐4.7, HE‐4.8, HE‐4.9, and HE‐4.14 
PROGRAM 12: LOT CONSOLIDATION PROGRAM 
Future residential development in the City will likely occur as infill housing and mixed‐use developments in 
opportunity  areas.  The  City  adopted  a  Lot  Consolidation  incentive  and  the  Revitalization  of  Obsolete  and 
Underused Properties policy in June 2012, and City staff will continue to implement these policies. 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Continue  to  implement  adopted  lot  consolidation  and  revitalization  policies  during  the  2013‐2021 
       planning period. 
   ■ Promote  policies  through  information  at  public  counters  and  on  City  website  and  provide  technical 
       assistance to property owners and interested developers.  
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Planning Division 
Funding Sources: 
              Departmental Budget 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐1.1, HE‐1.2, HE‐1.3, HE‐1.4, HE‐1.5, HE‐4.2, and HE‐4.14 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                     4‐102                                     GENERAL PLAN 
 

HOUSING PLAN
PROGRAM 13: FAIR HOUSING 
The  City  contracts  with  the  Southern  California  Housing  Rights  Center  (HRC)  to  actively  inform  residents, 
landlords  of  residential  property,  and  others  involved  in  the  insurance,  construction,  sale  or  lease  of 
residential property of the laws pertaining to fair housing. The HRC provides a wide array of programs and 
services to its clients free of charge, including: 
   ■   Landlord‐Tenant Counseling 
   ■   Predatory Lending Information & Referrals 
   ■   Housing Discrimination Investigation 
   ■   Enforcement & Advocacy 
   ■   Outreach & Education 
O BJECTIVES AND  T IMEFRAME  
   ■ Continue to contract with the Southern California Housing Rights Center (HRC) to provide fair housing 
       services to residents. 
   ■ Disseminate information to the public on the array of fair housing programs and services provided by 
       HRC. 
   ■   Refer complaints and inquiries to the Southern California Housing Rights Center. 
   ■   Place fair housing brochures at City counters and community locations. 
   ■   Provide a link to the Southern California Housing Rights Center on the City’s website. 
   ■   Include public presentations with different community groups in annual fair housing service contracts. 
Responsible Agency: 
              Environmental Services Department/Housing & Special Projects Division 
Funding Sources: 
              CDBG 
Relevant Policies: 
              HE‐1.6, HE‐1.7, HE‐4.10, HE‐4.11, and HE‐4.12 
GENERAL PLAN                                            4‐103                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                    CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Summary of Objectives 
Table H‐46  summarizes  the  quantifiable  objectives  presented  for  each  program  earlier.  Objectives  are 
categorized as units to be constructed, rehabilitated, or preserved by income level. 
 
  Table H‐46           Quantified Objectives 
                                                               Extremely  Very                      Above 
                                                                  Low     Low   Low  Moderate     Moderate 
  Construction (Based on anticipated production given
                                                                  155     155   208    229           509
  resources available)
  Rehabilitation (Home Rehabilitation Program)                     0       0     60     0             0
  Conservation/Preservation (At-Risk Housing Preservation)         0      163    88     0             0
  Housing Assistance (Housing Choice Vouchers)                    400     400     0     0             0
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                        4‐104                           GENERAL PLAN 
 

        Appendix H1  Review of Past Accomplishments 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY       H1‐1              GENERAL PLAN 
 

                                                                                                                                                       CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
 
  Table H1‐1             Review of Past Accomplishments 
     2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                             Objectives                                        Accomplishment                     Continued Appropriateness 
  Program 1: Home Rehabilitation              Continue to provide loans to qualified low-income       Overall, 63 housing units were rehabilitated      Rehabilitation of
  Program                                     homeowners.                                             from 2008 to 2012. Of the households              deteriorated housing is an
  The Home Rehabilitation Program offers      Disseminate information to homeowners regarding         assisted, 30 were very low-income                 important goal of the City.
  low interest deferred loans to low- and     rehabilitation standards and the Home                   households, 27 were low-income                    This program is included in
  median-income homeowners.                   Rehabilitation Program.                                 households and six were moderate-income           the 2013–2021 Housing
                                                                                                      households.                                       Element.
                                              Improve 15 housing units annually.
                                                                                                      The City’s Home Rehabilitation Coordinator
                                                                                                      routinely provides technical assistance to
                                                                                                      local property owners regarding housing
                                                                                                      maintenance.
  Program 2: Code Enforcement                 Continue code enforcement activities and connect        Between 2008 and 2012, the City                   This program is included in
  The City enforces municipal ordinances      households in need of City rehabilitation programs.     addressed and obtained compliance on              the 2013–2021 Housing
  and permit compliance by promoting                                                                  1,186 property maintenance violations.            Element.
  voluntary compliance through working in
  partnership with the citizens and
  businesses of Simi Valley.
  Program 3: Preservation of At-Risk          Annually monitor the status of at-risk units by         All of the affordable housing units at-risk       The City will continue to
  Units                                       maintaining contact with property owners and HUD        during the 2008-2014 Housing Element              monitor the status of
  Eight affordable housing projects in the    Multi-Family Housing Division.                          converted to market rate. The majority of         housing units at risk of
  City – Regency, Creekside, Patricia         Solicit interest and participation of nonprofit housing these projects (seven of eight) were              converting to market-rate
  Partners, Indian Oaks, Villas at Wood       developers to acquire and preserve at-risk units.       required to maintain affordable units in          housing. This program is
  Ranch, Shadow Ridge Apartments,                                                                     exchange for a density bonus. No public           included in the 2013–2021
                                              Work with property owners intending to opt out of
  Courtyard, and Baywood Apartments – are                                                             funding was involved in these projects.           Housing Element.
                                              the affordability covenants to ensure tenants receive
  considered at risk of converting to market-                                                         Preservation of these at-risk units is difficult
                                              adequate notice.
  rate housing during the planning period of                                                          as only a small percentage of the units in
                                              Support and assist property owners in applying for      these projects are reserved as affordable
  this at-risk analysis (July 1, 2008 through
                                              state and federal at-risk housing preservation funds.   housing. The majority of the units at these
  June 30, 2018).
                                              Provide technical assistance to tenants to access       projects are market-rate units. Preservation
                                              other affordable housing resources.                     of the affordable units by way of acquiring
                                                                                                      the entire projects is financially infeasible,
                                                                                                      especially with the loss of redevelopment
                                                                                                      funds.
                                                                                                      The City’s strategy is to continue to
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                      H1‐2                                                                   GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H1                    REVIEW OF PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS
  Table H1‐1             Review of Past Accomplishments 
     2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                             Objectives                                     Accomplishment                Continued Appropriateness 
                                                                                                   replenish the affordable housing inventory
                                                                                                   by offering regulatory incentives. The City
                                                                                                   continues to work with property owners and
                                                                                                   pursue partnership opportunities with non-
                                                                                                   profits to expand affordable housing.
  Program 4: First-Time Homebuyer              Disseminate information to the public regarding the Overall, the City’s first-time homebuyer     This program has been
  Program                                      First-Time Homebuyer Program.                       program has assisted 65 households in        suspended indefinitely due
  The First-Time Homebuyer Program             Provide assistance to 15 households annually.       achieving homeownership since 2008. Of       to a lack of funding.
  currently offers qualified low-income first-                                                     the households assisted, nine were very      However, this type of
  time homebuyers who wish to purchase a                                                           low-income households, 54 were low-          assistance is offered
  home in Simi Valley a deferred payment                                                           income households and two were               through other means with
  second trust deed loan (no monthly                                                               moderate-income households.                  Ventura County.
  payments required) up to $50,000 per                                                             The City continues to actively promote       This program is not included
  bedroom, not to exceed $200,000.                                                                 various first-time homebuyer assistance      in the 2013–2021 Housing
                                                                                                   programs by providing information to the     Element.
                                                                                                   public.
                                                                                                   The City previously funded several First-
                                                                                                   Time Homebuyer Assistance Program loans
                                                                                                   through the CalHFA loan program and
                                                                                                   continues to promote that loan program.
                                                                                                   The City will continue to explore available
                                                                                                   funding sources to provide down payment
                                                                                                   assistance to first-time homebuyers.
  Program 5: Security Deposit Assistance       Disseminate information to the public regarding the Overall, the City’s Security Deposit         This program has been
  Program                                      Security Deposit Assistance Program.                Assistance Program has assisted 21           suspended indefinitely due
  This program assists eligible residents with Provide assistance to 6 households annually.        households since 2008. All of the            to a lack of funding.
  up to two-thirds of the required security                                                        households assisted were very low=income     However, this type of
  deposit, up to a maximum of $1,200, for all                                                      households.                                  assistance is offered
  qualified very low-income families seeking                                                                                                    through other means with
  to secure a rental unit in Simi Valley.                                                                                                       Ventura County.
                                                                                                                                                This program is not included
                                                                                                                                                in the 2013–2021 Housing
                                                                                                                                                Element.
  Program 6: Section 8 Housing Choice          Continue to participate in the federally sponsored  As of July 2013, 808 households in the City  Section 8 remains a major
  Vouchers                                     Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program.           were receiving housing rental assistance     source of affordable housing
GENERAL PLAN                                                                             H1‐3                                                  CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H1‐1             Review of Past Accomplishments 
     2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                              Objectives                                   Accomplishment                   Continued Appropriateness 
  Section 8 requires a very low-income          Disseminate information to the public regarding the through the Section 8 Program.                assistance for extremely
  renter to pay up to 30 percent of their       Section 8 Program and promote participation by      The City has continued to actively support    low-, very low-, and low-
  gross monthly income towards rent and         rental property owners.                             the Area Housing Authority's Section 8        income households. This
  picks up the balance on the renter’s behalf.  Promote programs to extremely low-income            Program and has submitted letters of          program is included in the
                                                households.                                         support for additional funding when           2013–2021 Housing
                                                                                                    requested: The. City is represented by two    Element.
                                                Provide Section 8 Vouchers to 140 households
                                                annually.                                           volunteers appointed by the City Council
                                                                                                    who serve on the Area Housing Authority
                                                                                                    Board of Directors.
  Program 7: Senior Rent Subsidy                Disseminate information to the public regarding the An average of 40 very-low- income seniors     Prior funding for this
  Program                                       Senior Rent Subsidy Program.                        were provided with rent subsidies each        program was eliminated as
  The Senior Rent Subsidy Program (SRSP)        Provide assistance to a maximum of 41 senior        month from 2008 to 2012.                      a result of the dissolution of
  is available to seniors living in Simi Valley households annually.                                Due to a lack of funding, as of August 2013,  redevelopment agencies in
  that qualify for Section 8 assistance. The                                                        zero households were receiving assistance     June 2011.
  SRSP was created in 1989 to provide                                                               through this program. Applications are not    This program is not included
  rental assistance to residents who were                                                           currently being processed; however, 149       in the 2013–2021 Housing
  very low-income seniors age 62 and older,                                                         households remain on the waiting list for     Element.
  on the HUD Section 8 waiting list, and                                                            assistance.
  waiting to be assisted through Section 8.
  Program 8: Mobile Home Rent Subsidy           Disseminate information to the public regarding the An average of 29 very low-income seniors      Prior funding for this
  for Seniors                                   Mobile Home Rent Subsidy Program for Seniors.       were provided with mobile home rent           program was eliminated as
  This program offers space rent subsidies      Provide assistance to 35 seniors annually           subsidies each month from 2008 to 2012.       a result of the dissolution of
  for very low- and low-income seniors living   (approximately 10 very low-income and 25                                                          redevelopment agencies in
  in one of five major mobile home parks in     extremely low-income seniors.                                                                     June 2011.
  the City (Susana Woods, Trade Winds,                                                                                                            This program is not included
  Friendly Village, Simi Country, and the                                                                                                         in the 2013–2021 Housing
  Crest).                                                                                                                                         Element.
  Program 9: Eviction Prevention                Disseminate information to the public regarding the Overall, the Eviction Prevention Assistance   This program has been
  Assistance                                    Eviction Prevention Assistance Program.             Program has assisted 27 households since      suspended indefinitely due
  This program provides up to $1,200 to         Provide assistance to 6 households annually.        2008.                                         to a lack of funding.
  assist with either rent or mortgage for low-                                                                                                    However, this type of
  income Simi Valley residents who are                                                                                                            assistance is offered
  behind on rent (or mortgage) due to                                                                                                             through other means with
  unforeseen circumstances and are in the                                                                                                         Ventura County.
  process of being evicted or foreclosed                                                                                                          This program is not included
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                     H1‐4                                                              GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H1                    REVIEW OF PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS
  Table H1‐1             Review of Past Accomplishments 
    2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                                 Objectives                                     Accomplishment                  Continued Appropriateness 
  upon because of non-payment.                                                                                                                       in the 2013–2021 Housing
                                                                                                                                                     Element.
  Program 10: Foreclosure Prevention            Disseminate information to the public regarding        Overall, the Foreclosure Prevention           This program is included in
  Assistance                                    foreclosure prevention assistance.                     Assistance Program has assisted 153           the 2013–2021 Housing
  Under the program, HOC counselors assist      Provide assistance to 40 households annually.          households since 2008.                        Element.
  local homeowners with one-on-one
  counseling, leading to action plans to avoid
  foreclosure or offer alternatives to
  foreclosure if homeownership cannot be
  maintained.
  Program 11: Energy Conservation/              Offer education and provide outreach to residents      The City’s website includes the “Live Green”  This program is included in
  Green Building                                and developers regarding energy efficiency and         and “Save Green” pages promoting energy       the 2013–2021 Housing
  The City strongly encourages applicants       greenbuilding requirements (ongoing).                  efficiency and green building practices.      Element.
  for publicly subsidized home rehabilitation   Increase long-term affordability of housing by         City-sponsored events, and the City’s
  projects to prioritize energy efficiency      improving energy efficiency (ongoing).                 hosting of workshops, provide education
  improvements, including windows, water                                                               and outreach to the community. City is
                                                Participate in Energy Leader Partnership Program
  heaters, cooling system repairs or                                                                   working with local and regional groups to
                                                with SCE and participate in first Green Communities
  upgrades, weatherization, and other                                                                  establish plug-in electric vehicle charging
                                                Challenge by the Institute for Local Government.
  measures that will save money and                                                                    stations.
  energy.                                                                                              Additionally, the City Council adopted a
                                                                                                       Green Building Ordinance in December
                                                                                                       2009, which requires the recycling of
                                                                                                       materials in demolished structures and
                                                                                                       encourages energy efficient design of new
                                                                                                       buildings.
  Program 12: Affordable Housing                Continue to facilitate affordable housing using        Tri-Pointe Homes recently developed a 43-     This program is included in
  Development                                   financial and regulatory incentives.                   unit single-family home project at the        the 2013–2021 Housing
  Through Affordable Housing Agreements,        Continue to offer nonprofit housing developers up to   southeastern corner of Royal Avenue and       Element.
  the City negotiates with developers for the   two rounds of review by the Affordable Housing         Corto Street, which includes five units
  inclusion of affordable housing in new        Subcommittee at no fee.                                reserved for purchase by low-income
  developments. In addition, the City utilizes                                                         households. The sale of these affordable
                                                Annually explore funding availability at the state and
  a variety of funding sources to assist in the                                                        units was completed.
                                                federal levels and pursue funding as appropriate.
  development of affordable housing.                                                                   In 2012, the City approved a 31-unit senior
                                                Facilitate the development of 100 units affordable to
                                                                                                       apartment project on Katherine Road South
                                                lower-income households (with a portion being
                                                                                                       with an 18.8% density bonus. The City and
GENERAL PLAN                                                                              H1‐5                                                      CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                     CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H1‐1            Review of Past Accomplishments 
    2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                                Objectives                                       Accomplishment                 Continued Appropriateness 
                                               targeted for extremely low-income households).           developer entered into a 55-year affordable
                                               As funding permits, prioritize affordable housing        agreement receiving 30 units for very low-
                                               funds for projects that set aside a portion of the       income households.
                                               units for extremely low-1income households.              Also in 2012, permits were issued for 75
                                                                                                        moderate-income condominium units (The
                                                                                                        Waterstone project on Heywood Street;
                                                                                                        Haven at Tapo Street; Parkview on Los
                                                                                                        Angeles Avenue, north of the Metrolink train
                                                                                                        station; and Los Arboles at Royal Avenue
                                                                                                        and Corto Street).
                                                                                                        During 2011, the City approved a request to
                                                                                                        modify the proposed acquisition and
                                                                                                        rehabilitation of the 12-unit Peppertree
                                                                                                        Apartment complex to provide housing for
                                                                                                        very low- and low-income households. A
                                                                                                        relocation plan was prepared in conjunction
                                                                                                        with the proposed project.
                                                                                                        The City will continue to offer developers
                                                                                                        the opportunity to submit affordable housing
                                                                                                        conceptual review applications at no
                                                                                                        charge.
                                                                                                        The City has continued to use mortgage
                                                                                                        revenue bonds as a source of funds for new
                                                                                                        affordable housing construction.
                                                                                                        The City actively supports the actions of
                                                                                                        developers to obtain state and/or federal
                                                                                                        funds to build affordable housing projects.
  Program 13: Adequate Sites Inventory         Monitor the development trends in the City,              The City continues to identify potential      It is important for the City to
  The City will ensure that an adequate        particularly on the sites identified in this Housing     vacant or underdeveloped sites suitable for   continue to identify suitable
  supply of vacant and underutilized sites at  Element to ensure continued ability to                   the construction of a variety of housing      sites for residential units in
  appropriate densities and development        accommodate the RHNA.                                    types and densities.                          order to meet its RHNA.
  standards to accommodate the remaining       Assist in the identification of sites with potential for                                               This program is included in
  RHNA is available by maintaining an          lot consolidation and housing development.                                                             the 2013–2021 Housing
  inventory of vacant and underutilized sites.                                                                                                        Element.
  Program 14: Managed-Growth Plan              Work with a committee in 2011 and 2012 to draft a        The voters of Simi Valley adopted Measure     This program is included in
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                         H1‐6                                                               GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H1                    REVIEW OF PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS
  Table H1‐1            Review of Past Accomplishments 
     2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                             Objectives                                 Accomplishment                Continued Appropriateness 
  The City’s Managed-Growth Plan covers      replacement measure that meets the objectives of   N in November 2012, which will continue      the 2013–2021 Housing
  the period of January 4, 2004 to December  orderly development and accommodates the City’s    the Managed Growth Plan of 292               Element.
  12, 2012. The City is required to put a    RHNA in timely manner.                             allocations per year, as modified. The City
  replacement measure on the ballot in       Conduct an educational campaign for City residents has adopted a revised Permit Allocation
  November 2012. The City will be working    in 2012 regarding the relationship between         System to implement the revised Managed-
  with a committee to draft a replacement    managed growth, land use planning, and             Growth Plan through a first approved, first
  measure. The replacement measure will      compliance with state laws.                        awarded system.
  ensure that the City is able to meet its
  Regional Housing Need Allocation and
  establish a process and clear criteria for
  allocation that would serve to facilitate
  residential development in a timely and
  orderly manner.
  Program 15: Mixed-Use                      Encourage mixed-use development along transit      The Mixed-Use Overlay Zoning District was    This program is included in
  During the implementation of General Plan  corridors and other appropriate areas through the  adopted concurrently with the General Plan   the 2013–2021 Housing
  2030, the City will work to focus higher   following incentives:                              Update in June 2012.                         Element.
  density developments and mixed-use            Shared Parking
  projects in areas adjacent to transit         Reduced parking requirements – The City
  stations, along transit corridors and             revised the Development Code to provide
  commercial corridors, near job centers,           reduced parking for mixed-use developments.
  and in other appropriate areas throughout
  the City.                                     Height limits – The City revised the
                                                    Development Code to provide for a building
                                                    height limit of 55 feet and four stories
                                                    (compared to 48 feet and three stories in
                                                    commercial zones)
                                                Reduced setbacks – The City revised the
                                                    Development Code to reduce setbacks for
                                                    mixed-use developments.
  Program 16: Development Standards          Recommend appropriate multi-family residential     City fees are re-evaluated every two years.  This program is included in
  and Review Process                         parking standards to facilitate development in the Park District fees for very low- and low-    the 2013–2021 Housing
  Continue to review and improve the City’s  City by the end of 2013.                           income units are substantially reduced.      Element.
  development standards and review           Monitor the implementation of the new Mixed Use    School fees are substantially reduced for
  process.                                   Overlay to ensure the adopted standards facilitate new senior housing projects.
                                             residential and mixed use developments at the      The City continues to expedite the
                                             maximum allowable density.                         development review process for affordable
GENERAL PLAN                                                                            H1‐7                                                CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                            CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
  Table H1‐1        Review of Past Accomplishments 
    2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                           Objectives                                    Accomplishment                 Continued Appropriateness 
                                                                                                 housing projects.
                                                                                                 The City recently amended the
                                                                                                 Development Code to address the
                                                                                                 extremely low-income and special needs
                                                                                                 housing.
  Program 17: Senior Citizen Dwelling   Amend the Development Code to remove this use            This program was completed. The             This program is not included
  Units                                 classification or treat these units the same way         amendment was adopted on January 13,        in the 2013–2021 Housing
                                        second dwelling units are treated within one year of     2014.                                       Element.
                                        adoption of the Housing Element.
  Program 18: Extremely Low-Income and  Within one year of the adoption of the Housing           During January 2009, the City approved a    This program is included in
  Special Needs Housing                 Element, the City will amend the Development Code        Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance,         the 2013-2021 Housing
                                        to address the following:                                which allows disabled persons to submit an  Element.
                                           Transitional Housing: The Development                application to make improvements that will
                                                Code will be amended to address the              give them expanded access to housing.
                                                provision of transitional housing. Transitional
                                                housing pursuant to Health and Safety Code       The City recently amended the
                                                Section 50801(i) will be permitted in all zones  Development Code to address the
                                                where housing is permitted and subject to the    extremely low-income and special needs
                                                same development standards as the same           housing, including transitional and
                                                type of housing in that zone.                    supportive housing.
                                           Group Homes: State law includes group
                                                homes in the definition of residential care
                                                homes and requires larger residential care
                                                facilities (of seven or more people) to be
                                                provided for. Therefore, the City will amend
                                                the Development Code to include group
                                                homes in the “residential care facility”
                                                definition and treat this use the same as
                                                residential care facilities for zoning purposes.
                                           Supportive Housing: The Development
                                                Code will be amended to address the
                                                provision of supportive housing. Supportive
                                                housing pursuant to Health and Safety Code
                                                Section 50675.14(a)(B)(2) will be permitted in
                                                all zones where housing is permitted and
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                  H1‐8                                                            GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H1                   REVIEW OF PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS
  Table H1‐1            Review of Past Accomplishments 
     2008‐2014 Housing Element Programs                             Objectives                                      Accomplishment                  Continued Appropriateness 
                                                     subject to the same development standards
                                                     as the same type of housing in that zone.
  Program 19: Lot Consolidation Program       Implement a lot consolidation program that offers     The Lot Consolidation Incentive and the         This program is included in
                                              incentives for lot consolidation within one year of   Revitalization of Obsolete and Underused        the 2013–2021 Housing
                                              adoption of the Housing Element.                      Properties policies were adopted with the       Element.
                                                                                                    General Plan Update in June 2012.
  Program 20: Fair Housing                    Continue to contract with the Southern California     The City maintains a contract with the          This program is included in
  Continue to provide outreach material on    Housing Rights Center (HRC) to provide fair           Housing Rights Center to provide fair           the 2013–2021 Housing
  state and federal fair housing laws and     housing services to residents.                        housing counseling and referral services to     Element.
  direct complaints of housing discrimination Disseminate information to the public on the array of local residents. The Housing Rights Center
  to appropriate enforcement agencies (i.e.,  fair housing programs and services provided by        periodically conducts informational
  State Department of Fair Employment and     HRC.                                                  workshops in the community and provides
  Area Housing Authority of the County of                                                           literature to those who attend the
                                              Refer complaints and inquiries to the Southern
  Ventura).                                                                                         workshops. The City also provides fair
                                              California Housing Rights Center.
                                                                                                    housing brochures at the public information
                                              Place fair housing brochures at City counters and     counter, incorporates the fair housing logo
                                              community locations.                                  on its housing program brochures, and
                                              Provide a link to the Southern California Housing     requires affordable housing developers to
                                              Rights Center on the City’s website.                  provide fair housing information to individual
                                              Include public presentations with different           clients.
                                              community groups in annual fair housing service
                                              contracts.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                            H1‐9                                                       CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                       CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
SUMMARY OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
 
  Table H1‐2          Summary of Accomplishment: January 1, 2008–September 1, 2013 
                                       Very Low        Low   Moderate     Above      Total 
                                                                         Moderate 
  Objectives
  Units Constructed                       50           250     310        1,820      2,430
  Units Rehabilitated                     35            35      5           0         75
  At-Risk Units Preserved                206           198      0            0        404
  First-Time Homebuyer                     0            35      40          75        150
  Security Deposit                        20            10      0           0         30
  Housing Choice Vouchers                 90            50      0           0         140
  Senior Rent Subsidy                     80            20      0            0        100
  Mobile Home Rent Subsidy               175             0      0           0         175
  Accomplishments
  Units Constructed                       29            37     119          66        251
  Units Rehabilitated                     30            27      6           0         63
  At-Risk Units Preserved                  0             0      0           0          0
  First-Time Homebuyer                     9            54      2           0         65
  Security Deposit                        21             0      0           0         21
  Housing Choice Vouchers                750            40      0           0         790
  Senior Rent Subsidy                     40             0      0           0         40
  Mobile Home Rent Subsidy                29             0      0           0         29
  SOURCE:  City of Simi Valley, 2013. 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                              H1‐10                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

                     Appendix H2  Public Participation 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY       H2‐1               GENERAL PLAN 
 

                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
ORGANIZATIONS INVITED TO WORKSHOPS 
Housing Rights Center                               Ventura County Rescue Mission 
Many Mansions                                       Sarah's House 
Samaritan Center of Simi Valley                     Ventura County Jewish Family Service 
Turning Point Foundation                            Cornerstone Church 
Ventura County Area Agency on Aging                 NewHeart Four Square Church 
Lutheran Social Services of Southern California     New Hope Christian Fellowship 
Shop Ahoy                                           Shepherd of the Valley Lutheran Church 
Easter Seals Southern California                    St. Rose of Lima 
Tri‐County GLAD                                     USA Properties Fund, Inc. 
Action Family Counseling                            Essex Properties I, LLC 
Berylwood Family Resource Center                    California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc. 
United Way of Ventura County                        Ventura County Human Services Agency 
Big Brothers Big Sisters (BBSVC)                    Mercy Housing, Inc. 
Boys and Girls Club of Simi Valley                  Peoples Self Help Housing 
Child Development Resources                         Fairfield Residential 
Children’s Home Society of California               Dyer Sheehan Group, Inc. 
Community Pregnancy Clinic                          Ventura County Homeless & Housing Coalition 
FOOD Share, Inc.                                    Western Manufactured Housing Comm. Assoc. 
Kids & Families Together                            Corporation for Better Housing 
Rainbow Connection Family Resource Center           Independent Living Resource Center, Inc. 
Salvation Army Simi Valley                          PathPoint 
Schools on Wheels, Inc.                             Highridge Costa Housing Partners, LLC 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                              H2‐2                                   GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H2              PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Simi Valley Family YMCA                                  CFC Mortgage Bankers 
Catholic  Charities  of  Los  Angeles,  Inc.,  Ventura 
                                                         America’s Lending Group 
County OASIS 
Building Industries Association of Southern California  Greenback Funding 
Long  Term  Care  Services  of  Ventura  County,  Inc.
                                                         LoanSmart, Inc. 
Ombudsman Program 
Simi Valley Unified School District                      The Olson Company 
Habitat for Humanity                                     Hovell & Pilarski Engineering 
Tri‐Counties Regional Center                             KB Homes 
Ventura County Behavioral Health                         JemStreet Properties 
SCANPH                                                   Colton Lee Communities LLC 
Conejo Simi Moorpark Association of REALTORS             C R Property Management Co. 
Community Action of Ventura County, Inc.                 Carlito Construction, Inc. 
AMCAL Multi‐Housing, Inc.                                Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) 
Urban Strategies                                         Sequoia Equities 
ARC of Ventura County                                    Rescue Mission Alliance 
Area Housing Authority of Ventura County                 Simi Valley Council On Aging 
Simi Valley Chamber of Commerce                           
Cabrillo Economic Development Corp.                       
Interface Children Family Services of Ventura County      
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                   H2‐3                               GENERAL PLAN 
 


     Appendix H3  Residential Capacity Under General 
                                           Plan 2030 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY      H3‐1               GENERAL PLAN 
 

                                                                                            CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
METHODOLOGY 
  Land Use Distribution 
Vacant and underutilized parcels were identified utilizing the data from the Ventura County Assessor’s Office, 
and  refined  with  site  visits  and  staff  knowledge.  Specifically,  underutilized  properties  are  defined  as  those 
with improvements older than 30 years of age and improvement‐to‐land value less than one (improvements 
are worth less than the land). This improvement‐to‐land value ratio is frequently used by economists and real 
estate  professionals  to  identify  potential  sites  for  development.  This  inventory  was  then  refined  with  site 
visits and staff input. The majority of the properties identified in this sites inventory are at least 50 years of 
age,  with  low‐intensity  development  on  larger  lots.  Many  properties  have  antiquated  configuration  and 
facilities that cannot accommodate modern urban uses. Retrofitting some of these properties can often be 
cost‐prohibitive  given  the  low  intensity  uses  on  site.  Many  properties  are  also  impacted  by  deferred 
maintenance. 
In  estimating  development  capacity  in  these  Opportunity  Areas,  the  City  developed  a  set  of  guiding 
assumptions for the distribution of various land uses in these areas. These assumptions are summarized in 
Table H‐42 of the Housing Element. These land use assumptions were developed with extensive community 
input, particularly with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC), Planning Commission, and City Council. 
In this inventory, each parcel is first estimated for a buildout capacity based on 80 percent of the maximum 
allowable  density  under  the  scenario  of  multi‐family  housing  (column  labeled  “MFR  Units”)  and  under  the 
scenario of mixed‐use developments (column labeled “MU Units”). Since the density allowed in either land 
use is identical, the buildout capacity under either scenario on an individual parcel basis is the same. The row 
entitled “Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels” represents total units if all vacant and underutilized parcels 
are redeveloped either 100 percent as multi‐family unit or 100 percent as mixed‐use units. 
However,  the  City’s  vision  is  different  for  the  individual  opportunity  areas.  Therefore,  the  land  use 
distribution assumptions are applied to these vacant and underutilized properties within individual subareas 
of  the  Opportunity  Areas,  assuming  a  certain  percentage  of  the  vacant  and  underutilized  parcels  will  be 
redeveloped  as  multi‐family  units,  and  a  certain  percentage  will  be  redeveloped  as  mixed‐use  units.  For 
example,  if  all  vacant  and  underutilized  parcels  in  Tapo  Street  Corridor  Subarea A  were  redeveloped  with 
either  multi‐family  or  mixed‐use  developments,  208 units  can  be  achieved.  However,  Tapo  Street  Corridor 
Subarea A is anticipated for 20 percent multi‐family uses and 40 percent for mixed‐use developments, with 
the  remaining  40 percent  of  the  acreage  being  redeveloped  without  a  residential  component.  Therefore 
60 percent of the vacant and underutilized sites in this area is anticipated to be redeveloped with Very High 
Density  residential  uses  or  Mixed  Use  developments.  The  estimated  capacity  in  Tapo  Street  Corridor 
Subarea A  used  for  the  Housing  Element  is  42  multi‐family  units  (20 percent  of  the  208‐unit  maximum 
capacity) and 83 mixed‐use units (40 percent of the 208‐unit maximum capacity) for a total of 125 units. 
Furthermore, the apportioning of capacity is based on the number of units totaled from individual parcels. 
That is, the distribution of mixed‐use and multi‐family units is based on the land use percentage times the 
number  of  unit  capacity,  not  based  on  the  aggregated  total  acreage  times  the  density.  This  method 
safeguards the rounding up of partial units and represents a conservative method of estimating capacity. 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                         H3‐2                                      GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3                RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
  Average Density Assumption 
To  calculate  the  potential  number  of  units  that  can  be  accommodated  on  each  parcel  in  the  MU  Overlay 
District,  estimates  were  calculated  for  a  variety  of  different  development  scenarios  (senior  housing,  small 
apartments, large apartments, and townhomes) based on the residential square footage realized by a recent 
project.  Under  the  senior  housing  development  scenario,  all  residences  were  assumed  to  be  one‐bedroom 
units  with  an  approximate  gross  square  footage  of  850 square  feet  (sf)  per  unit.  This  gross  area  was 
estimated based on apartment size data from a 2008 citywide survey of rental housing units. According to 
this  survey,  the  average  size  of  a  nonsenior  market‐rate  one‐  to  two‐  bedroom  apartment  in  the  City  was 
839 sf. To produce a conservative estimate, this square footage was rounded up to 850 sf and then inflated 
again  (by  approximately  20 percent)  to  1,020 sf  to  account  for  hallways,  lobby,  and  other  common  areas. 
Based on an average gross square footage of 1,020 sf per unit, a maximum density of 42 dwelling units per 
acre (du/ac) can reasonably be achieved under this development scenario. 
Under  the  small  apartment  scenario,  residences  were  assumed  to  be  one‐  to  two‐bedroom  units  with  an 
approximate gross square footage of 1,050 sf per unit. This gross area was estimated based on the inflated 
square  footage  estimate  for  senior  housing  units  (1,020 sf  per  unit  discussed  above).  To  produce  a 
conservative  estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  1,050 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by 
approximately  20 percent)  to  1,260 sf  to  account  for  common  areas.  Based  on  an  average  gross  square 
footage  of  1,260 sf  per  unit,  a  maximum  density  of  34 du/ac  can  reasonably  be  achieved  under  this 
development scenario. 
Under  the  large  apartment  scenario,  all  residences  were  assumed  to  be  three‐bedroom  units  with  an 
approximate  gross  square  footage  of  1,620 sf  per  unit.  This  gross  area  was  estimated  based  on  apartment 
size  data  from  the  citywide  survey  of  rental  housing  units.  According  to  the  survey,  the  average  size  of  a 
nonsenior  market‐rate  three‐bedroom  apartment  in  the  City  was  just  under  1,200 sf.  To  produce  a 
conservative  estimate,  this  square  footage  was  rounded  up  to  1,350 sf  and  then  inflated  again  (by 
approximately  20 percent)  to  1,620 sf  to  account  for  common  areas.  Based  on  an  average  gross  square 
footage  of  1,620 sf  per  unit,  a  maximum  density  of  26 du/ac  can  reasonably  be  achieved  under  this 
development scenario. 
Under the townhome scenario, all residences were assumed to be three‐bedroom townhome units with an 
approximate  gross  square  footage  of  2,460 sf  per  unit.  This  gross  area  was  estimated  based  on  a  recently 
approved mixed‐use townhome project within the MU Overlay District. In this development, the average size 
of a townhome unit was 2,040 sf. To produce a conservative estimate, this square footage was rounded up to 
2,050 sf and then inflated again (by approximately 20 percent) to 2,460 sf. Based on an average gross square 
footage  of  2,460 sf  per  unit,  a  maximum  density  of  18 du/ac  can  reasonably  be  achieved  under  this 
development  scenario.  These  density  assumptions  yield  an  average  density  of  30 du/ac.  However,  to  be 
conservative, future residential development in the MU Overlay District is estimated at 28 du/ac, 80 percent 
of the maximum density of 35 du/ac permitted. 
GENERAL PLAN                                                H3‐3                            CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐1           Tapo Street Corridor A 
                                   MU                                            Residential 
                                 Overlay/                                         Very High           Mixed Use 
  Map                    General  Base                                          Max: 35 du/ac       Max: 35 du/ac 
   ID        APN           Plan   Zoning         Address          Acreage       Avg: 28 du/ac        Avg: 28 du/ac                                Notes 
Underutilized Parcels
                                    MU       4387 Alamo St.         0.47               13                  13
                          Mixed
    2     616016030               Overlay/
                           Use
                                   CPD
                                           Auto related commercial, old gasoline station converted into an auto repair shop on a 0.47-acre lot facing main commercial shopping
                                           area and adjacent residential.
                                             4473 Alamo St.         0.48               13                  13
                                             4415 Alamo St.         2.49               69                  69
          627002029                 MU
                          Mixed
   33     627002027               Overlay/
                           Use               4487 Alamo St.         3.27               91                  91
          627002028                CPD
                                           Old shopping center with large parking lot. Several vacant commercial tenant spaces.
Subtotal Underutilized Parcels                                      6.71              186                 186
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                  H3‐4                                                                   GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3                RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐1          Tapo Street Corridor A 
                                   MU                                              Residential 
                                 Overlay/                                          Very High             Mixed Use 
  Map                    General  Base                                          Max: 35 du/ac          Max: 35 du/ac 
   ID        APN          Plan    Zoning         Address          Acreage       Avg: 28 du/ac          Avg: 28 du/ac                                    Notes 
Vacant Parcels
                                    MU        2804 Tapo St.         0.53               14                     14
                          Mixed
   31     627002020               Overlay/
                           Use
                                   CPD
                                           Vacant for lease; former gasoline service station. Site is fully remediated, at the intersection of retail and commercial uses, adjacent to
                                           another vacant parcel.
                                               East side of
                                    MU          Tapo St.,           0.12                3                       3
                          Mixed
   32     627002026               Overlay/
                           Use              north of Alamo St.
                                   CPD
                                           Vacant for lease—intersection of retail and commercial uses, adjacent to other vacant parcel site number 31.
                          Mixed
    1     616016029                CPD                              0.18                5                      5
                           Use
Subtotal Vacant Parcels                                             0.83               22                      22
Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels                              7.54              208                     208
                                        Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                                      Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                                      Unit Assumptions 
         Housing Element 
           Assumptions                     RVH (20%)              MU (40%)         RVH Units              MU Units                                   Total Units 
                                             1.51                   3.02               42                     83                                         125
GENERAL PLAN                                                                         H3‐5                                                               CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
 
Table H3‐2         Tapo Street Corridor D 
                                  MU                              Residential 
                                Overlay/                          Very High      Mixed Use 
Map                   General     Base                           Max: 35 du/ac  Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID        APN        Plan      Zoning     Address     Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac  Avg: 28 du/ac                                Notes 
Underutilized Parcels
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 4374 Eileen
   4    618015119                                        0.28           7              7       Commercial building built in 1963
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 4322 Eileen
   5    618015124                                        0.41          11             11       Commercial building (ambulance service) built in 1987
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2109 Tapo
   7    618015144                                        0.77          21             21       5,272 sf of commercial retail building built in 1980
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2139 Tapo
   9    618015146                                        2.01          56             56       Commercial retail building built in 1980
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/    2140
  11    618015149                                        1.01          28             28       Commercial offices built in 1984
                        Use       CPD      Winifred St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2161 Tapo
  13    618015153                                        0.56          15             15       Retail commercial built in 1969
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2151 Tapo
  15    618015155                                        0.56          15             15       Retail commercial built in 1970
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2211 Tapo
  16    618015156                                        0.41          11             11       Retail commercial
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/    4304
  21    618016022                                        0.44          12             12       Retail commercial built in 1972
                        Use       CPD      Cochran St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2375 Tapo
  22    618016025                                        0.69          19             19       Restaurant built in 1974
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 4386-4392
  23    618016028                                        0.28           7              7       Retail commercial built in 1979
                        Use       CPD      Cochran St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2387 Tapo
  24    618016029                                        0.52          14             14       Retail commercial built in 1973
                        Use       CPD          St.
                       Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2353 Tapo
  25    618016030                                        0.32           8              8       Retail commercial built in 1979
                        Use       CPD          St.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                      H3‐6                                                               GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3               RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐2        Tapo Street Corridor D 
                                      MU                                           Residential 
                                   Overlay/                                        Very High          Mixed Use 
Map                     General       Base                                       Max: 35 du/ac      Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID       APN           Plan       Zoning          Address        Acreage       Avg: 28 du/ac      Avg: 28 du/ac                                Notes 
                         Mixed    MU Overlay/        4332
  26    618016031                                                    1.13               31                31       Retail commercial built in 1972
                          Use         CPD         Cochran St.
                         Mixed    MU Overlay/      2355 Tapo
  28    618016033                                                    1.43               40                40       Retail commercial built in 1989
                          Use         CPD             St.
                         Mixed    MU Overlay/      2321 Tapo
  30    618016035                                                    0.57               15                15       Retail commercial
                          Use         CPD             St.
      The above parcels contain a variety of older commercial and retail stores with large surface parking lots..
                                                   2390 Tapo
                         Mixed    MU Overlay/                        0.51               14                14
  68    644007019                                     St.
                         Used         CPD
                                                 Service station and car wash built in 1992.
                                                   2196 Tapo
                                                                    14.49              405               405
                                                      St.
                         Mixed    MU Overlay/
  70    644007058
                         Used         CPD        Old shopping center built in 1966 with several vacated stores and
                                                 marginally performing business.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                             H3‐7                                                      CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐2     Tapo Street Corridor D 
                              MU                                         Residential 
                            Overlay/                                      Very High           Mixed Use 
Map               General     Base                                     Max: 35 du/ac        Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID     APN       Plan      Zoning       Address         Acreage      Avg: 28 du/ac        Avg: 28 du/ac  Notes 
                                        4371 Valley
                                                            0.70              19                  19
                                          Fair St.
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/
   3  618015108                        Single-story commercial building, adjacent to large parking lot.
                   Used       CPD
                                       Across the street from a vacant building, near railroad tracks and
                                       other retail uses.
                                         4385-4395
                                         Valley Fair        0.33               9                  9
                                              St.
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/
   6  618015140
                    Use       CPD      Single-story commercial building (furniture retail), adjacent to
                                       retail and facing Tapo St., Near railroad tracks and other retail
                                       uses.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                             H3‐8                              GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3         RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐2     Tapo Street Corridor D 
                              MU                                         Residential 
                            Overlay/                                      Very High         Mixed Use 
Map               General     Base                                      Max: 35 du/ac     Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID     APN       Plan      Zoning      Address         Acreage        Avg: 28 du/ac     Avg: 28 du/ac                                  Notes 
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/ No address         0.41                11                 11
   8  618015145
                    Use       CPD
                                       Parking lot.
                                        2149 Tapo
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/                    0.41                11                 11
  12  618015151                             St.
                    Use       CPD
                                       Small restaurant built in 1971 located on large parking lot, frontage on Tapo St. among retail uses.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                   H3‐9                                                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                          CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐2     Tapo Street Corridor D 
                              MU                                          Residential 
                            Overlay/                                       Very High          Mixed Use 
Map               General     Base                                      Max: 35 du/ac        Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID     APN       Plan      Zoning       Address          Acreage      Avg: 28 du/ac        Avg: 28 du/ac                              Notes 
                                        4350 Eileen
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/                       0.70              19                  19
  14  618015154                              St.
                    Use       CPD
                                       Strip mall built in 1963 with small retail uses on large parking lot.
                                        2399 Tapo
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/                       0.36              10                  10
  18  618016001                              St.
                    Use       CPD
                                       Older gas station built in 1962 at main intersection of Tapo St. and Cochran St. Across from vacant parcel and marginal retail uses.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                             H3‐10                                                                GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3         RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐2     Tapo Street Corridor D 
                              MU                                          Residential 
                            Overlay/                                       Very High           Mixed Use 
Map               General     Base                                       Max: 35 du/ac       Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID     APN       Plan      Zoning      Address          Acreage        Avg: 28 du/ac        Avg: 28 du/ac  Notes 
                                        2311 Tapo
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/                      1.15                32                  32
  27  618016032                              St.
                    Use       CPD
                                       Small retail stores built in 1976 with large surface parking lot.
                                        2381 Tapo
                   Mixed   MU Overlay/                      0.65                18                  18
  29  618016034                              St.
                    Use       CPD
                                       Retail strip center with large parking lot built in 1979.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                     H3‐11                         CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐2           Tapo Street Corridor D 
                                     MU                                          Residential 
                                   Overlay/                                       Very High           Mixed Use 
Map                      General     Base                                      Max: 35 du/ac       Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID        APN            Plan     Zoning      Address         Acreage        Avg: 28 du/ac        Avg: 28 du/ac                              Notes 
                                               2058 Tapo
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/                      0.43                12                 12
  69     644007043                                 St.
                           Use       CPD
                                              Parking lot and building for free clinic and financial services built in 1969.
                                                  4444
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/ Cochran St.         0.83                 23                 23
  74     644018001
                           Use       CPD
                                              Funeral home built in 1973 on larger lot with abundant parking. Adjacent to residential neighborhood and across from retail.
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/     2120
  10     618015148                                                 1.01                28                 28
                           Use       CPD       Winifred St.
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/ 4364 Valley
  17     618015204                                                 2.06                57                 57
                           Use       CPD         Fair St.
Subtotal Underutilized Parcels                                    35.43               978                978
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                     H3‐12                                                              GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3                RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐2          Tapo Street Corridor D 
                                     MU                                           Residential 
                                   Overlay/                                       Very High         Mixed Use 
Map                      General     Base                                       Max: 35 du/ac     Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID        APN           Plan      Zoning        Address       Acreage         Avg: 28 du/ac     Avg: 28 du/ac                                    Notes 
Vacant Parcels
                                                 2295 Tapo
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/                     1.05                29                29
  19     618016012                                   St.
                           Use       CPD
                                               Retail commercial building near Tapo St; built in 1970. Rear portion of the lot adjacent to Winifred St. is vacant.
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/ 2267 Tapo St        1.58                44                44
  20     618016014
                           Use       CPD
                                               Older retail commercial built in 1966 and vacant land.
Subtotal Vacant Parcels                                           2.63                73                73
Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels                           38.06              1,051             1,051
                                       Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                                      Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                                    Unit Assumptions 
        Housing Element 
          Assumptions                    RVH (20%)             MU (60%)           RVH Units         MU Units                                    Total Units 
                                             7.61                22.84               213               639                                          852
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                                           H3‐13                                                          CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                             CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐3         Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                             Residential 
                                MU Overlay/                                  Very High        Mixed Use 
 Map                   General     Base                                    Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID         APN        Plan      Zoning        Address        Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac      Notes 
Underutilized Parcels
                                              1577 E. Los
                        Mixed   MU Overlay/                     1.44              0              40
  35      632015103                           Angeles Ave.
                         Use       CPD
                                             U-Haul Rental yard; small building on large lot.
                                              1555 E. Los
                        Mixed   MU Overlay/                     0.32              0               8
  48      632015207                           Angeles Ave.
                         Use       CPD
                                             Fast food restaurant built in 1971 on large lot.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                               H3‐14                           GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3         RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐3     Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                        Residential 
                            MU Overlay/                                  Very High         Mixed Use 
 Map               General     Base                                    Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID      APN       Plan      Zoning        Address        Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                        Notes 
                                          1723 E. Los
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/                     0.20             0                 5
  56   632029445                          Angeles Ave.
                     Use       CPD
                                         Small restaurant built before 1961.
                                          1717 E. Los
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/                     0.71             0                19
  54   632029442                          Angeles Ave.
                     Use       CPD
                                         Auto related commercial/retail building built in 1965 with large parking lot.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                  H3‐15                                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                           CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐3     Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                        Residential 
                            MU Overlay/                                 Very High        Mixed Use 
 Map               General     Base                                   Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID      APN       Plan      Zoning        Address       Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                         Notes 
                                          1495 E. Los
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/                    0.77              0               21
  58   632032004                          Angeles Ave.
                     Use       CPD
                                         McDonald’s restaurant built in 1970 on large lot.
                                          1307 E. Los
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/                    1.03              0               28
  59   632032005                          Angeles Ave.
                     Use       CPD
                                         Bank of America built in 1967 on very large lot with a lot of parking spaces.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                          H3‐16                                              GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3         RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐3     Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                        Residential 
                            MU Overlay/                                 Very High        Mixed Use 
 Map               General     Base                                   Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID      APN       Plan      Zoning        Address      Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                                          Notes 
                                          1495 E. Los
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/                     0.59              0               16
  63   632032029                          Angeles Ave.
                     Use       CPD
                                         McDonald’s restaurant parking lot.
                                                            1.01
       632032053                                            1.18
       632032057                                            1.00
       632032059                                            1.44
                                          1101 E. Los
       632032060    Mixed   MU Overlay/                     1.00              0              693
  67                                      Angeles Ave.
       632032061     Use       CPD                          1.09
       632032062                                            1.01
       632032063                                           17.04
       632032064                                          Total =
                                                           24.77
                                         Old shopping center originally built in 1963. Refurbished multiple times, located near proposed train station
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/   1475 E. Los
  61   632032024                                            1.01              0               28       Bank, built in 1985.
                     Use       CPD        Angeles Ave.
                    Mixed   MU Overlay/   1463 E. Los
  62   632032028                                            0.59              0               16       Church, built in 1997.
                     Use       CPD        Angeles Ave.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                   H3‐17                                                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐3        Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                                 Residential 
                                  MU Overlay/                                    Very High     Mixed Use 
 Map                    General        Base                                     Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID       APN            Plan        Zoning          Address      Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                                       Notes 
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1317 E. Los
  66    632032046                                                    14.36            0           402        Shopping center with several vacant tenant spaces built in 1991.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1445 E. Los
  60    632032010                                                    2.15             0            60        Commercial building built in 1979.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1357 E. Los
  64    632032043                                                    2.62             0            73        Shopping center built in 1991.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1457 E. Los
  65    632032045                                                    0.78             0            21        Movie theater built in 1994.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
      The above parcels contain a variety of older commercial and retail stores
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2019 Donville
  40    632015109                                                    0.49             0            13        Batting cage.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1543 E. Los
  45    632015203                                                    0.35             0             9        Fast food restaurant built in 1971.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1525 E. Los
  46    632015204                                                    0.59             0            16        Automotive shop built in 1971.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2055 Donville
  49    632015208                                                    0.36             0            10        Car wash built in 1986.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                   H3‐18                                                               GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3               RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐3        Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                                 Residential 
                                  MU Overlay/                                    Very High    Mixed Use 
 Map                    General        Base                                    Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID       APN            Plan        Zoning          Address      Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                                      Notes 
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2010 Donville
  50    632015209                                                    0.32             0            8        Auto repair shop built in 1995.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2020 Donville
  51    632015211                                                    0.35             0            9        Auto repair shop built in 1995.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2016 Donville
  52    632015212                                                    0.44             0           12        Auto repair shop built in 1996.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1613 E. Los
  36    632015104                                                    1.23             0           34        Fast food restaurant built in 1978.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1603 E. Los
  37    632015105                                                    1.70             0           47        Shopping center built in 1987.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2050 Donville
  38    632015107                                                    0.36             0           10        Bar/Club built in 1976.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ 2001 Donville
  39    632015108                                                    0.45             0           12        Auto repair shop built in 2002.
                          Use          CPD             Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1557 E. Los
  44    632015116                                                    0.66             0           18        Fast food restaurant built in 2002.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1515 E. Los
  47    632015206                                                    0.28             0            7        Auto repair shop built in 1978.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1579 E. Los
  53    632015213                                                    0.57             0           15        Fast food restaurant built in 1994.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
      The above parcels contain a variety of older commercial and retail stores.
GENERAL PLAN                                                                          H3‐19                                                      CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐3        Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                                 Residential 
                                  MU Overlay/                                    Very High    Mixed Use 
 Map                    General        Base                                    Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID        APN           Plan        Zoning          Address      Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                                    Notes 
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/ E. Los Angeles
  55     632029444                                                   0.12             0            3
                          Use          CPD              Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1727 E. Los
  56     632029445                                                   0.29             0            8        Shopping center built in 1963.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/      1777 E. Los
  57     632029451                                                   0.51             0           14        Commercial building built in 1983.
                          Use          CPD          Angeles Ave.
      The above parcels contain a variety of older commercial and retail stores.
                                  Subtotal Underutilized Parcels    60.41             0         1,675
Vacant Parcels
                         Mixed     MU Overlay/
  41     632015111                                   No address      0.44             0           12
                          Use          CPD
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                   H3‐20                                                         GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3                RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐3          Los Angeles Avenue B 
                                                                              Residential 
                                  MU Overlay/                                 Very High       Mixed Use 
  Map                    General       Base                                 Max: 35 du/ac Max: 35 du/ac 
   ID        APN           Plan       Zoning        Address       Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac Avg: 28 du/ac                                     Notes 
                                                  2015 Donville
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/                         0.20         0                5
   42     632015114                                   Ave.
                           Use         CPD
                                                 Vacant commercial parcel located on northern side of Donville Ave.
                          Mixed   MU Overlay/      No address        0.29          0               8
   43     632015115
                           Use         CPD
                                                                                   Vacant commercial parcel on northern side of Donville Ave.
                                        Subtotal Vacant Parcels       0.93         0               25
                        Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels 61.34               0             1,700
                                      Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                                    Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                                 Unit Assumptions 
       Housing Element 
        Assumptions                       RVH (0%)                MU (60%)    RVH Units        MU Units                                  Total Units 
                                              0                      36.80         0             1,020                                     1,020
 
GENERAL PLAN                                                                       H3‐21                                                        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐4          Old Town B 
                               MU                                      Residential 
                            Overlay/                                    Very High            Mixed Use 
 Map               General  Base                                      Max: 35 du/ac         Max: 35 du/ac 
  ID      APN        Plan    Zoning        Address      Acreage       Avg: 28 du/ac         Avg: 28 du/ac                                   Notes 
Underutilized Parcels
                                        1636 Sinaloa
                                                          9.97              119                   0
                     High                    Rd.
  34   631014010               RM
                   Density
                                      The Adventist Church has purchased another property north of the Simi Valley Town Center and submitted a development application for
                                      that site. The Church plans to sell this property at 1636 Sinaloa Rd. and move to the new site once construction is complete.
                        Subtotal Underutilized Parcels    9.97              119                   0
             Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels       9.97              119                   0
                                 Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                               Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                                    Unit Assumptions 
      Housing Element 
        Assumptions                 RH (100%)           MU (0%)          RH Units             MU Units                                    Total Units 
                                      9.97                  0               119                   0                                          119
 
 
 
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                    H3‐22                                                                 GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3               RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table H3‐5        Los Angeles Avenue Transit‐Oriented Development/Industrial Area C 
                               MU                                            Residential 
                            Overlay/                                         Very High          Mixed Use 
  Map             General     Base                                         Max: 35 du/ac      Max: 35 du/ac 
   ID     APN       Plan     Zoning           Address          Acreage     Avg: 28 du/ac       Avg: 28 du/ac                                    Notes 
Los Angeles Industrial D Underutilized Parcels
                    Mixed      MU       5197 E.Los Angeles
   71  644009129                                                 0.51             0                  14
                     Use    Overlay/LI          Ave.
                    Mixed      MU       5135 E. Los Angeles
   72  644009134                                                 1.01             0                  28
                     Use    Overlay/LI          Ave.
                                        5105 E. Los Angeles
                                                                 4.80             0                 134
                    Mixed      MU               Ave.
   73  644009135
                     Use    Overlay/LI
                                        Large shopping center with older grocery store building and other small retail. Structures constructed prior to 1980. 5197 E. Los Angeles
                                        Ave. contains a vacant building.
                    Mixed      MU
       644021006                                                 3.55             0                  99
                     Use    Overlay/LI
                                        5000 E. Los Angeles
   76
                                                Ave.
                    Mixed      MU
       644021007                                                 2.73             0                  76
                     Use    Overlay/LI
GENERAL PLAN                                                                        H3‐23                                                           CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                                                                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
Table H3‐5           Los Angeles Avenue Transit‐Oriented Development/Industrial Area C 
                                    MU                                           Residential 
                                  Overlay/                                        Very High         Mixed Use 
  Map                General        Base                                        Max: 35 du/ac     Max: 35 du/ac 
   ID       APN         Plan       Zoning          Address          Acreage     Avg: 28 du/ac      Avg: 28 du/ac                            Notes 
                                    Subtotal Underutilized Parcels   12.60            0                 351
                        Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels 12.60                  0                 351
                                   Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                                 Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                                     Unit Assumptions 
  Housing Element 
    Assumptions           RVH (100%)                     MU (0%)                  RVH Units          MU Units                            Total Units 
                                0                         12.60                       0                 351                                  351
 
Table H3‐6           Los Angeles Avenue Transit‐Oriented Development/Industrial Area D 
                                                                 MU                                                 Residential 
                                                              Overlay/                                              Very High        Mixed Use 
                                           General              Base                                               Max: 35 du/ac   Max: 35 du/ac 
  Map ID     APN (Site ID No.)               Plan              Zoning               Address               Acreage  Avg: 28 du/ac    Avg: 28 du/ac               Notes 
Los Angeles Industrial D Underutilized Parcels
    75         644021003            Residential Very High       RVH         5150 E. Los Angeles Ave.        9.22        258               0           Old mobile home park.
                                                                          Subtotal Underutilized Parcels    9.22        258               0
                                                               Total Vacant and Underutilized Parcels       9.22        258               0
                                                            Vacant and Underutilized Site 
                                                           Acreage by Anticipated Land Use                                             Unit Assumptions 
       Housing Element 
          Assumptions                          RVH (100%)                                 MU (0%)                   RVH Units          MU Units              Total Units 
                                                   9.22                                       0                         258               0                      258
 
                                        
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY                                                                     H3‐24                                                             GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3   RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
                                                                          
GENERAL PLAN                                  H3‐25        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

                           CHAPTER 4: HOUSING
                                         
CITY OF SIMI VALLEY  H3‐26      GENERAL PLAN 
 

APPENDIX H3   RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY UNDER GENERAL PLAN 2030
                                                                           
GENERAL PLAN                                  H3‐27        CITY OF SIMI VALLEY 
 

