      GENERAL PLAN
Adopted November 10, 2016
Prepared by:
Raimi + Associates
3600 Lime Stree, Suite 226
Riverside, CA 92501
www.raimiassociates.com
With:
Sargent Town Planning
Fehr & Peers
Michael Baker International
Rincon Consultants
      GENERAL PLAN
Adopted November 10, 2016

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
City Staff
Lauri Aylaian, City Manager
Rudy Acosta, Assistant City Manager
Ryan Stendell, Director of Community Development
Martin Alvarez, Economic Development Director
Janet Moore, Director of Housing
Mark Greenwood, Public Works Director
David Hermann, Management Analyst
Mark Diercks, Transportation Engineer
Eric Ceja, Principal Planner
City Council
Robert A. Spiegel, Mayor
Jan Harnik, Mayor Pro Tem
Susan Marie Weber, Council Member
Sabby Jonathan, Council Member
Van Tanner, Council Member
Planning Commission
John Greenwood, Chairperson
Nancy DeLuna
Joseph Pradetto
Ron Gregory
Kathleen Kelly
Former Comissioners
Ken Stendell, Chairperson
Rodger Dash
Sonia Campbell
 


CONTENTS
1.		 Vision & Guiding Principles............................................ 1
2.		 Introduction.................................................................. 11	
3.	 Land Use & Community Character............................... 21
4.	 Mobility........................................................................ 51
5.	 Health & Wellness........................................................ 77
6.	 Environmental Resources............................................. 87
7.	 Noise.......................................................................... 101
8.	 Safety.......................................................................... 109
9.		 Public Utilities & Services........................................... 131
10.	 City Center Area Plan................................................. 139
11. Housing (Under Separate Cover)................................ 197
12.	 Work Plan................................................................... 199
(This page is intentionally left blank
1. VISION & GUIDING PRINCIPLES
                                                                                           Inspirational downtown buildings
Palm Desert is the heart of California’s Coachella Valley. Our intent is to create a town
with great neighborhoods, anchored by a true downtown and a vibrant, walkable
university center, connected by safe, comfortable streets for all users.
Today, Palm Desert serves as a landmark city for residents and visitors alike. From
recreation to arts to educational opportunities, our city offers a safe and stable         Inspirational pedestrian walkway
community, while benefiting from the tourism industry and all the diversity and
culture it brings to Palm Desert. Tomorrow, Palm Desert will embrace our love for the
arts, our unique culture, the environment we inhabit, and the industries that allow us
to progress as a happy and healthy community.
Palm Desert’s outstanding quality of life offers residents and visitors of all ages a wide
array of recreational, educational, shopping, housing and entertainment opportunities
as well as arts and cultural activities and world-class events in a uniquely beautiful
desert environment. This premier resort destination is a thriving, safe and sustainable
community that attracts innovative employers by virtue of its diverse, highly qualified
workforce and synergistic business, civic and educational partnerships.
We will be the leading educational hub in the region. We will provide excellent
educational opportunities and serve as an invaluable research and development
resource for innovation in the region. Through improved training, education, and
                                                                                                                            |

                                    innovation opportunities, our educational institutions will help to keep our economy
                                    diverse and resilient.
                                    Our tourism market will remain a valuable core of our local economy. The retail,
                                    recreation, and hospitality sectors of our economy will strengthen as we diversify
                                    other industries to ensure a diverse and resilient local economy. The City Center will
                                    develop into a world class downtown, providing residents and visitors with an
                                    experience that is rich and highly accessible with walkable destinations.
                                    We will continue to protect and enhance the striking and unique natural setting that
                                    makes Palm Desert special, and we will continue to be leading environmental
                                    stewards in the Coachella Valley. We will foster an environment that protects our
                                    residents and visitors. We will continue to protect the scenic desert environment that
                                    surrounds us as we adapt to climate pressures, and to protect our sensitive resources.
                                    Through the implementation of this General Plan, the city will develop so as to be
                                    more welcoming and accessible to both its residents and its visitors. The city’s
Cultural Influences in Palm Desert  important centers, such as the downtown and the university area, will develop into
                                    attractive, walkable hubs of social and economic activity. We will continue to
                                    celebrate our strengths and explore our opportunities to establish new industries, and
                                    enhance our community and improve quality of life for residents and visitors.
                                    The 2013-2033 Strategic Plan, Envision Palm Desert - Forward Together identifies nine
                                    Strategic Results Areas ranging from arts and culture to transportation. Each sets out
                                    mini-visions, priorities, strategies, action plans, and measures of success. Below are
                                    highlights from all nine. These mini vision statements have helped guide this General
Community activities in Palm Desert
                                    Plan Update and will continue to serve to guide City decision making.
                                                          The plan envisions Palm Desert as the cultural core of the
                                    Coachella Valley. Priorities are to assess the current arts and cultural landscape,
                                    explore the viability of creating an arts and culture district, and develop secure and
                                    sustainable funding for arts and culture.
                                                                        The vision builds on Palm Desert’s strengths in
                                    business, education, arts, and tourism to provide an inviting economic climate offering
                                    lifestyle, education, and investment opportunities. Priorities are to increase job and
                                    business opportunities, expand quality education to ensure that residents are
                                    prepared to serve in a workforce of the future, to create and attract entertainment
                                    and events that grow the economy and improve the quality of life, and enhance and
                                    raise awareness of business-friendly services to retain and attract business.
                                                   : The Strategic Plan envisions an education destination offering world-
                                    class programs providing lifelong learning opportunities and an engaged and informed
                                    community. Priorities are to create and support a community-based education
                                    coalition that will focus on graduation rates, attract and retain students of all ages by
                                    providing outstanding academic and cultural programs, and create community
                                    awareness of, and support for, the building blocks of student and career success.

                                   The vision is to be a responsible steward of the city’s
natural resources. Priorities are to reduce per-capita consumption of energy and
water, promote greater use of sustainable materials with an eye upon the needs of
future generations, encourage all new construction to be net zero energy in design
and exceed the Coachella Valley Water District’s efficiency standards, and encourage
property owners to reduce energy and water consumption.
                                                 The vision is a well-planned and
developed city with a vibrant city core; natural open space; and housing, business, and
community revitalization opportunities. Priorities are to enhance Palm Desert as a
first-class destination for premier shopping and national, regional, and neighborhood
retail businesses, to expand Palm Desert as an educational hub, to facilitate
development of high-quality housing for people of all income levels, and to develop
creative and innovative zoning and incentives that promote education and high-quality
residences and encourage a balance between housing and jobs.
                             The Strategic Plan envisions parks, open spaces, and
recreational opportunities as drivers of innovation and a high quality of life. Priorities
are to fund park maintenance and plan for future replacement and growth, assure a             Inspirational downtown mixed-use
continuing flow of innovative ideas through creative partnerships, and provide
adequate staffing. Other priorities include encouraging resident input, promoting
healthy community principles by incorporating recreational and exercise opportunities
in all public spaces, planning and developing the North Sphere Regional Park, and
evaluating the need for expansion of the Palm Desert Aquatic Center.
                                                    The vision is for a high quality of life
for Palm Desert as a result of its comprehensive public safety services. Priorities are to
continually enhance the delivery of public safety services, increase methods of crime
prevention through expanded community participation, and help the community be
more prepared for disasters and public safety emergencies.
                               The plan envisions a year-round international resort          Downtown activities and tourism
destination offering a wellness lifestyle, exemplary hotels, arts, entertainment,
shopping, recreational, and education opportunities for all ages. Priorities are to
improve access to the city and its attractions, to grow existing events and develop new
events to enhance the desirability of Palm Desert year-round, to attract new and
developing markets (culinary, medical, cultural tourism, business, sports, film industry,
emerging international markets and those for younger demographics), and to support
Palm Desert tourism through enhanced marketing.
                       The vision is of a community with safe, convenient, and efficient
transportation options for residents and visitors. Priorities are to create walkable
neighborhoods in residential, retail, and open space areas to reduce the use of low          Separated bicycle and walk way
occupancy vehicles; revitalize the Highway 111 corridor through land use and other
improvements; and emphasize multiple modes of travel including carpooling, bus
riding, cycling and walking.
                                                                                                                               |

                       The successful realization of the Vision and effective implementation of the Envision
                       Palm Desert Strategic Plan rely on the city’s ability to strengthen its sense of
                       community identity and unique character for residents and Palm Desert visitors. To do
                       this, we will focus on people and creating a human-oriented and human-scaled town.
                       This is a cross-cutting topic that is pivotal to the achievement of so many of the
                       Strategic Plan objectives, including expanded and diversified economic development
                       opportunities, a successful university area, expanded tourism opportunities, improved
                       energy and sustainability, diverse and high-quality neighborhoods, improved
                       community health, improved transportation options, and community safety
                       enhancements. To achieve Palm Desert’s Vision for the future, the City will focus on
                       the following principles:
                                                        First and foremost, our city is a place for people. It is a
                       place for people to live, to work, to learn, to shop, and to play. By planning and
                       designing Palm Desert with people as the primary focus, the city will continue to serve
                       as a destination that entices visitors, and to endure as a community with a high quality
                       of life that attracts the best and the brightest residents, students, and businesses. To
                       ensure we are designing for the human scale, we must do several things. We must
Lively outdoor centers maintain a moderate density and scale: just enough to create interest and activity, but
                       not so much as to overwhelm people and not so little as to dilute the sense of place or
                       inhibit walking and bicycling. Buildings should be unique and interesting to appeal to
                       people experiencing them in person and improve their experience of Palm Desert and
                       improve walk appeal. The public realm, comprised of our buildings, open spaces, and
                       roadways, must be designed to create safe and comfortable places for pedestrians
                       with convenient, safe, and easy street crossings; and convenient, close access to
                       buildings. Our alternative is to continue the 50-year trend in Southern California of
                       designing for the automobile first. Cars are an important part of our transportation
                       system, but too great an emphasis on accommodating the automobile has made
                       walking and bicycling as part of daily life difficult, leading to increased air pollution and
                       a variety of public health issues.
Human scale mixed use
                                                         We want places for our residents and visitors to
                       congregate, especially for commerce and socializing. Lively city centers are the
                       physical forum for gathering, business, shopping, and the exchange of ideas. To create
                       lively centers, we need to provide for a mix of uses, sufficient scale and density to
                       make the places interesting and attractive, and to include housing within and near the
                       centers. Establishing vibrant, active nodes around the 111 corridor and the University
                       is critical to implementing the Strategic Plan Vision. Smaller centers throughout the
                       city are also necessary in order to serve our various neighborhoods.
                                               We ask a lot of our streets. We want safe, convenient, and easy
                       automobile travel. We want efficient goods movement. We also need to provide our
                       residents and visitors with legitimate choices as to how they get around our town.
Separated bicycle path
                       Everyone should have the option of meeting some, if not all, of their daily needs by
                       means other than automobiles. To accomplish this, this General Plan provides for a
                       layered transportation network that will expand choice by providing new
                       opportunities for walking, bicycling, and transit. We recognize the importance of the

automobile, we will continue to accommodate its valuable role in our community, and
we will expand our transportation infrastructure by improving our pedestrian network
and expanding our bicycle network.
                                              As we think about our new buildings,
districts, neighborhoods, and corridors and making sure they are designed for people
first, we also need to ensure that we are working towards the creation of a town with
great accessibility and great connectivity. To date, Palm Desert has been very
successful at capitalizing on the value created by separated uses. Now we are going to
capitalize on the value potential of creating connected places. Research shows that
more connected and compact street networks with fewer lanes on major roads are
highly correlated with reduced rates of obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, and
heart disease among residents. Research also shows innumerable economic benefits
of walkable places. With this General Plan, we will seek accessibility and connectivity
in our new neighborhoods and our centers so as to capitalize on the health and
economic benefits of walkable places.
                                Our residents are people with great affection and         Palm Desert public transit stop
appreciation for the outdoors. The city’s setting is unique and strikingly beautiful. Our
residents are also active and health minded. As such, we need a city with an extensive
supply and variety of quality open spaces. These open spaces will be comprised of
small neighborhood parks, plazas, sports fields, and natural areas. They will serve to
provide places to gather, places to play, and visual and emotional relief from the built
areas of town. In part, new development will help provide for these open space
resources. Our community will reap the benefits. Increasing the quantity and quality
of parks increases the amount of time children exercise, decreases their risk of chronic
diseases, and even reduces juvenile delinquency. Adults who live closer to open
spaces report reduced stress and fatigue, improved mental health, and higher self-
rated health. Children diagnosed with ADHD receive as much benefit from walking in a
park as they do from leading medication therapies. Living closer to green space is also
associated with decreased cardiovascular and respiratory disease mortality in men.
Considering the human and economic costs of these diseases, parks begin to look like      Open Space in Palm Desert
a particularly attractive investment.
This General Plan is a long-term strategy that will be implemented over the course of
decades. If we are to be successful at achieving the realization of our vision, we must
keep our efforts focused and work to achieve early successes. Only then should we
consider broadening our list of efforts or strategies. The following are the most
important General Plan opportunity areas. Figure 1.1 shows how these areas of town
reflect the various degrees of change envisioned by this General Plan. These areas are
broadly categorized as preserve, enhance, and transform, and describe areas of the
city that have the greatest opportunities or likelihood for change. It should be noted
that change is meant in a very general sense and is not meant to be limited to changes
in density, intensity, or land uses. These changes might also include reinvestment and
reconstruction of existing uses, roadway improvements, or infrastructure investment.
                                                                                                                          |


                   The Strategic Plan made a very strong case for both the desire for a
true city center as well as the economic and community benefits of having a true
city center. A city center, or downtown, is compact and moderate in scale, has a mix
of uses, has a range of housing types, and is easy and comfortable to navigate on
foot. The city center is the heart of the town and the center of social, civic, and
commercial activity. Few cities in southern California have authentic downtowns
and the creation of one in Palm Desert will be a distinguishing milestone on the path
towards creating a stronger sense of place and a more competitive city. Because this
strategy is such an important component of the Envision Palm Desert Strategic Plan,
it will be critical for the City to focus efforts and resources on the successful
implementation of the plan. Similarly, the City will focus on creating a spark of
excitement by starting the evolution of the City Center with the transformation of
                                                                                            Inspirational downtown festivals
the San Pablo center.
                          The creation of both a California State University and a
University of California campus within Palm Desert is an enormous economic
opportunity for both the city and the entire Coachella Valley. The campuses provide
the City with new opportunities for educating residents, attracting new talent to the
valley in the way of both faculty and students, and attracting investment related to
university operations. The first step towards these opportunities was completed with
the City donating the land for the campus. Into the future, the City will need to
continue to work with and support the development of the campus. More
importantly, the City will need to ensure that the lands around the universities are
developed in a way that maximizes connectivity and accessibility. Through a strategy
of connectivity and accessibility, the City will capitalize on the greatest possible value   Inspirational streetscape and public realm
of creating a university area. To help achieve this outcome, the City will also prepare a
University Neighborhood Specific Plan, which will provide detailed design guidance
for the neighborhoods near the universities and the roads that connect the area
internally and with the rest of the city. This area of Palm Desert would also be an
ideal location for a future Metrolink station, when that service reaches the Valley.
Similarly, this area of the city would be ideal for mass transit such as Bus Rapid
Transit (BRT) or Light Rail. In each case, such infrastructure would help connect the
University Area and Palm Desert, improving inter-valley and regional connectivity.
                                  The Cook Street Corridor will serve an important function
into the future as the center of the University Area, connecting the university campus
with the neighborhoods and centers to the west. Cook Street will also become a very
important connector across the city, connecting the University Area, the various             Inspirational streetscape furniture and shade
                                                                                             trees
resorts along Cook Street, and the City Center via Fred Waring and 111. With the I-
10/Portola interchange set to come online within the next few years, the city will have
increased regional access, providing new opportunities to enhance Cook Street as a
multi-modal corridor that connects the city’s two most important centers.
Figure 1.2, Vision Diagram, presents a conceptual map that illustrates how the City’s
vision, guiding principles, and strategy of prioritization can come together in the form
of a land use and transportation plan. This diagram served as the basis of the land use
and transportation plans presented in the following elements.
                                                                                                                                     |


The General Plan will be implemented over an extended period of time that will likely
span several decades. During this time, long-range planning efforts will continue using
the General Plan goals and polices as a guide. However, the General Plan is a living
document. State law allows it to be updated and refined over the coming decades. In
fact, State law encourages annual reviews of implementation actions and
recommends that the entire General Plan be thoroughly reviewed every five years to
ensure that it is still consistent with the community’s goals.
Part of this ongoing annual review of the General Plan should include objective
monitoring of progress towards success. A table of indicators can be found in Chapter
12, the Work Plan.
                                                                                        |

(This page is intentionally left blank
2. INTRODUCTION
The Palm Desert General Plan charts the path for Palm Desert’s future and is the
principal tool for guiding the physical form and development of the City. At the same
time, it is a visionary document that lays out the community’s long-term goals and
objectives for the future. It contains the City’s official policies on land use and           El Paseo, Palm Desert
community design, mobility, housing, infrastructure, economics, health, and public
facilities and services. Its purpose is to identify planning goals; provide a basis for
decision-making; and inform citizens, developers, decision-makers, and other cities of
the ground rules for development within Palm Desert.
The General Plan is used by the City Council and Planning Commission to evaluate
public and private development proposals and to make funding and budget decisions.
It is used by city staff to direct their day-to-day activities, particularly those related to
building and development. It is used by residents and neighborhood groups to
understand the City’s long-range plans and proposals for different parts of the City.
The entirety of this document, including the vision, guiding principles, goals, policies,
actions, various maps and diagrams, and figures shall be understood to be the City’s
official policy guiding the physical design and construction of Palm Desert.
In 2013, more than 100 interested residents, business owners, and policy makers
worked together to develop a 20-year strategic plan for the City. The yearlong process
and resulting document, the 2013-2033 Strategic Plan, Envision Palm Desert - Forward
Together (“Envision Palm Desert”), laid the groundwork and direction for this General
Plan Update. The community members developed an overall community vision,
priorities, strategies, action steps, and measures of success. Envision Palm Desert
identified the City’s Vision and several important strategies that pertain to planning,
land use and transportation, including:
      • Expand economic competitiveness
      • Build on tourism, education, arts, and business successes
                                                                                                                    |

                                     •  Enhance quality of life
                                     •  Attract new employers
                                     •  Leverage universities
                                     •  Create an authentic downtown
                                     •  Anticipate new demographics and market trends
                                     •  Capitalize on the city’s outstanding climate and geography
                                     •  Expand access throughout the City
                                Given the connections to planning, land use, and transportation, the Strategic Plan
                                recommended that the City prepare a General Plan Update. The General Plan Update
                                seeks to bring the plan up-to-date by:
                                      • Creating updated policies for achieving the priorities set forth in the Strategic
                                         Plan for: Arts & Culture; Economic Development; Education; Energy &
                                         Sustainability; Land Use, Housing & Open Space; Parks & Recreation; Public
                                         Safety & Emergency Services; Tourism & Marketing, and Transportation.
                                      • Creating policies and framework to foster the development of a true city
                                         center/downtown.
                                      • Creating policies and implementation actions to further enhance the city’s
                                         leading sustainability and energy efficiency efforts.
                                As such, this General Plan update is serving as an implementation tool of the City’s 20-
                                year strategic plan, providing a road map for the physical changes to City envisioned
                                by the community.
                                The City of Palm Desert is located in the center of the Coachella Valley, which is in the
                                geographic center of Riverside County. The city is bordered by Rancho Mirage to the
                                west and Indian Wells to the south and east, and the unincorporated community of
                                Bermuda Dunes to the east. The existing city limits generally extend southward from
                                Interstate 10, past Highway 111 and along Highway 74 to the foot of the Santa Rosa
                                Mountains between Monterey Avenue and Washington Street. The City’s Sphere of
                                Influence (SOI) encompasses areas to the north and south of the city, including
                                portions of the Santa Rosa Mountains south of the city limits and the unincorporated
                                communities of Bermuda Dunes to the east, and Sun City Palm Desert north of
                                Interstate 10. Figure 2.1 depicts the Palm Desert City Limits, SOI and location relative
                                to other nearby cities or communities.
Palm Desert cultural influences


                     Regarded as the geographic center of Coachella Valley, the City of Palm Desert and the
                     surrounding San Bernardino basin were first settled by the Cahuilla tribe. Primarily a
                     farming community, evidence of Cahuilla settlements date back an estimated 2,000-
                     2,500 years. In 1774, Spanish explorer Juan Bautista de Anza arrived in the Coachella
                     Valley where he established a trade route between the Monterey-Sonoma area and
                     Southern California, known as Alta California.
                     Over the next century, trade flourished throughout the Coachella Valley region,
                     leading to the construction of the Southern Pacific Railroad and the establishment of a
                     major station in Indio by 1876. Wells, reservoirs and farms were constructed over the
                     next several decades. In 1943, the first residential area was developed in conjunction
Palm Desert in 1954
                     with an Army camp, and in 1945, brothers Randall, Carl, Clifford, and Phil Henderson,
                     successfully founded the 1,600- acre Town of Palm Desert. Regarded as Palm Desert’s
                     founding fathers, Clifford, Carl, Randall, and Phil Henderson successfully developed
                     Palm Desert by balancing desert terrain with monumental projects. Clifford was
                     known as the visionary who built large scale projects in surrounding cities, while
                     Randall was known as the expert on the desert and mountain environment. The
                     brothers envisioned a desert oasis were Randall could relocate his publishing plant as
                     then editor of “Desert Magazine.” Soon after, Palm Desert became a resort town
                     featuring the Shadow Mountain Club enticing visitors with cottages, restaurants, a golf
                     course, tennis courts, stables and a figure-eight swimming pool. It became a regular
                     retreat for celebrities, politicians, and affluent families. Within two years, Palm Desert
                     transformed into a business and entertainment hub with the establishment of El
Historic Palm Desert Paseo, a visionary commercial and up-scale shopping district that would become the
                     regional destination it is today.
                     The initial spark of development along Highway 111 and El Paseo may be attributed to
                     two major anchors: the city’s first U.S. Post Office (1947), and the opening of the
                     Desert Magazine Building (1948), a 17,000 square-foot commercial building housing
                     the Desert Magazine, local newspapers, an art gallery, gem shop, and bookstore. By
                     1953, Palm Desert included 30 miles of roads, over 150 homes, and 14 hotels. Private
                     investment in the town totaled an estimated $3.5 million (or $45 million, as adjusted
                     for inflation).
                     Early on, Palm Desert became known as the “Golf Capitol of the World.” However, the
                     city’s developments and reputation quickly diversified throughout the 1960s and 70s,
                     with the city doubling in size and population every 3.5 years. Between 1980 and 2000,
                     the Palm Desert grew from 11,000 to 41,000 residents. The City of Palm Desert was
                     officially incorporated in November 1973, and later re-incorporated as a California
                     Charter City in 1997. By 2010, the City had a reported population of 48,445, with a
                     median household income of $53,456 (U.S. Census). While Palm Desert’s historic core
                     is centered around Highway 111 and El Paseo, the completion of Interstate 10 in the
                     1960s shifted much of the city’s development activity to the north, including:
                     residential neighborhoods, golf resorts, university campuses, retail centers and
                     industrial facilities.

The General Plan is governed by California Government Code, which requires that
“each planning agency shall prepare and the legislative body of each county and city
shall adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of
the county or city” (California Government Code §65300).
Within this general requirement, some aspects of the general plan are tightly
prescribed, while others are left to the discretion of individual cities or counties. In
sum, the general plan:
       • Must set forth a “statement of development policies” that includes
           “objectives, principles, standards, and plan proposals,” and must include
           seven mandatory elements – land use, circulation, housing, conservation,
           open space, noise and safety – as well as any optional elements the City
           chooses. (Gov’t Code § 65302).
       • Must be an “internally consistent and compatible statements of policies.”
           (Gov’t Code § 65300.5).
       • “. . . may include any other subjects which, in the judgment of the legislative
           body, relate to the physical development of the county or city.” (Gov’t Code
           § 65303).
       • Should “accommodate local conditions and circumstances” (Gov’t Code §
           65300.7)
       • “. . .may be adopted in any format deemed appropriate or convenient by the
           legislative body, including the combining of elements,” provided it meets
           other minimum requirements (Gov’t Code § 65301).
This General Plan meets the above legal requirements and also introduces some
discretionary elements the City has deemed appropriate. This is sanctioned by
California law, which allows a general plan to “include any other subjects [that] relate
to the physical development of the…city” (California Government Code §65303).
These topics include urban form and character, public health, economic development,
infrastructure, and arts and culture. While part of the General Plan, the Housing
Element is a stand-alone volume that is updated more frequently than the other
elements. The Housing Element is not a part of this General Plan Update.
To start the General Plan planning process, an Existing Conditions Report was
prepared to collect and analyze data on current planning issues in Palm Desert for
each of the aforementioned topic areas. The Existing Conditions Report should be
referenced for additional background information on the Palm Desert General Plan.
The opening chapter of the General Plan lays out a vision for the City of Palm Desert
that the community is striving towards. The vision is intended to be realized over the
course of one or two generations of thoughtful growth and development. It is
                                                                                         |

                                     expected that the vision will help guide decisions relating to new development and
                                     updates of the City’s various plans and ordinances.
                                     The Introduction provides background on the reasons for updating the General Plan,
                                     including a brief synopsis of the challenges and opportunities facing the City. This
                                     chapter also describes the role of the General Plan, how it is intended to be used and
                                     administered, and an overview of the Plan.
                                     This element presents the approach to land use and community character, in addition
                                     to policies regarding the fiscal health of the City. Within this element are the General
                                     Plan land use designations, the designation map, goals and policies describing the
                                     community’s preferences and priorities for the character and appearance of the City.
                                     In addition, this element discusses historic preservation, strategies for in-fill
                                     development, local arts, employment, and resorts and tourism. This element also
                                     presents approaches to creating a walkable city that is well connected and accessible
                                     to all members of the community.
 Local landmark and community
 character
                                     This element presents the approach to transportation, addressing access and mobility
                                     within the City. Included in this element are descriptions of street types and the
                                     circulation network map as well as goals and policies addressing existing and future
                                     transportation facilities in Palm Desert for pedestrians, bicycles, and transit. This
                                     element addresses multi-occupant modes of transportation, identifying local and
                                     regional circulation issues, and outlines an open space trail network.
                                     This element presents the community’s priorities for realizing a healthier community.
                                     It includes goals and policies that address existing community health concerns as well
                                     approaches to managing new development to prevent future health issues. It covers
                                     topics such as accessible healthcare, air quality, healthy eating, active living, and parks
                                     and recreation.
                                     This element presents the community’s approach for dealing with archaeological and
                                     cultural resources, biological resources, water resources, air quality, energy resources,
                                     and open space and conservation.
                                     This element contains the community’s approach to reducing the potential risks
Inspirational pedestrian and bicycle
                                     resulting from natural and environmental hazards such as earthquakes, floods, fire
safety and mobility                  and extreme weather. The element contains goals and policies that will help guide the
                                     City’s decisions related to new development and the risks to the health, safety, and
                                     welfare of local hazards.
                                     This element addresses the approach for minimizing the community’s exposure to
                                     harmful noise levels. The element analyzes and quantifies future noise levels. It

includes a map summarizing the results, and presents goals and policies for managing
exposure to excessive noise.
This element addresses public services and utilities across the City. More specifically,
this element includes information regarding water utilities, public buildings and
facilities, police and fire protection, schools and libraries, and emergency response.
The City Center Area Plan presents a vision for the future of the greater Highway 111
corridor area, including El Paseo, the San Pablo corridor, and the Civic Center. It
provides a vision, a summary of the community input, guiding principles, goals, and
policies for transforming the 111 corridor area into Palm Desert’s downtown.
Implementation actions for the City Center Area Plan are contained within Chapter 12.
    City Center Area Plan Development Strategy
The General Plan provides a vision for the future of Palm Desert and guidance about
how to attain that future. City staff, the City Council, the Planning Commission, and
other boards and commissions, as part of their duties to the City, will carry out the
goals and policies of the plan. Plan implementation will be achieved through the
adoption, implementation and revision of the municipal code, annual budget, capital
improvements program, and through on-going decisions about development
proposals. Indeed, all City programs, policies and actions must be made consistent
with this General Plan to meet state requirements.
To assist with the effort of implementing this General Plan, the final chapter,
Implementation, provides a list of actions that the City will undertake to carry out the
vision. Each action includes a description, a level of priority, a timeframe for
accomplishing the tasks, and the responsible parties for each action. This chapter also
includes a list of major physical improvements known at the time of writing and
indicators to measure the successful implementation of the General Plan.
                                                                                         |

                                   In addition to the above chapters, the General Plan also includes the State-mandated
                                   Housing Element. Since the Housing Element is updated more frequently than the rest
                                   of the General Plan, it is contained in a separate volume and is not being updated at
                                   this time.
Inspirational multi-family housing
                                   Each element of the General Plan is organized with the following sections:
                                                                   A summary of the scope and purpose of the element.
                                                                        A short explanation of the mandatory state
                                    requirements for each element – what must be included in the section to be certified
                                    as a legally binding document.
                                                  A summary of the issues facing the community. The issues serve as
                                    background for the goals and policies and are derived from the Existing Conditions
                                    Report prepared as part of this General Plan update.
Inspirational mixeduse                                          Each element contains goals and policies responding to the
                                   key issues associated with achieving the community’s vision, and are intended to
                                   provide clear direction in how the City will implement the overall vision of this plan.
                                   Together, the General Plan language creates a hierarchy of goals and policies that will
                                   be mandated, encouraged, or allowed by the City over the next 20 years.
                                   Each element of this General Plan contains goals and policies. Implementation actions
                                   are included in Chapter 12 “Implementation,” but are organized by the same topics as
                                   each chapter. All of these guide decision-making and are defined as follows:
                                               Overall statement describing the envisioned end state for the community.
                                   Goals are broad in both purpose and aim, but are designed specifically to establish
                                   directions and outcomes. The following is an example of a goal:
                                       Land Use Goal 1: Quality Spaces. A beautiful city with a balance of high quality
                                       open spaces and high quality urban areas.
                                                 Specific position statements that support the achievement of goals and
                                   serve as guides to the City Council, Planning Commission, other City commissions and
                                   boards, and City staff when reviewing development proposals and making other
                                   decisions. Policies seek to achieve the goals by mandating, encouraging, or permitting
                                   certain actions. Certain policies are critical and must be implemented. Thus,
                                   compliance with the policy or action is mandatory. Language used to describe this
                                   intent includes will, must, require, prohibit, conduct, maintain and implement. Other
                                   policies are strongly encouraged by the City, but total implementation may not be
                                   possible, thus compliance is not mandatory. Language used to describe this intent

includes should, may, encourage, consider, explore, allow, discourage and promote.
The following is an example of a policy in the Palm Desert General Plan:
     Land Use Policy 1.1: Phasing of public facilities. Require new parks, open spaces
     and public facilities be constructed concurrent with, or prior to, the development
     of each neighborhood. All required parks, open spaces and public facilities should
     be constructed before 75 percent of the dwelling units are constructed.
The General Plan is supported by a variety of maps, diagrams and illustrations, which
reinforce the text of each element. Graphics are incorporated into the General Plan to
delineate land use and circulation patterns, community focal points, open space and
recreation facilities, biological and cultural resources, and areas requiring special
consideration or study. Important or significant environmental resource and hazard
areas are also mapped, as well as public and quasi-public facilities. These official maps
carry equal authority to the goals and policies of the General Plan.
Development proposals and infrastructure projects must be analyzed and tested for
consistency with the goals, policies, and programs in every applicable element of the
General Plan, regardless of whether they are initiated by a developer or the City. On
an ongoing basis, the City must assure and maintain consistency of the General Plan
with adopted Specific Plans and the City Zoning Ordinance. Similarly, each year, the
Capital Inprovements Program shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to
ensure the City’s planned infrastructure investments are consistent with this General
Plan. This test of General Plan compliance is also a required criterion for determining
significant impacts under the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act.
In the event uncertainty exists regarding the location of boundaries of any land use
category, proposed public facility symbol, circulation alignment, or other symbol or
line found on the official maps of the General Plan, the following procedures will be
used to resolve such uncertainty.
Boundaries shown in the General Plan and on official maps as approximately following
the limits of any municipal corporation are to be construed as following these limits.
Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half or
quarter section lines shall be construed as following such lines.
                                                                                          |

Where a land use category applied to a parcel is not mapped to include an adjacent
street or alley, the category shall be considered to extend to the centerline of the right
of way. Boundaries shown as separated from, parallel, or approximately parallel to any
of the features listed above shall be construed to be parallel to such features and at
such distances therefrom as are shown on the map. Symbols that indicate appropriate
locations for proposed public facilities are not property-specific. Rather, they indicate
only the general area within which a specific facility should be established.
The Palm Desert General Plan will be implemented over an extended period of time
(20+ years, with a time horizon of 2040). During this time, the long-range planning
efforts for Palm Desert will continue using the goals and objectives as a guide.
However, a general plan is a living document, and presents the outcomes desired by
the community based on their current goals and local conditions. As the city grows
and changes, it may become necessary to amend specific policies and implementation
actions as economic and demographic conditions change while new ideas about
growth and conservation are formed. In fact, State Law encourages annual reviews of
implementation actions and recommends that the entire General Plan be thoroughly
reviewed every five years to ensure it is still consistent with the community’s goals.
Any part of a general plan may be amended to accommodate changing conditions.
Property owners, the Planning Commission, the City Council, or City staff may propose
amendments. Proposed changes must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
the City Council at public hearings and the potential of environmental impacts must be
evaluated in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act.
Community members, neighborhood groups and local organizations are encouraged
to get involved in the on-going planning efforts of the City and to participate in the
implementation of the General Plan. By active, thoughtful involvement, residents can
be part of the process of shaping and growing Palm Desert to make it an even more
active, prosperous and welcoming city than it is today.
California Government Code requires that the planning agency “render an annual
report to the legislative body (City Council) on the status of the Plan and the progress
in its implementation” (Section 65400(b)). State law further requires that the Housing
Element be reviewed and updated at least once every eight (8) years. As part of this
review, the City will consider progress in the context of the indicators presented
within this General Plan. Similarly, each year, the Capital Improvements Program shall
be reviewed by the Planning Commission to ensure the planned infrastructure
investments are consistent with this General Plan.

3. LAND USE & COMMUNITY CHARACTER
                                                                                              Example of outdoor seating
California law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires that a city’s general plan
include:
“… a land use element which designates the proposed general distribution and general
location and extent of uses of the land for housing, business, industry and open space,
including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty,
public buildings and grounds, solid waste disposal facilities and other categories of
public and private uses of land. The land use element shall include a statement of the
standards of population density and building intensity recommended for the various
districts and other territory covered by the plan.”                                            Examples of an outdoor plaza and
                                                                                               gathering space
The required land use element has the broadest scope of the required elements of a
general plan, regulating how all land in a city is to be used in the future. To fully reflect
the range of physical attributes that are important for Palm Desert’s success, this
chapter also contains goals and policies to guide urban form and design.
Palm Desert has grown to be a very desirable community with a high quality of life and
robust economy. Much of this success is due to the careful planning of its land use and
transportation system, realizing a diversity of uses and industries all framed by
preserved hillsides and desert open space.
The General Plan area covers 44,533 acres, or 69.9 square miles. The City’s corporate
boundaries include 17,256 acres, while 27,277 acres, or 42.6 square miles, constitute
the City’s sphere of influence. Within the city, there are approximately 2,700 acres of
undeveloped land, much of which is in the northern portion of the city.
                                                                                                                             |

The city currently offers a wide range of housing opportunities, from rental
apartments to multi-million dollar estates. Like many California communities, much of
Palm Desert’s housing was constructed in a suburban context in which value is in part
derived from the separation and isolation of neighborhoods from the rest of the city.
This trend is most striking when viewing a map of the city’s gated communities and
has likely contributed to Palm Desert’s success at attracting seasonal residents.
During the last General Plan cycle, the City initiated the development of the California
State University and University of California campuses, expanding the city’s
educational opportunities. This move presents great educational, economic, and
overall quality of life offerings. However, to fully capitalize on the opportunity, the City
will need to make sure it appropriately plans for enough land in the vicinity of the
universities to accommodate new students, faculty, and university supportive
businesses. Additionally, it will be very important for the City to ensure that all new
development in the area is interconnected so as to form a cohesive university area.
Palm Desert has also concluded that the development of the Highway 111 corridor
area into a downtown presents an important opportunity for maintaining and
improving the City’s position as a premier destination for tourists, visitors, and
shoppers. The City’s strategy is to focus on retail business retention and the
redevelopment of underutilized commercial areas in order to protect and grow Palm
Desert’s market position. The City’s strategy also includes transitioning the Highway
111 corridor into a walkable City Center district where visitors and residents alike can
employ a “park once” approach. In part, this approach is based on leveraging the
success of the walkable “Main Street” form and character of El Paseo. The City is also
responding to strong market and demographic trends, driven by the Baby Boomer and
Millennial generations, exhibiting strong demand for walkable, connected places over
isolated, automobile-oriented places. As such, this General Plan contains strategies
that emphasize the connectivity between housing, jobs, and services as well as the
City’s desire to enhance resident mobility through high quality transit and transit-
supportive development. In sum, this strategy aims to create a true downtown,
enhancing the city’s identity, quality of life, and economic competitiveness.
As the city continues to grow, infill development will be a critical land use strategy.
This strategy will allow the city to continue to grow and allow the city to continue to
protect and preserve its hillsides and natural environment. These amenities create the
striking natural beauty that is at the heart of Palm Desert’s identity.

The General Plan sets forth land use designations that indicate the purpose and
intended use for each parcel within the city. These designations are developed to
provide clear, yet flexible, structure that adapts to changing economic conditions and
community vision. The land use designations are organized into categories in the
tables below.
There are five broad categories of land use designations—residential, mixed use,
commercial, industrial, and public uses. Given the City’s broad place-making goals and
the community’s interest in shape the form and character of their city, these broad
categories have been grouped into three place types: neighborhoods, centers, and
districts. Each land use designation provides direction on use, intensity/density, form,
and character.                                                                             Examples of a walkable city center
The place type category definitions are as follows:
                       are the basic building block of great cities and this General Plan
identifies a range of neighborhood types. Neighborhoods are developed areas with a
balanced mix of human activity with uses including dwellings, workplaces, shops, civic
buildings, and parks. The vision of the Plan is to create complete, compact and
connected neighborhoods that provide a high quality of life for residents.
Neighborhoods are the basic building blocks of a livable Palm Desert. A Palm Desert
neighborhood should mix a variety of residential types within a walkable network of
green streets and parks, well-connected to parks, schools and neighborhood centers
                                                                                           Examples of neighborhood types
to serve daily shopping needs. Our neighborhoods must provide safe, attractive and
comfortable places to live and play. The neighborhood designations presented in the
following pages call for the development of such traditional neighborhoods
throughout the city.
             are areas of the city that are dominated by a single activity that is
functionally specialized with supportive uses and are somewhat more automobile-
oriented. They differ from Neighborhoods and Centers in that most important
physical characteristics are the connectivity through the area and the way the districts
adjoin (and potentially impact) adjacent uses. Districts play an important role in a city
since they are the primary retail and entertainment areas (Regional Retail and Resort
and Entertainment), and provide jobs and economic development opportunities
(Employment and Industrial). The Resort District also provides an opportunity for the
City to capitalize on the part-time living and hospitality economic sectors.
            are mixed-use areas with a compact and walkable environment that are
generally located on the City’s corridors serving as both connectors and transitions
between neighborhoods and districts. Some Centers are retail and service commercial
oriented and provide concentrations of jobs, civic and cultural uses. Multi-family
residences may also be integrated into Centers, often on upper floors of buildings
above ground-floor businesses. Centers are the primary places of commerce,
neighborhood-serving retail, arts and culture and civic activities. There are a variety of
centers ranging from walkable, mixed-use Neighborhood Center to Downtown.
Centers are characterized by the urban and walkable character and their mix of uses.
                                                                                                                            |

                                       In addition to the required information on allowed land use and intensity of
                                       development, the General Plan land use designations provide more detailed
                                       information on the built form and character of the uses than is typically found in a
                                       general plan. With the exception of the Public and Specific Plan designations (which
                                       are described more generally), each designation has policy guidance on:
Above: Spanish Walk is an example of a
neighborhood within Palm Desert,
below: Typical diagram of a
neighborhood.
                                            Above: Westfield Mall is an example of a   Above: El Paseo is an example of a center
                                            district within Palm Desert, below:        within Palm Desert, below: Typical
                                            Typical diagram of a district              diagram of a center
•                                 This describes the overall purpose of the land
     use designation.
•                                             This describes the intended
     physical form and character that new development will take.
•                                        The intensity of development as
     measured in dwelling units per acre for residential development and
     floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential development.
•                         The allowed land uses and their general distribution
     are summarized on each land use designation sheet.
•                                          This includes descriptions and metrics
     for ensuring a high level of connectivity in the transportation system.
•                                                      A description of the
     roadways desired in each designation is included. This description works
     in concert with the policies and street types in the Mobility Element.
•                       This includes descriptions of the range of parks and
     open spaces desired. Additional detail on specific park types is provided
     in a separate table presented in the Environmental Resources Element.
     (See Table 5-1.)
  Single Family Residential                   Recreational
  Multi-Family Residential                    Governmental
  Bed & Breakfast Inn                         Industrial
  Agricultural uses                           Large Retail
  Small Retail                                Research & Development
  Mobile Home
                                                                                  |

To conserve nature while providing the lowest intensity and amount of neighborhood
development.
DU/AC: 0.05 to 1.0
Commercial FAR: N/A
Uses are primarily single-family residential. Limited commercial activity may be
allowed in the form of focused specialty lodging such as a bed & breakfast inn with
minor commercial/retail.
Uses such as guest houses, churches, schools, family day care homes, public facilities,
and others which are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving
the needs of rural, low-density neighborhoods may also be allowed.
Streetscapes are natural, with gutterless shoulders defined by informal tree
arrangements and natural street edges. Street alignments are relatively informal with
moderate interconnectivity. Some dead end roads may be warranted to preserve
existing topography and/or natural environment.
Open space is primarily provided through the natural features being preserved.
Residential on-site amenities are welcomed, but not required.
Small portions of sites are developed with single-family houses organized around
natural areas. Buildings are set back large distances from the natural street edge to
provide very large front yards with porches and terraces. Structures are clustered
together to leave most of the natural area undisturbed. Open spaces are primarily
natural with a single or few clusters of limited numbers of houses. Height of homes
are site appropriate (depending on topography and slope).
To provide lower-intensity neighborhood development that features golf course
activity, or similar recreational orientation, and limited commercial uses.
DU/AC: up to 8.0
Commercial FAR: N/A
Uses are comprised of a variety of single-family houses and limited multi-family
dwellings organized around golf courses and other open space with focused
commercial/retail.
Uses such as retail, personal service, care, public facilities, and others which are
determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of resort-
oriented living and recreation may also be allowed.
Streetscapes are suburban and rural with moderate interconnectivity and formal or
informal street tree arrangements depending upon the particular street. Ideally,
intersection density would not be less than 140 intersections per square mile.
Open space is primarily provided through the golf course(s) or other recreational
amenities. In order to provide maximum viewsheds of the golf course(s) for Palm
Desert residents, large portions of the golf course(s) are exposed to public view along
streets. Other open spaces may be provided throughout the neighborhood including
plazas at mixed use areas. Open space preserves some of the natural terrain and
features of the desert.
Buildings are set back from the sidewalk to provide large front yards with porches and
terraces except in mixed-use areas where buildings are near or at the sidewalk to
support outdoor dining and easy view of storefronts. Buildings are a variety of single-
family houses and small multi-family and small commercial buildings up to 2 stories
focused on plazas.
                                                                                        |
To provide low intensity neighborhood development that features a limited variety of
housing choices. Occurs primarily on valley floor away from steep slopes.
DU/AC: 3.0 to 8.0
Commercial FAR: N/A
Uses are single-family houses and small multi-family dwellings organized along
walkable streetscapes with commercial/ retail activity nearby.
Streetscapes are suburban with formal street tree arrangements and have minimal
interconnectivity. Intersection density should be no less than 200 per square mile.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and other open
spaces such as parks and fields throughout the neighborhood.
Buildings are set back from the sidewalk to provide moderately sized front yards with
porches and terraces except in commercial areas where buildings are set back behind
parking areas. Buildings are primarily single-story single-family houses. Limited multi-
family buildings up to 2 stories are also allowed.
To provide moderate intensity neighborhood development that features a variety
of housing choices and mixed uses, while preserving or enhancing the existing
inventory of 1950’s Desert homes.
DU/AC: 3.0 to 10.0
Commercial FAR: Up to 0.75
Uses are a variety of single-family houses and small multi-family dwellings
organized along walkable streetscapes with limited commercial/retail activity within
walking distance. House-scale multi-family is allowed on a limited basis, primarily
along corridors.
Uses such as retail, care, public facilities, guest houses, churches, schools, family
day care homes, public facilities, and others which are determined to be compatible
with and oriented toward serving the needs of neighborhoods may also be allowed
and should be focused along corridors.
Streetscapes are suburban with formal street tree arrangements and are highly
interconnected. Intersection density should be at least 400 per square mile.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and a variety
of small, individual open spaces throughout the neighborhood including plazas and
open spaces at mixed use areas.
Buildings are set back from the sidewalk to provide moderately sized front yards
with porches and terraces except in mixed-use areas where buildings are near or at
the sidewalk to support outdoor dining and easy view of storefronts. Buildings can
be up to 2.5 stories.
                                                                                      |

To provide moderate to higher intensity neighborhood development that features a
variety of housing choices, walkable streets, and mixed uses.
DU/AC: 7.0 to 40
Commercial FAR: 0.5 to 0.75
Uses are a range of single-family and multi-family residential uses including duplex,
triplex, quadruplex, rowhouses, townhouses, courtyard multi-family buildings and
small scale multi-family buildings organized along walkable streetscapes with focused
commercial/retail activity within walking distance.
Uses such as retail, personal service, care, public facilities, guest houses, churches,
schools, family day care homes, public facilities, and others which are determined to be
compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of neighborhoods may also be
allowed and should be focused along corridors and main streets.
Streetscapes have an urban character with formal street tree arrangements and are
highly interconnected. Mid-block paseos are allowed to provide pedestrian
connections from the streets to parking facilities within the blocks. Intersection
density should be 400 per square mile.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and variety of
open spaces throughout the neighborhood including plaza and other public open
spaces in mixed use areas.
Buildings are set back from the sidewalk to provide small to moderate front yards with
porches and terraces except in mixed-use areas where buildings are near or at the
sidewalk to support outdoor dining and easy view of storefronts. Buildings are a
variety of housing choices up to 3 stories and mixed-use buildings up to 3 stories
focused at key intersections and/or public open space.
To provide a wide variety of office-intensive activity that could include some
manufacturing along with research and development opportunities.
DU/AC: n/a
Commercial FAR: Up to 0.75
A wide variety of office and limited commercial activity along with multi-family
dwellings organized along walkable streetscapes. Uses would include professional
and medical office, and traditional business park.
Streetscapes are urban with formal street tree arrangements, on-street parking
and are highly interconnected. Larger block sizes are allowed in this district.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and variety of
plaza or other open spaces at key gathering areas. Small to moderate sized
buildings should be encouraged to consolidate or align shared open spaces. Within
larger buildings, open space is provided in the form of courtyards which are
shaded by the buildings.
Buildings are located near or at the sidewalk to shape the streetscapes and to
frame public open space used by employees. In some areas - and particularly in
order to attract a large employer - it may be appropriate for several blocks to be
joined together as a campus environment with pedestrian-only paths that connect
to surrounding streets. Buildings can be up to 3 stories.
                                                                                   |
To provide a wide variety of industrial activity ranging from light to heavy
manufacturing and outdoor assembly including research and development
opportunities.
DU/AC: n/a
Commercial FAR: Up to 0.75
A wide variety of industrial and limited commercial activity organized on utilitarian
industrial streets. Industrial and research & development uses, with support retail and
office uses, would be allowed.
Streetscapes are utilitarian with informal street tree arrangements and on-street
parking and are interconnected.
Open space is provided through the planted streetscapes that connect the various
parcels.
Buildings are near or away from the sidewalk depending upon the type of industrial
activity. Utilitarian architecture is appropriate for industrial districts and buildings
are single-use industrial or mixed-use buildings up to 2 stories.
To provide for government buildings and school facilities including: civic center,
libraries, community centers, senior centers, fire stations, corporate yards, both public
and private schools/universities and similar uses.
DU/AC: n/a
Commercial FAR: Up to 0.5
Government buildings and facilities and a wide range of public uses such as public and
private schools, higher educational facilities, community centers, and other similar
uses.
Determined on a case-by-case basis.
Open space is provided on a case-by-case basis. Government buildings are
encouraged to provide usable public open space.
Determined on a case-by-case basis.
                                                                                          |
To provide for a range of entertainment and resort destination uses that require large
amounts of land and that draw visitors to the City such as theme parks, hotels, and sports
facilities.
DU/AC: up to 10.0
Commercial FAR: Maximum of 0.10; exceptions may be made for certain entertainment
uses such as theme parks.
Lodging, recreation, support retail and commercial services along with
specialized entertainment.
Will vary depending upon the core amenities and market niche. Internal residential
components should follow the general direction of neighborhoods described herein.
Internal pedestrian connectivity should be high. External streets should provide
comfortable pedestrian amenities and street trees to shape a continuous public realm.
Resorts, due to their reduced vehicular access, should be designed to not unreasonably
disrupt the overall connectivity of the City.
Open space is primarily provided through a wide range of types varying from golf courses
and sports fields to plazas and mini parks.
Will vary depending upon the core amenities and market niche.
To provide large-format retail development along with associated restaurant and
commercial service activity. This district is located near major freeway connections
and around major intersections.
DU/AC: 10.0 to 15.0
Commercial FAR: 0.35 to 1.0
A variety of large-format retail, commercial services, lodging, entertainment, and
restaurant activity organized along walkable streetscapes. Multi-family is allowed as a
supportive use.
Streetscapes are urban with formal street tree arrangements, on-street parking and
are interconnected. In pedestrian-oriented retail environments, larger blocks should
be subdivided into smaller “virtual blocks” no longer than 400 or 500 feet.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes, though outdoor
plazas and green spaces are encouraged.
Buildings are entirely near or at the sidewalk to shape the streetscapes or they are
partially at the sidewalk to allow for convenient parking while shaping the
streetscape. Buildings should have ground-floor shopfronts and are generally
attached, with no side yards. Service functions such as loading and trash pickup
should occur at the rear. Buildings can be up to 3 stories.
                                                                                        |

To provide a concentration of retail businesses--including “big box” and “large format”
retailers--in a setting that accommodates the parking requirements of such businesses
and balances access by shoppers.
DU/AC: 10.0 to 15.0 (if housing is included)
Commercial FAR: 0.2 to 1.0
Primarily retail and services, sometimes with commercial uses on upper floors, and
flexibility of adding housing.
Streetscapes are urban with formal street tree arrangements, on street parking, and
are interconnected.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and variety of
plaza open spaces at key gathering areas. Open spaces in Suburban Retail Centers
should generally be plazas/greens to provide sufficient gathering space for shoppers
and visitors. Mini parks may also be appropriate.
Single-use commercial or mixed-use buildings up to 3 stories with flexibility of adding
housing. Buildings face the street or internal sidewalks with attractive shop fronts.

To provide a concentration of commercial businesses and civic amenities within
walking and biking distances of neighborhoods.
DU/AC: 10.0 to 15.0
Commercial FAR: Up to 0.5
Primarily neighborhood-serving retail and services. Allowed uses include retail,
professional office, local-oriented uses, including supermarkets, retail stores, theaters,
restaurants, professional and medical offices, and specialty retail stores, and flexibility
of adding housing. Residential uses are secondary uses found on upper floors of
mixed-use buildings and in multi-family buildings at the edge of the center where it
transitions to the adjoining neighborhood.
Streetscapes are urban with formal street tree arrangements, on-street parking, and
are interconnected. Streets within the center should connect to neighborhood streets
to provide convenient access for nearby residents as well as motorists.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and variety of
plaza open spaces at key gathering areas.
Buildings should be comprised of a variety of mixed-use buildings up to 3 stories with
the flexibility of adding housing. Buildings are near or at the sidewalk to shape the
streetscape and to frame public open space and streets.
                                                                                            |
To provide high intensity mixed-use development anchored by civic, cultural,
entertainment, retail and dining activity that features a variety of building sizes and
housing choices.
DU/AC: 12.0 to 40
Commercial FAR: Up to 2.5
A variety of civic, cultural, entertainment, retail, restaurant, and commercial services
activity along with multi-family dwellings organized along walkable streetscapes.
Ground floor uses include retail, restaurant, service, and office uses, while upper
floors accommodate residential and office uses. Residential uses are prohibited on
ground floors.
Streetscapes are urban with formal street tree arrangements, on-street parking and
are highly interconnected.
Open space is primarily provided through the generous streetscapes and variety of
plaza open spaces at key gathering areas. Within larger mixed-use or multi-family
buildings, open space is provided in the form of courtyards which are shaded by the
buildings.
Buildings are near or at the sidewalk to shape the commercial streetscapes, support
outdoor dining and for easy view of storefronts. Smaller buildings face streets and
public gathering spaces. Buildings are typically mixed-use up to 3 stories with taller
buildings up to 5 stories focused at key intersections and/or public open space. A
variety of housing choices, including lodging, up to 5 stories, are also allowed.

(This page is intentionally left blank
1.1 Scale of development. Require new development along the city’s
    corridors use design techniques to moderate height and use and ensure
    compatible fit with surrounding development.
1.2 Open space preservation. Balance the development of the city with the
    provision of open space, and especially the hillsides surrounding the City,
    so as to create both high quality urban areas and high quality open space.
1.3 Traffic generation. Balance medium and high intensity/density
    development with pedestrian-oriented and bicycle friendly design
    features so as to maximize trip and VMT reduction.
1.4 Phasing of public facilities. Require new parks, open spaces and public
    facilities be constructed concurrent with, or prior to, the development of
    each Neighborhood. All required parks, open spaces and public facilities
    should be constructed before 75 percent of the dwelling units are
    constructed.
1.5 Hillside Development. Limit development and grading in areas with
    slopes greater than 20 percent and limit the density and intensity of
    development in areas with slopes of between 10 and 19 percent.
1.6 Community Amenities. Balance the impacts of new development,
    density, and urbanization through the provision of a high-level of
    neighborhood and community amenities and design features.
2.1 Pedestrian focus. Design the streetscape of high volume corridors to
    balance regional traffic flow with pedestrian movement and safety and
    the unique physical environment of the area.
2.2 Parking frontages. Require parking strategies and designs that ensure
    parking areas do not dominate street frontages and are screened from
    public views whenever possible.
2.3 Landscaping. Require development projects to incorporate high quality
    landscaping in order to extend and enhance the green space network of
    the city.
                                                                                |

2.4  Tree planting. Encourage the planting of trees that appropriately shade
     the sidewalk and improve the pedestrian experience throughout the city.
2.5  Streetscape. Enhance the pedestrian experience through streetscape
     improvements that could include new street lighting, tree planting, and
     easement dedications to increase the size of the sidewalks and pedestrian
     amenities.
2.6  Lighting. Require all new street lights in commercial areas to be
     pedestrian-oriented and scaled, attractively designed, compatible in
     design with other street furniture, and to provide adequate visibility and
     security in accordance with best practices for night sky protection.
2.7  Public gathering spaces. Improve existing and create new gathering
     spaces throughout the city to provide beautiful, comfortable, and inviting
     public and pedestrian spaces, encouraging walking and public gathering
     spaces.
2.8  Public plazas. Encourage new development to incorporate public plazas,
     seating, drinking fountains, and gathering places, especially in prominent
     locations and areas of pedestrian activity.
2.9  Commercial requirements. Require development projects in non-
     residential and mixed use areas to provide for enhanced pedestrian
     activity through the following techniques:
     •         Requiring that the ground floor frontage be oriented to and
               accessible from the sidewalk.
     •         Locating the majority of a building’s frontages in close proximity
               to the sidewalk edge;
     •         Requiring that the first level of the building occupy a majority of
               the lot’s frontage, with exceptions for vehicle access;
     •         Requiring that the majority of the linear ground floor retail
               frontage (where it occurs) be visually and physically “penetrable,”
               incorporating windows and other design treatments to create an
               attractive street frontage;
     •         Requiring that the first level of building where retail uses are
               allowed have a minimum 15 feet floor to floor height for non-
               residential uses;
     •         Minimizing vehicle intrusions across the sidewalk;
     •         Allowing for the development of outdoor plazas and dining areas;
     •         Discouraging new surface parking lots; and
     •         Locating parking (surface or structured) behind buildings,
               wherever feasible.
     •         Address parking on a regional basis to maximize efficiency.
2.10 Auto-oriented uses. Consider allowing uses that serve occupants of
     vehicles (such as drive-through windows) and discourage uses that serve

     the vehicle (such as car washes and service stations), in places that are
     clearly automobile oriented, ensuring that such uses do not disrupt
     pedestrian flow, are not concentrated, do not break up the building mass
     of the streetscape, and are compatible with the planned uses of the area.
2.11 Roadway scale. In pedestrian prioritized areas of the city, limit roadway
     size and design techniques that emphasize and/or prioritize automobile
     operation at the expense of pedestrian and bicycle operation.
2.12 Destination Accessibility. Direct the development of new centers, parks,
     schools, and similar destinations so as to provide all residences within
     town ¼ mile to at least two amenities.
3.1  Complete neighborhoods. Through the development entitlement
     process, ensure that all new Neighborhoods (areas with a
     “Neighborhood” General Plan Designation) are complete and well-
     structured such that the physical layout and land use mix promote
     walking to services, biking and transit use, are family friendly and address
     the needs of multiple ages and physical abilities. New neighborhoods
     should have the following characteristics:
     •        Contain short, walkable block lengths.
     •        Contain a high level of connectivity for pedestrians, bicycles and
              vehicles where practicable.
     •        Are organized around a central focal point such as a park, school,
              civic building or neighborhood retail such that most homes are no
              more than one quarter-mile from this focal point.
     •        Have goods and services within a short walking distance.
     •        Contain a diversity of housing types, where possible.
     •        Have homes with entries and windows facing the street.
     •        Have a grid or modified grid street network (except where
              topography necessitates another street network layout).
     •        Provide a diversity of architectural styles.
3.2  Conventional neighborhood design. Discourage the construction of new
     residential neighborhoods that are characterized by cul-de-sacs,
     soundwalls, long block lengths, single building and housing types and lack
     of access to goods and services.
                                                                                  |

3.3  Variety of types of neighborhoods. Promote a variety of neighborhoods
     within the City and ensure that neighborhood types are dispersed
     throughout the City.
3.4  Balanced neighborhoods. Within the allowed densities and housing
     types, promote a range of housing and price levels within each
     neighborhood in order to accommodate diverse ages and incomes. For
     development projects larger than five acres, require that a diversity of
     housing types be provided and that these housing types be mixed rather
     than segregated by unit type.
3.5  Housing affordability. Ensure affordable housing is distributed
     throughout the City to avoid concentrations of poverty and to be
     accessible to jobs.
3.6  Senior housing. Encourage the development of senior housing only in
     neighborhoods that are accessible to public transit, commercial services
     and health and community facilities.
3.7  Walkable neighborhoods. Require that all new neighborhoods be
     designed and constructed to be pedestrian friendly and include features
     such as short blocks, wide sidewalks, tree-shaded streets, buildings that
     define and are oriented to streets or public spaces, traffic-calming
     features, convenient pedestrian street crossings, and safe streets that are
     designed for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
     •        Provision of sidewalks. Except within designated rural areas,
              require sidewalks of at least six feet in width on both sides of
              streets in neighborhoods and prohibit obstructions that would
              impede use of the sidewalk.
     •        Block size. Require new neighborhoods to be designed with
              blocks no longer than 600 to 800 feet. Exceptions can be made if
              mid-block pedestrian and bicycle connections are provided.
3.8  Neighborhood intersection density. Require new neighborhoods to
     provide high levels of intersection density. Town Center and Small Town
     Neighborhoods should strive for 400 intersections per square mile.
     Conventional Suburban Neighborhoods should strive for at least 200
     intersections per square mile.
3.9  Street layout. Design streets and lot layouts to provide a majority of lots
     within 20 degrees of a north-south orientation for increased energy
     conservation.
3.10 Shared driveways. Allow and encourage new commercial and residential
     developments to have common driveways serving multiple units, to
     minimize the number of curb cuts along any given block to improve
     pedestrian safety.
3.11 Connections to key destinations. Require direct pedestrian connections
     between residential areas and nearby commercial and public/institutional
     areas.

3.12 Tree-lined streets. Require trees on both sides of at least 60 percent of
     new and existing streets within the project and on the project’s side of
     bordering streets, between the vehicle travel way and walkway at
     intervals averaging no more than 50-100 feet (excluding driveways and
     utility vaults). This standard shall apply whenever new streets are
     constructed or when existing streets and sidewalks are significantly
     rehabilitated with existing neighborhoods. Ensuring the appropriate
     revenue stream to provide long term maintenance.
3.13 Shaded sidewalks. Require shade over at least 30 percent of the length of
     sidewalks on streets within a project. Trees must provide shade within 10
     years of landscape installation and should be as water efficient as
     possible.
3.14 Access to daily activities. Require development patterns such that the
     majority of residents are within one-half mile walking distance to a variety
     of neighborhood goods and services, such as supermarkets, restaurants,
     churches, cafes, dry cleaners, laundromats, farmers markets, banks, hair
     care, pharmacies and similar uses.
3.15 Access to parks and open spaces. Require the design of new
     neighborhoods and, where feasible, retrofit existing neighborhoods, so
     that 60 percent of dwelling units are within a ¼ mile walking distance of a
     usable open space such as a tot-lot, neighborhood park, community park
     or plaza/green.
3.16 Neighborhood transitions. Require that new neighborhoods provide
     appropriate transitions in scale, building type and density between
     different General Plan designations.
3.17 Gated communities. Strongly discourage the construction of new gated
     communities except in the Rural or Resort General Plan Designations.
3.18 Soundwalls. Allow the use of soundwalls to buffer new Neighborhoods
     from existing sources of noise pollution such as railroads and limited
     access roadways. Prohibit the use of soundwalls to buffer residential
     areas from arterial or collector streets. Instead design approaches such as
     building setbacks, landscaping and other techniques shall be used. In the
     case where soundwalls might be acceptable, require pedestrian access
     points to improve access from the Neighborhoods.
3.19 Subdivision gateways. Discourage the use of signs to distinguish one
     residential project from another. Strive for neighborhoods to blend
     seamlessly into one another.
3.20 Neighborhood preservation. Preserve and enhance the character of
     existing residential neighborhoods.
3.21 Infill neighborhoods. In existing developed areas of the city, encourage
     development that repairs connectivity, adds destinations, and encourages
     complete neighborhoods. This can be achieved by increasing intersection
     density, reducing block size, providing new community amenities and
     destinations.
                                                                                  |

3.22 University Neighborhood. Facilitate the development of a University-
     oriented neighborhood west of Cook Street, north of Frank Sinatra Street,
     and west of Portola Avenue. Specify and require the neighborhood be
     walkable, highly connected to the surrounding areas, and exemplify the
     best ideals of Palm Desert and complete neighborhoods.
4.1  Resorts. Encourage the development of unique resort complexes. Locate
     resorts in areas of the city where citywide connectivity will not be
     negatively affected by the design of the project.
4.2  Resort design and connectivity. Allow resorts to be designed as isolated
     and gated developments as long as through traffic and external
     connectivity occurs at distances of no greater than 1,300 feet. Exceptions
     to this may be made where external connection is not possible because of
     steep slopes, or natural or man-made barriers.
4.3  Regional retail districts. Facilitate major regional serving commercial
     centers that provide a mix of uses in a pedestrian oriented format and
     become vibrant destinations for people to live, work, shop and
     congregate. Allow a wide variety of uses to locate in Regional Retail
     Districts including destination retail centers, mixed-use town centers, and
     hotels, among other uses.
4.4  Regional retail district design. Allow for significant flexibility in the design
     of Regional Retail Districts so long as city-wide and project-level
     connectivity standards are met, the uses do not adversely affect adjacent
     uses and accommodations are made for pedestrians, bicycle and transit
     users. Design internal streets and parking into blocks and require
     sidewalks along both sides of these streets.
4.5  Suburban retail design. Design new suburban retail to be pedestrian-
     friendly with buildings that front internal streets and public sidewalks and
     with buildings facing major roadways. No more than 50 percent of the
     frontage on streets may be parking lots.
4.6  Industrial compatibility. Where industrial uses are near existing and
     planned residential development, require that industrial projects be
     designed to limit the impact of truck traffic on residential areas.
4.7  Impact of industrial development. Require new development within the
     city’s industrial areas be designed for compatibility with surrounding uses
     to minimize impact and cultivate connectivity with each district.

4.8  Design of employment districts. Design Employment Districts to be urban
     in character with compact buildings sited at or near front lot lines, a high
     percentage of lot coverage, and building facades and entrances directly
     addressing the street and with a high degree of transparency. Parking lots
     and large setbacks shall not dominate the frontage of the Employment
     Districts.
4.9  School location and design. Encourage school districts to size, design and
     locate schools to better enable students to walk or bicycle to them.
4.10 Civic identity. Encourage civic buildings and public gathering places to be
     designed to provide locations that reinforce community identity and
     support self-government.
4.11 Role of civic buildings. Require that civic buildings be distinctive and
     appropriate to a role more important than the other buildings that
     constitute the fabric of the City.
5.1  Downtown. Facilitate the development of the Downtown as a vibrant,
     active downtown that is the civic and cultural heart of the community.
5.2  San Pablo. Prioritize the development of San Pablo Street at 111 into a
     local-serving, vibrant Main Street environment.
5.3  Diverse centers. Encourage the development of local and city-wide
     centers that address different community needs and market sectors. The
     centers shall complement and be integrated with surrounding
     neighborhoods.
5.4  Access to transit. Encourage the development of commercial and mixed
     use centers that are located on existing or planned transit stops in order
     to facilitate and take advantage of transit service, reduce vehicle trips and
     allow residents without private vehicles to access services.
5.5  Changing retail format. Provide incentives to transform existing, auto-
     oriented suburban centers into neighborhood destinations by adding a
     diversity of uses, providing new pedestrian connections to adjacent
     residential areas, reducing the visual prominence of parking lots, making
     the centers more pedestrian-friendly and enhance the definition and
     character of street frontage and associated streetscapes.
5.6  Neighborhood center design. Design new neighborhood centers to be
     walkable and pedestrian-friendly with buildings that front internal streets
     and public sidewalks and with buildings facing major roadways. No more
     than 50 percent of the frontage on streets may be parking lots.
                                                                                   |
6.1 Citywide connectivity. Establish and preserve a citywide street network
    throughout the city where through roads occur approximately every one-
    quarter mile, except where connections cannot be made because of
    previous large development projects or physical constraints such as
    railroads, waterways, steep slopes, limited access roadways and similar
    natural and man-made barriers.
6.2 Subarea connectivity. Ensure a high-level of connectivity in all
    Neighborhoods, Centers and Districts throughout the city. The
    connectivity shall be measured as block perimeter and in external
    connectivity on the perimeter of a new development project.
6.3 Connections between development projects. Require the continuation of
    the street network between adjacent development projects and
    discourage the use of cul-de-sacs except where necessary because
    connections cannot be made due to existing development, topographic
    conditions or limited access to transportation systems.
6.4 Cook Street. Facilitate the development of Cook Street into a multimodal
    street that serves as community amenity, connecting both east and west
    sides of the street, as well as the north and south ends of the city.
6.5 Unbundled Parking. Allow and encourage strategies that unbundle
    parking, reducing or eliminating requirements for on-site parking.
7.1 Performing arts. Encourage the development of facilities and venues for
    arts and entertainment.
7.2 Higher education. Increase coordinated marketing of arts and cultural
    events at Palm Desert’s higher education institutions.
7.3 Artists’ colony. Encourage the establishment of an artist’s colony near the
    downtown, supporting live-work studios as a form of mixed-use.
7.4 Artists live/work studios. Consider incentives for the inclusion of
    live/work studio space in new developments.
7.5 Arts and culture district. Consider the establishment of an arts and
    culture district.

7.6  Arts and culture funding. Consider innovative funding mechanisms to
     support funding for arts and culture.
8.1  Long-term economic development. Support the development and
     implementation of long-term economic development strategies that seek
     to establish and keep new businesses.
8.2  Regional jobs center. Encourage economic development strategies,
     especially those that leverage the College of the Desert, California State
     University, and University of California, which will expand the number of
     living-wage paying jobs within the city.
8.3  Jobs-housing balance. Strive to improve the jobs-housing balance in the
     city by actively pursuing new employment generating uses for the city.
8.4  University housing. Encourage the development of affordable housing to
     ensure an adequate supply of dedicated housing for students and
     university and college faculty.
8.5  Development Incentives. Consider incentives for new development that
     provides a substantial economic benefit to the community such as retail
     sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes or higher-paying jobs. Prohibit the
     provision of incentives that outweigh the direct benefits from the use.
8.6  Joint-use. Promote joint use of public and private facilities for community
     use, tourism, conference, convention and cultural uses.
8.7  Natural environment. Maintain and enhance the natural environment as
     critical to the attraction of tourists and ensure that new development
     does not adversely affect the natural environment as a tourist draw.
8.8  Recreational amenities. Strategically utilize City recreational investments
     to create and enhance development opportunities.
8.9  Convention/retreat center. Pursue the development of a regional scale
     conference center adjacent to the university campuses.
8.10 Adaptive reuse of golf courses. Support the conversion of struggling golf
     courses into new, complementary uses. Changes of use will be considered
     based on their merits and benefits to the surrounding community and city
     at large and must demonstrate excellence in design and connectivity. The
     City will consider uses such as:
     •         Active recreational space,
     •         Natural habitat restoration,
     •         Passive open space and trails,
     •         Community scale agriculture,
                                                                                 |

     •         Neighborhood supportive commercial and service uses,
     •         High quality neighborhoods.
8.11 Encourage Volunteerism. Continue to support and encourage ongoing
     opportunities for volunteerism in City government and throughout the
     city.
9.1  Fiscal impact assessment. For all major development projects, including
     but not limited to specific plans, annexations and changes in General Plan
     designations for areas over 5 acres in size, require a fiscal impact
     assessment to determine possible fiscal impact of the development
     project and use the information to formulate conditions of approval for
     the project.
9.2  Efficient growth. Manage growth in a manner that is fiscally sustainable
     and protects and/or enhances community value.
9.3  Diverse tax base. Guide development and public investments to maintain
     a fiscally sound city with a sustainable tax base and user fees including
     property tax, sales tax, transient occupancy tax, utilities user tax and user
     fees that pay for cost of services.

4. MOBILITY
                                                                                       Example of a well-defined and protected
                                                                                       bicycle lane
                                                                                       Example features of a well-connected
                                                                                       transportation network
AB 1358 – Complete Streets Act
The California Complete Streets Act of 2008 was signed into law on September 30,
2008. Beginning January 1, 2011, AB 1358 required circulation elements to address the
transportation system from a multi-modal perspective. The Complete Streets Act also
requires circulation elements to consider the multiple users of the transportation
system, including children, adults, seniors, and people with disabilities. For further
clarity, AB 1358 tasks the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research with release of
guidelines for compliance which are so far undeveloped.
SB 375 – Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act
On December 11, 2008, the Air Resources Board (ARB) adopted its Proposed Scoping
Plan for AB 32. This scoping plan included the approval of SB 375 as the means for
achieving regional transportation-related greenhouse gas (GHG) targets. SB 375
provides guidance on how curbing emissions from cars and light trucks can help the
                                                                                                                        |

                                    state comply with AB 32. SB 375 is implemented by Metropolitan Planning
                                    Organizations (MPO’s) such as the Southern California Association of Governments
                                    (SCAG) through plans called Regional Transportation Plans/Sustainable Communities
                                    Strategies (RTP/SCS). The RTP/SCS describe a series of measures which the MPO,
                                    counties, and cities will undertake to address GHG reduction within the context of
                                    regional growth.
                                    SB 743 – General CEQA Reform
                                    On September 27, 2013, Governor Jerry Brown signed SB 743 into law. A key element
                                    of this law is the potential elimination or deemphasizing of auto delay, level of service
                                    (LOS), and other similar measures of vehicular capacity or traffic congestion as a basis
                                    for determining significant impacts in many parts of the State. According to the
                                    legislative intent contained in SB 743, these changes to current practice were
                                    necessary to “More appropriately balance the needs of congestion management with
Example of a scenic bicycle path    statewide goals related to infill development, promotion of public health through
                                    active transportation, and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.”
                                    As noted, SB 743 requires impacts to transportation network performance to be
                                    viewed through a filter that promotes the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, the
                                    development of multimodal transportation networks, and a diversity of land uses.
                                    Some alternative metrics were identified in the law including vehicle miles traveled
                                    (VMT) or automobile trip generation rates. SB 743 does not prevent a city or county
                                    from continuing to analyze delay or LOS as part of other plans (i.e., the general plan),
                                    studies, or ongoing network monitoring, but these metrics may no longer constitute
                                    the sole basis for determining CEQA impacts
Example of traffic calming measures
                                    The transportation system in Palm Desert includes diverse elements including
                                    roadway systems, bicycle systems, and golf cart facilities, as well as a public transit
                                    system providing both local and regional bus service.
                                    Regional connectivity to the City of Palm Desert is provided by Interstate 10, Highway
                                    111, and California State Route 74. Within Palm Desert, major roadways include
                                    Highway 111, Fred Waring Drive, Country Club Drive, Frank Sinatra Drive, Gerald Ford
                                    Drive, Dinah Shore Drive, Monterey Avenue, Portola Avenue, Cook Street, and
                                    Washington Street. Higher volume roadways within the city include Washington
                                    Street, (over 40,000 vehicles per day), Monterey Avenue (over 40,000 vehicles per
                                    day), Highway 111 (over 30,000 vehicles per day), and Fred Waring Drive (over 30,000
                                    vehicles per day). The City maintains an extensive network of traffic signals along their
                                    roadways.
                                    This existing roadway network is supplemented by fixed route bus lines, which are
                                    provided by Sunline Transit currently. Sunline also provides paratransit service to
                                    supplement this fixed route service. Current service headways range from 20 minutes
                                    to 60 minutes during the weekdays. Less frequent service is provided on nights and
                                    weekends.
                                    Connections to these roadway and transit facilities are provided through a network of
                                    sidewalks and crosswalks. The pedestrian environment in the city can be grouped into
                                    three classifications. First, there are multiple locations where there are high levels of

pedestrian accommodations. One example of this highly amenitized environment is
found along on El Paseo which has ample sidewalks, shading, and street furniture. The
second level of accommodation occurs on roadways like Monterey Avenue where
sidewalks are provided but not buffered from adjacent traffic. There are also roadways
which currently lack sidewalks, such as portions of Fred Waring Drive and Highway
111.
The city has a robust network of bicycle and golf cart trails throughout the city, which
are configured either as exclusive off-street facilities or through on-street designated
lanes.
In its current form, the city’s transportation system faces a number of challenges
including:
         The predominant mode of travel is the automobile;
         The predominant land use patterns make walking, biking, and transit use
          challenging; and
         There are moderate levels of vehicle congestion, though this may worsen if
          through traffic increases or there are areas of significant development
          intensity in the city.
Figure 4.1 documents the proposed roadway network for the city, based on the
roadway typologies described below. Figure 4.2 illustrates the proposed bicycle
network, and Figure 4.3 proposed golf cart routes, and Figure 4.4 illustrates truck
routes through Palm Desert.
  Example of well-designed urban streets
                                                                                         |

(This page is intentionally left blank

(This page is intentionally left blank
Enhanced Arterials serve vehicular traffic but also have augmented bicycle and
pedestrian facilities. Emphasis is placed on enhanced pedestrian crossings, street
trees, and other similar amenities. Speeds are managed through mechanisms such as
narrower lanes, shorter blocks, and enhanced landscaping.
The general cross-section consists of a six-lane divided roadway, including a wide
median with trees and landscaping. This facility may provide dedicated left turn lanes
as well as a right turn lane where warranted. An Enhanced Arterial is designed to
accommodate approximately 45,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. A typical
cross-section is provided below.
Typical pedestrian facilities found on Enhanced Arterials are wide sidewalks with
landscaping and tree shading. Additionally, typical bicycle facilities provided are
buffered Bicycle Lanes.
Within Palm Desert, Highway 111, between Monterey Avenue and Deep Canyon Road,
is a proposed Enhanced Arterial.
   Example of a buffered bicycle lane         Example of a landscaped median
                                                                                       |
                           Vehicular Oriented Arterials prioritize the movement of automobiles. Bicycle and
                           pedestrian facilities are provided wherever possible but are not emphasized. Driveway
                           spacing is limited to reduce conflicts with through traffic.
                           The general cross-section consists of a six-lane divided roadway, including a median
                           with trees and landscaping. This facility may consist of dedicated left turn lanes as well
                           as a right turn lane where warranted. A Vehicular Oriented Arterial is designed to
                           accommodate approximately 45,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. Typical cross-
                           sections are provided below.
                           Typical bicycle facilities found on Vehicular Oriented Arterials are Shared Sidewalks
                           and Bicycle Lanes.
                           Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Vehicular Oriented Arterials include (1)
                           Monterey Avenue, (2) Cook Street, (3) Washington Street, (4) Fred Waring Drive, and
                           (5) Highway 111 between the western City boundary and Monterey Avenue and
                           between Deep Canyon Road and the eastern City boundary.
Typical bicycle facilities found on Vehicular Oriented Arterials are Shared Sidewalks and Bicycle Lanes.
                           Cook Street, between Gerald Ford Drive and Frank Sinatra Drive, is designated as a
                           Vehicular Oriented Arterial in this General Plan. It serves vehicles as it provides direct
                           access to/from I-10 as one of only three interchanges within the City (although Portola
                           Road is planned to be a fourth interchange in the future). However, the roadway also
                           bisects the University Area and divides housing and retail from the Cal State
                           campus. Additionally, the current volume on Cook Street (and future volume
                           projections) are more similar to a Balanced Arterial designation rather than a
                           Vehicular Oriented Arterial (e.g. less than 30,000 ADT). As such, Cook Street in this
area needs to have special considerations associated with treatment of the facility and
allow the facility to change as land use and vehicle demands change with future
development, allowing this short segment of Cook Street to serve as a unifying feature
of the Cal State campus and the rest of the University Area rather than a dividing
feature. Thus, this General Plan provides guidance on how to manage and configure
this segment of Cook Street as an interim condition until such time as all of the roads
potential vehicle capacity is necessary. The following approach and metrics have been
developed to assist the City in determining when and how the street should change
over time:
        The City should maintain sufficient rights-of-way to provide six lanes on Cook
         Street should it ever be needed;
        In the interim, the City will continue to monitor and study additional access to
         I-10 (i.e., Portola interchange completion), student population, and bicycle
         and pedestrian access to the university as triggers for when and whether
         Cook Street should be treated more like a Balanced Arterial with four travel
         lanes in each direction;
        To achieve four lanes along the corridor, the City should consider interim
         improvements that do not jeopardize the ultimate major infrastructure (e.g.
         curbs, gutter, and drainage facilities) such as paint treatments and movable
         decorative pots or bollards;
        The City should time the interim Balanced Arterial roadway treatments with
         new development on Cook Street that is designed and built with an
         orientation to Cook Street so as to maximize the potential placemaking
         benefits of an integrated land use and transportation system; and
        The City should monitor Cook Street ADT, as well as overall Citywide demand
         for I-10 access at all four future interchanges so as to balance the needs of
         the university and access to I-10.
                                                                                          |

         Balanced Arterials strive for a balance between all transportation modalities, including
         vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Bicycle and pedestrian facilities are provided,
         though not at the level of the enhanced arterial.
         The general cross-section consists of a four-lane divided roadway, including either a
         median or a two-way left turn lane. This facility may consist of dedicated left turn
         lanes as well as right turn lanes where warranted. A Balanced Arterial is designed to
         accommodate approximately 30,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. Typical cross-
         sections are provided below.
         Typical pedestrian facilities found on Balanced Arterials are sidewalks with landscaping
         and tree shading. Typical bicycle facilities are Shared Sidewalks and Bicycle Lanes.
         Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Balanced Arterials include (1) Portola
         Avenue between Dinah Shore Drive and Haystack Road, (2) Frank Sinatra Drive
         between Monterey Avenue and Interstate 10, (3) Hovley Lane between Portola
         Avenue and Washington Street, (4) El Dorado Drive between Frank Sinatra Drive and
         Hovley Lane, and (5) Gerald Ford Drive between Monterey Avenue and Cook Street.
Typical pedestrian facilities found on Balanced Arterials are sidewalks with landscaping and tree
shading. Typical bicycle facilities are Shared Sidewalks and Bicycle Lanes.
Enhanced secondary roadways provide high levels of bicycle and pedestrian amenities,
similar to enhanced arterials. Vehicular circulation is accommodated but not
emphasized.
The general cross-section consists of a four-lane divided roadway with a median. This
facility may provide dedicated left turn lanes. An Enhanced Secondary Roadway is
designed to accommodate approximately 30,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. A
typical cross-section is provided below.
Typical pedestrian facilities found on Enhanced Secondary Roadways are wide
sidewalks with landscaping and tree shading. Additionally, typical bicycle facilities
provided are buffered Bicycle Lanes.
Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Enhanced Secondary Roadways include (1)
Gerald Ford Drive, between Cook Street and Frank Sinatra Drive, (2) Magnesia Falls
Drive, (3) Parkview Drive, and (4) San Pablo Avenue.
 Example of a designated left turn lane               Example of a buffered sidewalk
 with median
  Typical pedestrian facilities found on Enhanced Secondary Roadways are wide sidewalks with landscaping and tree shading.
  Additionally, typical bicycle facilities provided are buffered Bicycle Lanes.
                                                                                                                           |
     Secondary Streets provide a balance between vehicular circulation, property access,
     and non-automotive modes. Bicycle and pedestrian facilities are provided, but not at
     the level of the enhanced secondary roadway.
     The general cross-section of a Secondary Street consists of a four-lane divided
     roadway with a median. This facility may provide dedicated left turn lanes. A
     Secondary Street is designed to accommodate approximately 30,000 vehicles at Level
     of Service (LOS) C. Typical cross-sections are provided below.
     Typical bicycle facilities found on Secondary Streets are Shared Roadways and Bicycle
     Lanes.
     Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Secondary Streets include (1) Deep Canyon
     Road between Highway 111 and Fred Waring Drive, (2) Mesa View Drive, (3) Portola
     Avenue between Mesa View Drive and Haystack Road, and (4) Gateway Drive.
Typical bicycle facilities found on Secondary Streets are hared Roadways and Bicycle Lanes.
Downtown Collector streets funnel pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic to and
from neighborhoods to downtown Palm Desert.
The general cross-section of a Downtown Collector street consists of a two-lane
undivided roadway. A Collector Street is designed to accommodate approximately
10,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. A typical cross-section is provided below.
Typical bicycle facilities provided on Downtown Collector streets are buffered Bicycle
Lanes. Additionally, pedestrian facilities include sidewalks with landscaping and
enhanced pedestrian-level lighting.
Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Downtown Collector streets include (1) San
Gorgonio Way, (2) De Anza Way, (3) Shadow Mountain Drive, and (4) Deep Canyon
Road, between Magnesia Falls Drive and Fred Waring Drive and between Highway 111
and Fairway Drive.
  Typical bicycle facilities of a Downtown Collector street consisting of a two-lane undivided roadway
  with buffered bicycle lanes.
                                                                                                       |
Collector streets funnel pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic to Enhanced
Arterials, Vehicular Oriented Arterials, Balanced Arterials, Enhanced Secondary
Roadways, and Secondary Streets.
The general cross-section of a Collector Street consists of a two-lane undivided
roadway. A Collector Street is designed to accommodate approximately
10,000 vehicles at Level of Service (LOS) C. A typical cross-section is provided
below.
Typical bicycle facilities provided on Collector Streets are Shared Roadways.
Within Palm Desert, examples of proposed Collector Streets include (1)
Grapevine Street, (2) California Drive, (3) Hovley Lane West, between
Monterey Avenue and Portola Avenue, (4) College Drive, and (5) Haystack
Road.
  Typical bicycle facilities provided on Collector Streets are Shared Roadways.
.
El Paseo is a key commercial roadway for the city. This roadway prioritizes property
access and includes a very high level of pedestrian amenities.
The cross-section for El Paseo consists of four vehicular travel lanes, two parking lanes,
and a wide median with trees and landscaping. Dedicated left turn lanes are provided
as well as a right turn lane where warranted. The typical cross-section for El Paseo is
provided below. It would also be acceptable and effective to have two lanes, wider
sidewalks, and diagonal parking.
  Typical pedestrian facilities found on El Paseo are wide sidewalks with landscaping and tree shading.
  Additionally, typical bicycle facilities provided are Shared Roadways.
                                                                                                        |
Figure 4.2 documents the future bicycle and golf cart network within Palm Desert.
These routes are for use by bicycles, pedestrians, and slow speed vehicles. Key facility
types shown on these maps are described in Table 4-1 below.
 Classification                               Description
 CV Link                                      A regional off-street facility for NEV’s,
                                              bicyclists, and pedestrians. This facility
                                              will be overseen and maintained by
                                              CVAG.
 Class I                                      These are off-street facilities, which can
                                              be shared between golf carts, bicyclists,
                                              and pedestrians.
 Class II                                     These are on-street facilities, which can
                                              be used by either bicycles only or as
                                              joint use facilities used by golf carts and
                                              bicycles. These facilities are designated
                                              either by striping or through physical
                                              separations in the roadway.
 Class III                                    These are on-street facilities designated
                                              through signage that do not provide a
                                              separate space.
 Class S                                      These are shared sidewalks that provide
                                              facilities for both pedestrians and
                                              bicyclists.
 CV Link Connectors                           These facilities would provide additional
                                              connections to the CV Link Facility
                                              through signage, crossing treatments, or
                                              separate facilities that provide
                                              connections from the city to the CV Link
                                              Facility.


  (This page is intentionally left blank
|

  (This page is intentionally left blank)
|
1.1 Complete Streets. Consider all modes of travel in planning, design, and
    construction of all transportation projects to create safe, livable, and
    inviting environments for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and public
    transit users of all ages and capabilities.
1.2 Transportation System Impacts. Evaluate transportation and
    development projects in a manner that addresses the impacts of all travel
    modes on all other travel modes through the best available practices.
1.3 Facility Service Levels. Determine appropriate service levels for all modes
    of transportation and develop guidelines to evaluate impacts to these
    modes for all related public and private projects.
1.4 Transportation Improvements. Consider improvements that add roadway
    or intersection capacity for vehicles only after considering improvements
    to other modes of travel.
1.5 Transportation Network Consistency. Perform a formal evaluation of any
    transportation projects to verify consistency with the goals and policies in
    the General Plan prior to approving funding for those projects.
1.6 Emergency Vehicle Access. Evaluate the impacts of transportation
    network changes on emergency vehicle access and response times.
1.7 System Efficiency. Prioritize transportation systems management (TSM)
    strategies such as signal coordination, signal retiming, and other
    applicable techniques to limit unnecessary delay and congestion for
    vehicles.
2.1 Public Parking Facilities. Provide new public parking facilities only after
    applying appropriate techniques to manage parking demand and ensure
    efficient use of all public and private parking facilities.
2.2 Parking Management. Actively manage public parking facilities to ensure
    that all potential users are benefitting from this civic resource.
                                                                                 |
2.3 Parking Cost Effectiveness. Continue to evaluate supply and demand and
    implement appropriate strategies to maximize use and cost effectiveness
    of public parking facilities.
2.4 Public/Private Partnerships. Promote the use of joint public and private
    approaches to parking which might include leasing of private parking lots
    for short-term or long-term use, using public parking for temporary
    private functions, or the construction of joint-use facilities.
2.5 Innovative Parking Approaches. Allow the use of innovative parking
    supply and demand strategies such as shared parking, unbundling
    parking, and other related items within privately owned parking facilities
    to allow an appropriate level of flexibility for these private land owners.
2.6 Formal Parking Evaluations. Perform formal evaluations of parking
    capacity on a biannual basis to identify areas where parking is under- or
    over-utilized.
2.7 Pick-up and Drop-off Zones. Encourage parking lots to be designed with
    pick-up and drop-off zones to accommodate the trend towards increased
    use of autonomous vehicles and shared vehicle services.
3.1 Pedestrian Network. Provide a safe and convenient circulation system for
    pedestrians that include sidewalks, crosswalks, places to sit and gather,
    appropriate street lighting, buffers from moving vehicles, shading, and
    amenities for people of all ages.
3.2 Prioritized Improvements. Prioritize pedestrian improvements in areas of
    the city with community and/or education facilities, supportive land use
    patterns, expressed community interest in better pedestrian
    infrastructure, and non-automotive connections such as multi-use trails
    and transit stops.
3.3 Roadway Sidewalks. Where feasible, provide adequate sidewalks along
    all public roadways.
3.4 Access to Development. Require that all new development projects or
    redevelopment projects provide connections from the site to the external
    pedestrian network.
3.5 Pedestrian Education and Awareness. Support regional efforts to
    encourage walking and also to reduce vehicular/pedestrian collisions.
3.6 Safe Pedestrian Routes to School. Consider school access as a priority
    over vehicular movements when any such conflicts occur.
4.1 Bicycle Networks. Provide bicycle facilities where shown on Figure 4.2
    along all roadways to implement the proposed network of facilities
    outlined in the General Plan.
4.2 Prioritized Improvements. Prioritize and capitalize on opportunities to
    provide bicycle facilities that connect community facilities, supportive
    land use patterns, pedestrian routes, and transit stations.
4.3 Bicycle Parking. Require public and private development to provide
    sufficient bicycle parking.
4.4 Bicycle Education. Develop educational programs that educate bicyclists
    on lawful/responsible riding.
4.5 Regional Bicycle Safety. Support regional efforts to educate all travelers
    on measures to improve safety for bicyclists.
5.1 Transit Service. Promote public transit service in areas of the City with
    appropriate levels of density, mix of residential and employment uses,
    and connections to bicycle and pedestrian networks.
5.2 Bus Stop Location. Regularly review bus stop locations in conjunction
    with Sunline Transit to ensure that bus stops reflect current land use and
    transportation networks.
5.3 Private Transit. Encourage the implementation of private transit services
    in a manner which minimizes negative impacts on public transportation
    facilities.
5.4 Senior Transit. Encourage existing para transit services in the City to
    provide transit access for seniors and persons with disabilities.
5.5 Private Development Access to Transit. Review development proposals
    to limit impacts on existing or proposed transit facilities.
5.6 Safe Routes to Transit. Regularly review transit stop locations to maintain
    safe access for pedestrians and bicyclists.
                                                                                |
6.1 Fair Share Costs. Require that new development pay for its fair share of
    construction costs related to new and/or upgraded infrastructure needed
    to accommodate the development.
6.2 Multi-Modal Impacts. Develop and apply funding mechanisms that
    require fair share contributions for impacts to all modes of transportation
    associated with development or redevelopment.
6.3 Operations and Maintenance Costs. Evaluate potential changes in
    Citywide operations and maintenance costs for transportation facilities
    prior to the construction of any new facilities.
6.4 Development Contribution to Operations and Maintenance Costs.
    Consider funding strategies that require private development to
    contribute to the ongoing operations and maintenance of transportation
    infrastructure within the City.
6.5 Cap-and-Trade Funds. Take advantage of funds from the State’s cap-and-
    trade program to apply to projects and programs in the City, when
    possible.
7.1 Ongoing Monitoring. Regularly monitor the performance of all major
    transportation facilities within the City including major roadways,
    pedestrian facilities, bicycle lanes, and transit stops.
7.2 Safety Review. Continue to coordinate with law enforcement agencies to
    identify major accident locations including those affecting vehicles,
    bicyclists, and pedestrians. Regularly publish reports regarding traffic
    safety conditions in the city.
8.1 Alternative Fueled City Owned Vehicles. Encourage the purchase of City
    vehicles which use fuel sources other than fossil fuels while considering
    factors such as cost effectiveness, environmental impacts, and the
    availability of local maintenance.

8.2 Innovative Vehicle Technologies. Regularly monitor and evaluate new
    vehicle technologies such as autonomous and connected vehicles for use
    by City Staff.
8.3 Emerging Mobility Strategies. Encourage the deployment of emerging
    transportation approaches such as transportation network companies,
    mobility hubs and comprehensive mobility providers by private vendors.
8.4 Big Data. Regularly evaluate new data sources including but not limited to
    real time traffic and parking information for use by City Staff and
    residents.
8.5 Analysis Tools. Regularly evaluate state of the practice transportation
    analysis tools and procedures to determine their utility in the analysis of
    existing and future transportation conditions.
8.6 Electric Vehicles. Encourage the use of electric vehicles (EV), including
    golf carts and Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV) by supporting the use
    of EVs and encouraging NEV charging stations to be powered with
    renewable resources.
9.1 Regional Vehicular Traffic. Be mindful of local impacts from regional
    “through” traffic. Consider but don’t prioritize the movement of through
    vehicles through Palm Desert roadways.
9.2 Regional Roadways. Coordinate with Caltrans, RCTC, CVAG, and other
    agencies on the planning, design, and construction of regional roadways
    to provide an appropriate level of regional connectivity.
9.3 Regional Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities. Coordinate with CVAG and
    other agencies on the planning, design, and construction of regional non-
    motorized routes such as CV Link.
9.4 Regional Transit. Collaborate with RCTC, CVAG, and Sunline Transit in the
    planning, design, and construction of regional transportation facilities,
    emphasizing the construction of a Metrolink station in Palm Desert.
9.5 Regional Priorities. Identify and prioritize desired regional roadway,
    transit, and non-motorized improvements to focus the City’s outreach
    with agencies such as Caltrans, CVAG, RCTC, and elected officials.
                                                                                |

(This page is intentionally left blank
 5. HEALTH & WELLNESS
                                                                                         Healthy communities promote active lifestyles.
                                                                                           Active parks and open space improve
                                                                                           health.
The Health and Wellness element is not a required element of the General Plan.
A broad range of social, economic, and environmental factors all contribute to health
including nutritious diets, active lifestyles, clean air and water, education, jobs, and
medical care. Cities can create policies that target these areas to address the specific
health needs and challenges of a community.
                                                                                                                                |
                                     The leading causes of death within Riverside County and the Eastern Riverside sub
                                     region, which includes the City of Palm Desert, are heart disease and cancer. Chronic
                                     lower respiratory disease, stroke, and Alzheimer’s are the third, fourth, and fifth
                                     leading causes of death in the County. Approximately 27% of Palm Desert adults aged
                                     20 and older are categorized as obese. In Eastern Riverside County, asthma was cited
                                     as one of the top ten reasons for emergency room visits for children 5-11 years-old
                                     and 12-14 years-old. Palm Desert’s asthma rates are slightly higher than the national
                                     average, and slightly lower than the California average. Development that encourages
                                     active lifestyles, such as parks, open space, and walkable neighborhoods, are linked
                                     with improvements in obesity and heart disease. Similarly, communities that provide
                                     greater access to healthy foods can lead to improved diets and reduced rates of
                                     obesity, heart disease, and cancer, while improved air quality corresponds with lower
                                     incidence of respiratory disease and asthma.
                                     Regular physical activity can help control weight, reduce the risk of cardiovascular
                                     disease, Type 2 diabetes, and some cancers, strengthen bones and muscles, improve
                                     mental health and mood, prevent falls among older adults, and increase chances for a
                                     longer life. In a recent CDC study, researchers calculated that limiting the time
                                     Americans spend sitting to three hours or fewer each day would increase the life
                                     expectancy of the U.S. population by 2 years. Cutting down TV watching to fewer than
                                     two hours each day would bump life expectancy up by another 1.4 years . Being
                                     overweight can also have far-reaching impacts on lifestyles, negatively affecting self-
                                     esteem and mental health. New data also suggests there is a “significant positive
 Outdoor community exercise          relationship between physical activity and academic performance.” Sedentary living is
                                     especially concerning for our youth as it can lead to shortened life spans. In general,
                                     7th and 9th graders in Desert Sands Unified School District schools were on par with
                                     the average Riverside County and California students. However, Abraham Lincoln
                                     Elementary reported that 41.1% of the 5th grade students were at risk for Body
                                     Composition measurements.
                                     Unhealthy eating habits are a primary risk factor for many leading causes of death in
                                     California. They also contribute to the number of obese and overweight Americans.
Heathy local food options, such as a Indeed, the relationship between obesity and chronic illness, such as diabetes or heart
farmers market
                                     disease, is also well-established. In the Coachella Valley, 21% of adults aged 20 and
                                     older self-report that they have a Body Mass Index (BMI) greater than 30.0 (obese).
                                     Excess weight may indicate an unhealthy lifestyle and puts individuals at risk for
                                     further health issues.
                                     While it is not our intent to force people to eat healthier, we can create local policies
                                     and programs that can improve people’s access to healthier food options and help
                                     make healthy food options an easier choice. The prevalence of diabetes is clearly
                                     associated with unhealthy diets. Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the
                                     United States. Since the 1970s, the risk of developing diabetes has increased by over
                                     50 percent for American adults. Specifically, more than 2.3 million people in California
                                     had diabetes in 2011-2012 -- a 35% increase over 10 years, which can be directly
                                     linked to lack of fitness and sugary diets. Improving access to healthy food can reduce
                                     the risk of contracting diabetes for City residents.

Excessive automobile use by residents has multiple deleterious impacts on health.
Scientific studies have linked ozone and particle pollution to lung cancer, asthma
attacks, heart attacks, diabetes, strokes, and early death, as well as increased
hospitalizations for breathing problems. Looking at air quality in 545 counties in the
U.S. between 2000 and 2007, researchers found that people had approximately four
months added to their life expectancy on average due to cleaner air, and people who
lived in urban and densely populated counties benefited the most. Asthma affects
adults and children in Riverside County, particularly children living in poverty. In
Eastern Riverside County, asthma was cited as the one of the top ten reasons for
emergency department visits for children 5- to 11-years-old and 12- to 14-years-old.
Palm Desert’s asthma rates are slightly higher than the national average, and slightly
                                                                                       Local air quality has a direct impact on
lower than the California average.
                                                                                       respiratory health.
One of the greatest health risks associated with air pollution from particulate matter
is living near freeways and "high volume roadways." The prevalence of asthma is a
crucial indicator of local air quality. Asthma is one of the leading causes of school
absenteeism and can be a life-threatening disease if not properly managed. Research
has shown that ozone air pollution may actually cause asthma in otherwise healthy
children.
                                                                                                                             |

 1.1 Park amenities. In the design of parks or open spaces, provide paths,
     running tracks, playgrounds, sport courts, and drinking fountains.
 1.2 Multiple users. Encourage active play structures and/or passive amenities
     to be designed to accommodate a range of ages and abilities, especially
     seniors.
 1.3 Partnerships. Create partnerships with organizations to sponsor and
     maintain green spaces and gardens on building sites.
 1.4 Joint-use. Promote joint use of public and private recreational facilities for
     community uses.
 1.5 Increase park space. Require 5 acres of park space for every 1,000
     residents, striving to have a park or recreation amenity within ½ mile of
     most neighborhoods. Provide an increased focus on neighborhood parks,
     mini parks and neighborhood plazas to serve residents.
 1.6 Design for heat. Consider extreme heat in the design of parks and
     playgrounds to facilitate activity in different weather conditions by
     including shade structures, shade trees, water fountains, splash pads,
     lighting for night play, and other design features that mitigate heat.
 1.7 Design for safety. Utilize CPTED design techniques such as providing clear
     lines of sight, adequate llighting, and wayfinding signs, to ensure parks are
     safe.
 1.8 New development. Ensure that new residential developments provide
     adequate on-site recreational and open space amenities consistent with
     the values and standards of the community and the needs of new
     development.
 1.9 Open space trails. Develop and enhance existing open space and trails that
     provide City residents and visitors access to undisturbed desert and
     mountain environments, while preserving these resources, including
     sensitive plant and animal species, in their natural environments.
1.10 Accessibility to parks. Seek new park locations that will serve residential
     areas that are more than a quarter mile from an existing or planned park
     or separated from an existing or planned park by a street that consists of
     four or more travel lanes. Where possible, parks shall be associated with
     and connected to the trail network.
1.11 Parks classification system. Adopt and utilize the parks classification
     system identified in Table 6-1 to help guide maintenance and planning
     work in the city.

                     Acre         Po p      D i s ta n c e
 Pa r k T y p e                                                       G e n e ra l C h a ra c te r i s t i c s
                    Range       Radius        Radius
                                                           Parks that exist primarily in residential areas or adjacent
                                                           to light business zones and have features, such as grass,
                                                           shade, trees, passive areas, green space, shelters, native
                               Not          Within         plant life, playgrounds and play structures. Use is limited
                  Less than 1  population   walking        to the local neighborhood. They may be realized in “tot-
Mini parks        acre to 1.5               distance of    lot” configurations that provide secure recreational
                               radius
                  acres        sensitive    immediate      space for small children and typically include equipment
                                            area           such as swings, slides, ‘monkey bars’ and sand boxes,
                                                           while leaving sufficient room for people to sit and enjoy
                                                           the space. Mini-parks are intended to serve a population
                                                           within walking distance or short biking distance.
                                                           Plazas and greens have the widest variety and the most
                                                           intense activities of all open spaces. Plazas and greens
                                                           serve as formal or informal community gathering spaces.
                                                           Plazas are unique to the city and represent a connection
                               Not          Close to       to the culture of the community. These park types are
Plazas/greens     Up to 2      population   entertainment  often shaped primarily by building frontages. Plazas are
                  acres        radius       and business   shaped primarily by building frontages and are primarily
                               sensitive    support areas  hardscape with occasional landscape in planters or
                                                           containers. Greens are landscaped open areas located at
                                                           the center of a community. Features may include
                                                           gazebos, water features, trees, shade, performance
                                                           areas, public artwork and other similar features.
                                                           Parks provide large unobstructed areas for passive or
                                                           active recreation throughout neighborhoods. Often
                                                           contain community gardens and playgrounds and are
                               6 to 10      About a 2.5    primarily landscaped. These parks are located in
Neighborhood      About 1.5-   acres per    mile radius in
parks                                                      residential areas. They include features such as: grass,
                  15           1,000        the developed  trees, restrooms, tot lots, picnic and shade shelters,
                               residents    area           grills, playground equipment, open fields, informal
                                                           sports areas, swimming pools and/or neighborhood
                                                           center.
                                                           Parks located in large areas that are compatible to
                                                           surrounding uses with features such as: large grass
                               One site per About a 5 to   areas, large picnic and shelter areas, restrooms, on-site
Community parks   About 10-50  25,000       10 mile        parking, swimming pool, community center, sports
                  acres        residents    service radius areas/complexes, lights, entertainment areas, special
                                                           features such as skateboard areas, outdoor theatres,
                                                           disc golf, BMX, exercise station, ponds and/or water
                                                           features.
                               One site per                Parks not located in residential areas. Features might
                               50,000 to    About a 25     include: large scale sports complex, special events site
Special use parks 50+ acres                 mile service
                               200,000                     (such as fairs and festivals), gardens, concessions, trails,
                               residents    radius         natural/open space, lakes, animal uses.
                                                           Areas generally free from development or developed at
                  As resources                             low intensity uses that respect natural environmental
                  are          Not          As natural     characteristics and serve as preservation of natural,
Nature/open                    population   resource
space             available                                cultural, archaeological resources, passive outdoor
                  (usually     radius       areas are      recreation, public safety and health, and shape urban
                  large)       sensitive    available      form. In some cases, these open space types may include
                                                           working lands such as farms, ranches, and mining areas.
                               Not          Distance is a  Greenways and trails may consist of walking, biking,
                  As resources population   function of in hiking, equestrian, greenway, long distance, off road,
Greenways/ trails are                                      rail, canal, and waterway with the purpose to meet
                               radius       and between
                  available    sensitive    park options   passive or active recreation, informal or formal
                                                           transportation.
                               Not          Tied to
                  Should                                   Purpose is to connect parks, entry ways, transportation
                               population   neighborhood
Linear parks      connect with                             routes, and unique features. May be concrete, asphalt, or
                               radius       entries and
                  trails                                   crushed fine, among other options.
                               sensitive    park sites
                                                                                                                        |

1.12  Economic opportunities. Utilize parks to maximize new and existing
      economic development opportunities through recruitment of new
      entertainment uses and by coordinating park development to support
      commercial development.
 2.1  Lifelong learning and professional development. Work with the school
      district, Cal State, and Riverside County Regional Occupational
      Center/Program to support mentorship, professional development, and
      continuing education programs, so working adults can expand their skills
      and embrace lifelong learning.
 2.2  Affordable housing. Encourage qualified employees to live in Palm Desert
      through homebuyer and rental assistance and other programs as
      recommended in the Housing Element.
 2.3  Employee programs. Encourage employers to adopt healthy employee
      programs and practices such as healthy work environments, healthy food
      choices, or health challenges including weight loss, smoking cessation, or
      physical activity.
 3.1 Community gardens. Encourage community gardens, especially in new
     affordable housing developments, multifamily developments and schools.
 3.2 Public gardens. Allow the development of community gardens in parks,
     public right-of-ways, alleys, parkways, vacant land and utility easements,
     and encourage edible landscaping.
 3.3 Private gardens. Allow for gardens on rooftops, residential front and back
     yards, and indoor spaces.
 3.4 Livestock. Allow the raising of animals such as bees, chickens, goats, etc. in
     certain designated, low residential areas.
4.1 Healthy food outlets. Utilize available incentives, grants, and/or programs
    to encourage small grocery or convenience stores to sell basic healthy fresh
    food items so as to expand the availability of healthy food within the City.
4.2 Farmers’ markets. Encourage farmers’ markets in a wide variety of formats
    and venues.
4.3 Healthy food environments. Limit fast food retailers’ density throughout
    the city, either by restricting the number of fast food retailers or increasing
    the number of healthy food retailers.
4.4 Innovation. Support the development of food cooperatives as alternative
    means of increasing access to healthy and fresh foods.
5.1 Health care service levels. Work with local health care providers to ensure
    the availability of adequate levels of health care services and facilities and
    to attract more primary care physicians.
5.2 Healthcare training and education. Commensurate with population growth,
    and responsive to the demographics of the city and the region, work with
    the UC Riverside School of Medicine to encourage the development of
    additional research, education and health care services to enhance access
    to health care training and educational opportunities, urgent care, in-home
    care and other medical treatment.
5.3 Innovative health services. Continue to encourage innovative health
    services that cater to Palm Desert’s unique community and needs.
5.4 Accessible health and social services facilities. Ensure health and social
    services facilities are accessible to residents and well served by transit.
5.5 Homegrown medical professionals. Aspire to cultivate “homegrown”
    medical professionals by supporting programs that create education
    pipelines to health careers and providing lease assistance, tenant
    improvements and capital contributions to new practices.
5.6 Healthcare accessibility. Consider and plan for individuals with disabilities
    when locating health services and health-promoting uses, including
    hospitals and medical centers, schools, grocery stores and markets, and
    governmental services.
5.7 Temporary health centers. Allow and encourage temporary healthcare
    spaces and events such as mobile clinics, health fairs, church and school
    clinics.
                                                                                    |

5.8 Aging in Place. Encourage Aging in Place design and policies in new
    development to ensure safe and easy access for seniors.
6.1 Near-source air quality impacts. Avoid locating new air quality-sensitive
    uses (schools, child care centers, senior centers, medical facilities, and
    residences) in proximity to sources of localized air pollution (e.g., Interstate
    10, high traffic roads, certain industrial facilities), and vice versa. Where
    such uses are located within 500 feet of each other, require preparation of
    a health impact assessment (HIA) or similarly effective health analysis as
    part of the CEQA environmental review process, to analyze the significance
    of the health impact on sensitive land uses and incorporate project-specific
    mitigation measures to reduce potential impacts.
    For sensitive land uses that cannot be avoided within 500 feet of sources of
    localized air pollution, potential design mitigation options include:
        Providing residential units with individual HVAC systems in order to
         allow adequate ventilation with windows closed;
        Locating air intake systems for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
         (HVAC) systems as far away from existing air pollution sources as
         possible;
        Using HEPA air filters in the HVAC system and developing a
         maintenance plan to ensure the filtering system is properly maintained;
         and
        Utilizing only fixed windows next to any existing sources of pollution.
        Using sound walls, berms, and vegetation as physical barriers.
        Notifying new potential home buyers of risks from air pollution.
6.2 Healthy buildings. Require new development to meet the State’s Green
    Building Code standards for indoor air quality performance, and promote
    green building practices that support “healthy buildings,” such as low VOC
    materials, environmental tobacco smoke control, and indoor air quality
    construction pollution prevention techniques.
6.3 Sensitive receptors. Avoid the siting of new projects and land uses that
    would produce localized air pollution in a way that would adversely impact
    existing air quality-sensitive receptors including schools, childcare centers,
    senior housing, and subsidized affordable housing. The recommended
    minimum distance separating these uses should be 500 feet. When a
    minimum distance of 500 feet cannot be avoided, a health impact
    assessment (HIA) shall be completed in compliance with Policy 6.1.

7.1 Physical plan. Facilitate the construction of a built environment that
    supports a healthy physical and social environment for new and existing
    neighborhoods and strengthens community cohesion.
7.2 Walkable streets. Regulate new development to ensure new blocks
    encourage walkability by maximizing connectivity and route choice, create
    reasonable block lengths to encourage more walking and physical activity
    and improve the walkability of existing neighborhood streets.
7.3 Pedestrian barriers. Discourage physical barriers to walking and bicycling
    between and within neighborhoods and neighborhood centers. If physical
    barriers are unavoidable, provide safe and comfortable crossings for
    pedestrians and cyclists. Physical barriers may include arterial streets with
    speed limits above 35 mph, transit or utility rights-of-way, very long blocks
    without through-streets, and sound walls, amongst others.
7.4 Health in new development. Evaluate the health impact and benefits of
    new development projects in the early planning phases to maximize its
    contribution to a healthier Palm Desert.
                                                                                  |
(This page is intentionally left blank
                                                                                            Santa Rosa/San Jacinto Mountains, located
                                                                                            within the Palm Desert southern Sphere of
                                                                                            Influence
                                                                                             Coachella Valley Preserve, located in the
                                                                                             northern Palm Desert Sphere of Influence
California State law requires all general plans include conservation and open space
elements as defined in the Sections §65302(d) and §65302(e). An open space element
must contain goals and policies to protect and maintain state natural resources, such
as water, soil, air quality, wildlife, minerals, and prevent wasteful resource exploitation
and destruction. It must also contain goals and policies for managing open space
areas, including undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation areas. This element
syndicates requirements and topics of both the conservation and open space element.
Drought, climate change, and development pressure on environmental resources are
key issues within the City of Palm Desert. The California Department of Finance
estimated growth of 9,262 residents between 2000 and 2014, or 22.5% growth in the
                                                                                                                                     |

                                       city of Palm Desert. Significant population growth throughout Riverside County has led
                                       to increased development pressure in and around the city. Without proper planning,
                                       new development can contribute to further depletion of limited water and energy
                                       resources, increased air and water pollution, and negative impacts on biological
                                       resources. Water resources are a basic and necessary component of inhabitance, and
                                       a community’s survival may be endangered if water needs cannot be met. As drought
                                       continues to plague Southern California, it is vital for Palm Desert officials to develop
                                       new policies and programs to conserve and protect the city’s water resources.
                                       Planning policies that promote conservation, efficiency, environmental protection, can
                                       prevent and mitigate these threats. Following are summaries of the important natural
                                       resources that need to be taken into consideration as the city experiences new growth
                                       and development.
                                       Increasing demand by a growing population on a limited water supply in the Coachella
                                       Valley has led to a greater urgency for additional water conservation and efficiency.
                                       The City’s Water-Efficient Landscaping Ordinance, adopted as part of the California
                                       Water Conservation Landscaping Act of 1990, established minimum water-efficient
                                       landscaping requirements for all new and rehabilitated public and private landscape
                                       projects.
                                       The City strongly encourages conservation of water in the form of water-efficient
                                       landscaping and irrigation design, as well as water-conserving home appliances and
                                       fixtures. The City plays an important role in the long-term protection of this essential,
                                       finite and valuable resource.
Aerial view of Palm Desert golf course
green and desert habitat
Credit: New York Times
                                       Palm Desert water supply sources include the Whitewater River, which runs west to
                                       east through the center of the city, ultimately flowing into the Salton Sea. All other
                                       waterways in the city lie south of the Whitewater River and drain from the Santa Rosa
                                       and San Jacinto mountains. Waterways in the City include Palm Valley Stormwater
                                       channel, Ramon Creek, Cat Creek, Bruce Creek, Dead Indian Creek, Ebbens Creek,
                                       Grapevine Creek, and Carrizo Creek. In 2013, the annual water balance for the West
                                       Valley portion of the Whitewater River sub-basin was negative. Imported water may
                                       offset groundwater overdraft in a particular year. However, on a long-term basis,
                                       diminishing water supplies will continue to be a challenge for Palm Desert.
                                       The Coachella Valley Water District provides domestic water services to Palm Desert
Whitewater River Basin                 using wells to extract groundwater from the Whitewater River sub-basin. The
                                       Whitewater River sub-basin supply consists of a combination of natural runoff, inflows
                                       from adjacent basins, returns from groundwater, recycled water, and imported water
                                       use. The supply is supplemented with artificial recharge with imported State Water
                                       Project Exchange and the Colorado River water. The natural supply of water to the
                                       northwestern part of the Coachella Valley is not keeping pace with the basin outflow
                                       due mainly to large consumptive uses created by the resort-recreation economy and

permanent resident population. Much of the irrigation needs are met by annual
deliveries of Colorado River water through the Coachella Canal.
Palm Desert has taken positive steps towards mitigating impacts of climate change
and strives to remain at the forefront of this issue within Riverside County. Climate
change poses a threat to the health and safety of all residents across the region, state
and globe. California has adopted the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, requiring
statewide climate planning—SB 375— which necessitates sustainable land use and
transportation patterns at the regional and local level.
The Coachella Valley Multispecies Habitat Conservation Plan (CVMSHCP) protects
240,000 acres of open space covering 27 special-status species of plants and animals.
The CVMSHCP strives to safeguard significant habitat linkages and wildlife corridors,
while also enhancing infrastructure without environmental conflicts. The City of Palm
Desert is the signatory to the CVMSHCP with other participants including Riverside
County, Cathedral City, Desert Hot Springs, Indian Wells, Indio, La Quinta, Palm
Springs, Rancho Mirage, the Coachella Valley Water District, Imperial Irrigation
District, Coachella Valley Association of Governments, and the California Department
of Transportation (Caltrans). Much of the southern sphere of influence (SOI) is part of
the CVMSHCP Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains Conservation Area. Several
existing state and federal conservation lands are within the planning area.
Palm Desert is sensitive to preserving all biological resources through protective
measures and awareness. Using database research from multiple federal, state, and
local sources, special species within the City of Palm Desert have been identified.
Categorized as candidate, sensitive, or special-status species are those that are at
potential risk or actual risk to their persistence in a given area or across their native
habitat. Some of these species have been known to occur within the city of Palm
Desert, while others have a possible occurrence. California statutes (FGC Section 3503,
4700, 5050, 5515) afford “fully protected” status to species that have been identified
as endangered. In Palm Desert this includes 13 protected birds, 8 protected mammals,
5 protected reptiles, and 10 protected fish species. California statutes (FGC Section
3503, 4700, 5050, 5515) afford “fully protected” status to species that have been
identified as endangered. Based on data obtained from the California Native Plant
Species (CNPS) inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants in California (2014), 10
special-status plant species are known to occur in the Planning Area, while an
additional 12 species were determined to have the potential to occur within the city or
its Sphere of Influence.
Within the city and Sphere of Influence (SOI) boundary, one habitat, known as the
Desert Fan Palm Oasis, was identified in the California Natural Diversity Database
(CNDDB) query as a locally sensitive terrestrial natural community. Within the city, this
habitat occurs in discrete patches associated with springs or other perennial water
sources in the canyons of the Santa Rosa and San Jacinto mountains. The majority of
the palm oases are not threatened by development because they either occur in
isolated canyons, or are surrounded by protected land.
                                                                                          |


Palm Desert is located within the Coachella Valley and the broader Colorado Desert
region. The region has a rich cultural history. Although Palm Desert is a “new”
community, it is part of a region that has been occupied by humans for thousands of
years. Archaeological evidence indicates that a large number of settlements and
rancherias were established in the Coachella Valley region during the prehistoric
period. In more recent history, the region was occupied by a Native American group
known as the Cahuilla. Additional details on the history of the region can be found in
Cultural Resources Technical Background Report located in Volume II, Existing
Conditions Report.
There are a number of known cultural and historical resources located within Palm
Desert. However, only one-third of the city has been included in a cultural resource
study, leaving at least two-thirds of the city unsurveyed for cultural resources. Areas
surveyed for cultural resources are illustrated in Figure 6.1.
The City of Palm Desert Cultural Resources Preservation Committee maintains the
Palm Desert Register, a listing of historical landmarks within the city. A total of seven
landmarks are located within the city limits (Table 6.1).
  Name                          Description                    Location
  Historical Society of Palm    Ranch Vernacular-style         72-861 El Paseo
  Desert/Palm Desert Fire       building
  Station
  Shadow Mountain Golf          First golf course in Palm      73-800 Ironwood
  Club                          Desert
  Portola Community             First community library in     45-480 Portola Avenue
  Center)                       Palm Desert
  Sandpiper                     Multi-family residential       El Paseo
  Condominiums, Circles 11      buildings
  & 12
  Palm Desert Community         City of Palm Desert’s first    45-630 Portola Avenue
  Church                        community church
  Schindler House for           Single-family residence        44-870 Cabrillo Avenue
  Marion Toole
  Randall Henderson House       Single-family residence;       74-135 Larrea Street
                                Home of Randall
                                Henderson, one of the
                                founders of Palm Desert
The City currently reviews development proposals for their potential impacts to
archaeologically and historically significant resources and may require additional
studies if the potential for damage to resources exists. As future development
                                                                                          |

proposals are received, they will be evaluated, and the need for site-specific cultural
resource assessments will be determined. This section sets forth policies aimed to
preserve the city’s cultural heritage and help perpetuate it for future generations.
The city is categorized as within the Mineral Resources Zone 3 (MRZ-3). This zone
includes areas containing known mineral deposits that may qualify as mineral
resources, which could be considered a resource. MRZ-3 areas are considered to have
a moderate potential for the discovery of economic mineral deposits. Areas within the
city may contain mineral deposits that may qualify as mineral resources.
Palm Desert is located within the Salton Sea Air Basin, which includes the central
portion of Riverside County and all of Imperial County to the southeast. The climate is
typical of a desert regime, with large daily and seasonal fluctuations in temperature
and relatively high annual average temperatures. High temperatures frequently
exceed 100 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) for the summer months. During the winter,
temperatures can drop to near freezing (and below freezing at higher elevations).
The weather of the area is governed by large-scale warming and sinking of air in the
semi-permanent subtropical high-pressure center over the Pacific Ocean. The high-
pressure ridge blocks most mid-latitude storms, except in the winter when the high-
pressure ridge is weakest and farthest south. The coastal mountains prevent the
intrusion of the cool, damp air found in California’s coastal regions. Throughout the
year, average daily relative humidity is low, as are average rainfall values (only three
inches per year). Most desert moisture arrives from infrequent warm, moist and
unstable air masses from the south.
The flat terrain and strong temperature differentials created by intense heating and
cooling patterns produce moderate winds and deep thermal circulation systems. As a
result, the general dispersion of local air pollution is greater than in the coastal basins
where polluted inversion layers may remain for long periods of time.
The status of the Riverside County portion of the Salton Sea air basin with respect to
attainment with the CAAQS (State Standard) and NAAQS (Federal Standard) is
summarized in Table 6.2. The Riverside County portion of the Salton Sea Air Basin, in
which Palm Desert is located, is a non-attainment area for both the federal and state
standards for ozone and PM10. However, it should be noted that maximum ozone
concentrations in recent years were below the health advisory level.

Pollutants              State Standards Federal Standards
Ozone (O3)              Nonattainment   Nonattainment
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)  Attainment      Unclassified
Carbon Monoxide (CO)    Attainment      Unclassified
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)    Attainment      Unclassified
Particulate Matter      Nonattainment   Nonattainment
(PM10)
Fine Particulate Matter Attainment      Unclassified
(PM2.5)
Lead                    Attainment      Unclassified
                                                          |
1.1 Water conservation technologies. Promote indoor and outdoor water
    conservation and reuse practices including water recycling, grey water re-
    use and rainwater harvesting.
1.2 Landscape design. Encourage the reduction of landscaping water
    consumption through plant selection and irrigation technology.
1.3 Conservation performance targeted to new construction. Incentivize
    new construction to exceed the state’s Green Building Code for water
    conservation by an additional 10 percent.
1.4 Greywater. Allow the use of greywater and establish criteria and
    standards to permit its safe and effective use (also known as on-site water
    recycling).
1.5 Waterways as amenities. When considering development applications
    and infrastructure improvements, treat waterways as amenities, not
    hazards, and encourage designs that embrace the waterways.
2.1 View corridor preservation. Protect and preserve existing, signature
    views of the hills and mountains from the city.
2.2 Scenic roadways. Continue to minimize the impact on views by restricting
    new billboards along the City’s roads and highways. Electronic and
    animated billboards should be prohibited except in rare and special
    circumstances.
2.3 Hillside grading. Continue to require the preparation of a grading analysis
    on hillside development to pre-determine where development should
    occur so as to minimize the impact of new development on views of the
    city’s hillsides.
2.4 Public facilities. Plan public facilities, roads, and private development to
    take advantage of the city’s mountain and hillside views, especially as the
    City Center develops.

2.5 Dark sky. Limit light pollution from outdoor sources, especially in rural,
    hillside and mountain areas, and open spaces, to maintain darkness for
    night sky viewing.
3.1 Open space network. Require new development to comply with
    requirements of the CVMSHCP.
3.2 Grading and vegetation removal. Limit grading and vegetation removal of
    new development activities to the minimum extent necessary to reduce
    erosion and sedimentation.
3.3 Preservation of natural land features. Preserve significant natural
    features and incorporate into all developments. Such features may
    include ridges, rock outcroppings, natural drainage courses, wetland and
    riparian areas, steep topography, important or landmark trees and views.
4.1  Buffers from new development. Require new developments adjacent to
     identified plant and wildlife habitat areas to maintain a protective buffer.
4.2  Wildlife corridors. Support the creation of local and regional
     conservation and preservation easements that protect habitat areas,
     serve as wildlife corridors and help protect sensitive biological resources.
4.3  Landscape design. Continue to encourage new developments to
     incorporate native vegetation materials into landscape plans and
     prohibit the use of species known to be invasive according to the
     California Invasive Plant Inventory.
                                                                                  |
5.1  Municipal operations. Conduct city operations so as to continually
     reduce municipal greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and lead the
     community in reducing GHG emissions.
5.2  GHG reductions. Promote land use and development patterns that
     reduce the community’s dependence on, and length of, automobile
     trips.
5.3  Existing GHG emissions. Work with community members and businesses
     to support their efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
5.4  Monitoring progress. Monitor and update periodically the city’s target
     to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
5.5  GHG Inventory. Periodically update the City’s greenhouse gas inventory.
5.6  Climate-appropriate building types. Seek out and promote alternative
     building types that are more sensitive to the arid environment found in
     the Coachella Valley. Consider the use of courtyard housing and
     commercial buildings to provide micro-climates that are usable year
     round, reducing the need for mechanically cooled spaces and reducing
     energy consumption.
5.7  GHG reduction incentives. Support and incentivize projects that
     innovatively and aggressively reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
5.8  Climate change and health. Acknowledge the on-going and future
     impacts of climate change and extreme events on Palm Desert’s
     residents, taking action to minimize the effects among vulnerable
     populations and help implement California's executive order (EO) S-13-
     08 and the 2009 California Climate Adaptation Strategy.
5.9  Adaptation strategy. Proactively develop strategies to reduce the
     community’s vulnerability to climate change impacts.
5.10 Urban forest. Protect the city’s healthy trees and plant new ones to
     provide shade, increase carbon sequestration and purify the air.
5.11 Reduced water supplies. When reviewing development proposals,
     consider the possibility of constrained future water supplies and require
     enhanced water conservation measures.
5.12 Designing for warming temperatures. When reviewing development
     proposals, encourage applicants and designers to consider warming
     temperatures in the design of cooling systems.

5.13 Designing for changing precipitation patterns. When reviewing
     development proposals, encourage applicants to consider stormwater
     control strategies and systems for sensitivity to changes in precipitation
     regimes and consider adjusting those strategies to accommodate future
     precipitation regimes.
5.14 Heat island reductions. Require heat island reduction strategies in new
     developments such as light-colored paving, permeable paving, right-
     sized parking requirements, vegetative cover and planting, substantial
     tree canopy coverage, and south and west side tree planting.
5.15 Public realm shading. Strive to improve shading in public spaces, such as
     bus stops, sidewalks and public parks and plazas, through the use of
     trees, shelters, awnings, gazebos, fabric shading and other creative
     cooling strategies.
5.16 Reducing GHG emissions. In consulting with applicants and designing
     new facilities, prioritize the selection of green building design features
     that enhance the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
5.17 Efficiency incentives. Provide incentives for households to improve
     resource efficiency, such as rebate programs, and giveaways for items
     such as low-flow showerheads and electrical outlet insulation.
6.1   Passive solar design. Require new buildings to incorporate energy
      efficient building and site design strategies for the desert environment
      that include appropriate solar orientation, thermal mass, use of natural
      daylight and ventilation, and shading.
6.2   Alternative energy. Continue to promote the incorporation of
      alternative energy generation (e.g., solar, wind, biomass) in public and
      private development.
6.3   Energy Efficient Buildings. Encourage new buildings and buildings
      undergoing major retrofits to exceed Title 24 energy efficiency
      standards.
6.4   Community development–subdivisions. When reviewing applications
      for new subdivisions, require all residences be oriented along an east-
      west access, minimizing western sun exposure, to maximize energy
      efficiency.
6.5  Renewable energy–open space areas. Allow the installation of
     renewable energy systems in areas designated for open space.
6.6  Publicly funded buildings. Require energy conservation as the primary
     strategy to reduce energy demand in new and renovation projects using
     public funds.
                                                                                |

6.7  Solar access. Prohibit new development and renovations that impair
     adjacent buildings’ solar access, unless it can be demonstrated that the
     shading benefits substantially offset the impacts of solar energy
     generation potential.
6.8  Use of passive open space. Allow renewable energy projects in areas
     zoned for open space, where consistent with other uses and values.
6.9  Public buildings. Require that any new building constructed in whole or
     in part with City funds incorporate passive solar design features, such as
     daylighting and passive solar heating, where feasible.
6.10 Municipal building energy efficiency. Strive for high levels of energy
     efficiency in municipal facilities.
6.11 Energy-efficient infrastructure. Whenever possible, use energy-efficient
     models and technology when replacing or providing new city
     infrastructure such as streetlights, traffic signals, water conveyance
     pumps, or other public infrastructure.
7.1  Affordable housing – green design. Require affordable housing
     developments to prioritize green building design features that reduce
     monthly utility costs, enhance occupant health and lower the overall
     cost of housing.
7.2  Education. Continue to provide technical support and information to
     educate the development community about green building.
7.3  Reducing GHG emissions. In consulting with applicants and designing
     new facilities, prioritize the selection of green building design features
     that enhance the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
7.4  Heat island reductions. Require heat island reduction strategies in new
     developments such as light-colored cool roofs, light-colored paving,
     permeable paving, right-sized parking requirements, water efficient
     vegetative cover and planting, substantial tree canopy coverage, south
     and west side water-efficient tree planting, and shaded asphalt paving.
7.5  Public realm shading. Strive to improve shading in public spaces, such as
     bus stops, sidewalks and public parks and plazas, through the use of
     trees, shelters, awnings, gazebos, fabric shading and other creative
     cooling strategies.

8.1 Sources of Pollutants. Minimize the creation of new sources of air
    pollutants within the city.
8.2 Land use patterns. Promote compact, mixed-use, energy efficient and
    transit-oriented development to reduce air pollutants associated with
    energy and vehicular use.
8.3 Single-occupant vehicle trip reductions. Provide disincentives for single-
    occupant vehicle trips through parking supply and pricing controls in
    areas where parking supply is limited and alternative transportation
    modes are available.
8.4 Electric vehicles. Encourage the use of electric vehicles (EV), including
    golf carts and Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV), by encouraging
    developments to provide EV and NEV charging stations, street systems,
    and other infrastructure that support the use of EVs. Similarly,
    encourage the use of renewable energy sources to power EV plug-in
    stations.
8.5 Construction-related emissions. Require construction activities,
    including on-site building and the transport of materials, to limit
    emissions and dust.
8.6 Traffic congestion. In the instance where a significant health hazard may
    be created, consider designs for new intersections to function in a
    manner that reduces air pollutant emissions from stop and start and
    idling traffic conditions.
8.7 Transportation demand management. Encourage employers to provide
    transit subsidies, bicycle facilities, alternative work schedules,
    ridesharing, telecommuting, work-at-home programs, employee
    education and preferential parking for carpools/vanpools.
8.8 Transportation management associations. Encourage commercial, retail
    and residential developments to create and participate in transportation
    management associations.
8.9 Deliveries. Encourage business owners to schedule deliveries at off-peak
    traffic periods.
                                                                               |
9.1 Disturbance of human remains. In areas where there is a high chance that
    human remains may be present, the City will require proposed projects to
    conduct a survey to establish occurrence of human remains, if any. If
    human remains are discovered on proposed project sites, the project must
    implement mitigation measures to prevent impacts to human remains in
    order to receive permit approval.
9.2 Discovery of human remains. Require that any human remains discovered
    during implementation of public and private projects within the City be
    treated with respect and dignity and fully comply with the California Native
    American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act and other appropriate
    laws.
9.3 Tribal coordination. Require notification of California Native American
    tribes and organizations of proposed projects that have the potential to
    adversely impact cultural resources.
9.4 Protected sites. Require sites with significant cultural resources to be
    protected.
9.5 Preservation of historic resources. Encourage the preservation of historic
    resources, when practical. When it is not practical to preserve a historic
    resource in its entirety, the City will require the architectural details and
    design elements of historic structures to be preserved during renovations
    and remodels as much as feasible.
9.6 Paleontological resources. Require any paleontological artifacts found
    within the City or its Sphere of Influence to be reported to the City and
    temporarily loaned to local museums like the Western Science Center for
    Archaeology and Paleontology in Hemet, CA.
10  Mitigation and preservation of cultural resources. Require development
    to avoid archaeological and paleontological resources, whenever possible.
    If complete avoidance is not possible, require development to minimize
    and fully mitigate the impacts to the resource
California law requires that a general plan include elements (or chapters) specifically
addressing noise. This element was prepared to meet these requirements
(Government Code Section 65302(f)).The noise element must identify and appraise
noise problems in the community from a variety of sources, establish a pattern of land
use that minimizes exposure of residents to excessive noise, and include possible
solutions to address existing and foreseeable noise problems.
Noise-sensitive land uses, such as housing, schools, senior care facilities, parks, and
libraries can be adversely affected by excessive noise.
The predominant noise source in Palm Desert, as in most communities, is motor
vehicles. The city’s roadway system includes a range of facilities including regional
freeways, major highways and other arterials, and collector and local streets. Regional
connectivity to the City of Palm Desert is provided by Interstate 10, California State
Route 111, and California State Route 74. Within Palm Desert, major roadways include
Fred Waring Drive, Country Club Drive, Frank Sinatra Drive, Gerald Ford Drive, Dinah
Shore Drive, Monterey Avenue, Portola Avenue, Cook Street, and Washington Street.
Higher volume roadways within the city include Washington Street (over 40,000
vehicles per day), Monterey Avenue (over 40,000 vehicles per day), Highway 111 (over
30,000 vehicles per day), and Fred Waring Drive (over 30,000 vehicles per day).
Freight rail service along the Union Pacific Railroad lines located immediately south of
and parallel to Interstate 10 are also responsible for generating substantial noise levels
                                                                                           |

in this area. The Bermuda Dunes Airport is located approximately 1.75 miles east of
the current city limits, within Palm Desert’s sphere of influence. The Palm Springs
International Airport is located approximately eleven miles northwest of Palm Desert.
Both airports generate air traffic that can impact the community’s noise environment.
Other noise generators in Palm Desert include industrial operations, construction
activities, special event noise, commercial activities that include live music, and
lawnmowers and leaf blowers. Noise-sensitive receptors within the planning area
include schools, libraries, and senior care facilities.
Noise is defined as unwanted or undesired sound. The combination of noise from all
sources near and far is known as the Ambient Noise Level. A very sudden change in air
pressure from the immediate “normal” atmospheric pressure results in airborne
sound. For purposes of this discussion, the ambient noise level at a given location is
termed “environmental noise.” Understanding environmental noise requires some
familiarity with the physical description of noise. The important characteristics of
sound include its frequency range, its intensity or loudness, and temporal/time-
varying aspect. The decibel (dB), A-weighted decibel (dBA) scale, and Community
Noise Equivalency Level (CNEL) are all units of measurement used to describe and
numerically weight noise levels. The unit of measurement describing the amplitude or
strength of sound is the decibel. The Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the
weighted average of the intensity of a sound, with corrections for time of day, and
averaged over 24 hours. The time of day corrections require the addition of five
decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m., and the addition of ten
decibels to sound levels at night between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
The Noise Compatibility Matrix, shown in Figure 1, defines the level of acceptable
noise for different land uses found in the city.



1.1 Noise Compatibility. Apply the Noise Compatibility Matrix, shown in
    Figure 7.1, as a guide for planning and development decisions. The City
    will require projects involving new development or modifications to
    existing development to implement mitigation measures, where
    necessary, to reduce noise levels to at least the normally compatible
    range shown in the City’s Noise Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 7.1.
    Mitigation measures should focus on architectural features and building
    design and construction, rather than site design features such as
    excessive setbacks, berms and sound walls, to maintain compatibility with
    adjacent and surrounding uses.
1.2 Noise Buffers. Require an open space or other noise buffer between new
    projects that are a source of excessive noise and nearby noise-sensitive
    receptors.
1.3 Mixed Use. Require that mixed-use structures and areas be designed to
    prevent transfer of noise from commercial uses to residential uses, and
    ensure a 45 dBA CNEL level or lower for all interior living spaces.
1.4 County and Regional Plans. Periodically review County and regional plans
    for transportation facilities and airport operation, to identify and mitigate
    potential noise impacts on future development.
1.5 Airport Land Use Planning. Ensure that new development in the city
    complies with all applicable policies contained in the Riverside County
    General Plan Noise Element relating to airport noise, including those
    policies requiring compliance with the airport land use noise compatibility
    criteria contained in the airport land use compatibility plan for Bermuda
    Dunes Airport, which is located within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
1.6 Land Use and Community Design. Prioritize the building design and
    character policies in the Land Use and Community Character Element
    over those in the Noise Element to ensure that new development meets
    the design vision of the city. This policy will not apply when noise levels
    are clearly in the incompatible range as shown in the City’s Noise
    Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 7.1.
                                                                                  |

2.1 Noise Ordinance. Minimize noise conflicts between neighboring
    properties through enforcement of applicable regulations such as the
    City’s Noise Control Ordinance.
2.2 Noise Control. Ensure that noise impacts from stationary sources on
    noise-sensitive receptors and noise emanating from construction
    activities, private developments/residences, landscaping activities, night
    clubs and bars, and special events are minimized.
2.3 Entertainment Uses. Ensure that entertainment uses, restaurants, and
    bars engage in responsible management and operation to control the
    activities of their patrons on-site and within reasonable and legally
    justifiable proximity to minimize noise impacts on adjacent residences
    and other noise-sensitive receptors, and require mitigation as needed for
    development of entertainment uses near noise-sensitive receptors.
2.4 Industrial Uses. Ensure that industrial uses engage in responsible
    operational practices that minimize noise impacts on adjacent residences
    and other noise-sensitive receptors, and require mitigation as needed for
    development of industrial uses near noise-sensitive receptors.
2.5 Noise Barriers for Industrial/Commercial Sources. If necessary, and after
    implementation of measures utilizing architectural features and building
    design and construction consistent with Policy 1.2, require certain
    industrial and certain heavy commercial uses to use absorptive types of
    noise barriers or walls to reduce noise levels generated by these uses. To
    be considered effective, the noise barrier should provide at least a 5-dBA-
    CNEL noise reduction.
3.1 Roadway Noise. Implement the policies listed under Goal 1 to reduce the
    impacts of roadway noise on noise-sensitive receptors where roadway
    noise exceeds the normally compatible range shown in the City’s Noise
    Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 7.1.
3.2 Traffic Calming. Implement traffic calming measures, such as reduced
    speed limits or roadway design features, to reduce noise levels through
    reduced vehicle speeds and/or diversion of vehicle traffic where roadway
    noise exceeds the normally compatible range shown in the City’s Noise
    Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 7.1.
3.3 Synchronization of Traffic Lights. Ensure that all new traffic signals are
    appropriately timed and synchronized with adjacent lights, even if in
    neighboring cities, to the extent feasible in order to help promote a

    smooth flow of traffic and minimize excessive noise from acceleration and
    braking. Also periodically assess the timing of existing traffic signals and
    make any appropriate adjustments.
3.4 Railway Noise. Ensure that noise from rail lines is taken into account
    during the land use planning and site development processes.
                                                                                 |
(This page is intentionally left blank
                                                                                       Palm Desert is known for high quality
                                                                                       emergency services
California law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires that a city’s general
plan include:
“a safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks
associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking,
ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to
mudslides and landslides; subsidence… and other geologic hazards known to the
legislative body; flooding; and wildland and urban fires. The safety element shall
include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also address
evacuation routes …peak load water supply requirements, and minimum road widths
and clearances around structures, as those items relate to identified fire and
geologic hazards.”
As required by state law, the Safety Element identifies forces of nature and events
resulting from human action that have the potential to cause harm to life and
property in the city. Identifying the source of such threats allows decision-makers to
take preemptory action to minimize the damage, particularly as it relates to new
development projects. In addition to State-mandated components, the Safety
Element builds on the previous General Plan to emphasize the importance of police
services and personal safety. This element presents existing conditions relative to
public safety in Palm Desert and is organized to address the following six priority
safety issues required by state law and identified by the City’s (2012) Local Hazard
Mitigation Plan:
     • Seismic and geologic hazards
     • Flooding
     • Extreme weather
     • Fire
     • Emergency preparedness
     • Human-caused and other hazards

                                         The Safety Element is consistent with and supports the other General Plan elements.
                                         The elements of the General Plan that most closely correlate to the Safety Element
                                         are the Land Use and Community Character Element, Public Utilities Element,
                                         Mobility Element, Housing Element, and Environmental Resources Element. While
                                         the Safety Element has a less direct relationship with the remaining General Plan
                                         elements, each element is important and collectively supports a comprehensive
                                         framework for Palm Desert’s future.
                                         The Safety Element addresses a broad range of issues and hazards that affect the
                                         community and residents of Palm Desert. Hazards and strategies from the Local
                                         Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP)1, Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan
                                         (MJHMP), Riverside County Unit Fire Plan, and Emergency Operations Plan (EOP)
                                         provide a foundation for policy development in this element. The Safety Element
                                         also reflects technical information on the extent and scope of hazards, as described
                                         in the City of Palm Desert Existing Conditions Report (2015). Relevant sections in the
                                         report include Section 7 (Geology and Soils), Section 8 (Hazards and Hazardous
                                         Materials), Section 9 (Hydrology and Water Quality), and Section 15 (Public Services,
                                         Utilities, and Recreation). These sections provide technical information on hazards,
Protecting community well-being and      in addition to context regarding the local, state and federal regulatory framework.
health remains a high priority for Palm
Desert
                                         The Safety Element supports and integrates several key plans that identify the City’s
                                         approach to assess and reduce risks from hazards. In addition to local plans and
                                         ordinances, several state and federal policies and programs shape the City’s
                                         approach to hazard mitigation.
                                         Two key local plans present programs and implementation strategies to assess and
                                         respond to hazards. The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) analyzes potential
                                         hazards in Palm Desert. Included in the LHMP is a comprehensive risk assessment
                                         that meets the requirements of the Disaster Mitigation Act (DMA) of 2000. The DMA
                                         requires local governments to prepare plans that identify hazards and risks in a
                                         community and to create appropriate mitigation. Additionally, the City maintains an
                                         Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) as a framework for implementation of the
                                         California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) and the National
                                         Incident Management System (NIMS). The EOP facilitates multi-agency and multi-
                                         jurisdictional coordination for emergency operations across the region and state.
                                         The City of Palm Desert is also a participant in the Riverside County Operational Area
                                         Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan (MJHMP) (Riverside County 2012). The
                                         MJHMP identifies the hazards, reviews and assesses past disaster occurrences,
                                         estimates the probability of future occurrences, and sets goals to mitigate, reduce or
                                         eliminate long-term risk to people and property from natural and man-made hazards
                                         in the county and participating jurisdictions, including Palm Desert.
                                         As a contract city that receives fire services from Riverside County, which contracts
                                         with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal FIRE). The City’s
                                         fire response and preparedness planning is contained in the Riverside County Unit
                                        1 County of Riverside Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan, June 2012
                                        http://www.rvcfire.org/ourDepartment/OES/Documents/MJHMP_-_7.18.12_shrank2.pdf

Fire Plan2 prepared by the County and Cal FIRE. This plan outlines the activities
necessary to reduce total government costs and citizen losses from wildland fires. A
key component of this protection of assets at risk through focused pre-fire
management prescriptions and increasing initial attack success. In addition, the City
has adopted the California Fire Code with some adoptions within Chapter 15.26 3of
the Palm Desert Municipal Code. The adoptions within this Chapter are associated
with local climactic, geologic, and topographical conditions within the City.
Palm Desert is in a region bordered by mountain ranges on three sides. According to
the state mapping of fault zones, pursuant to the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
Zoning Act of 1972 (Public Resources Code Sections 2621–2630), the city and the
sphere of influence (SOI) are not located in an active fault zone. Nonetheless, the
area is bordered by three active faults. The closest fault to the community is the San
Andreas Fault, located approximately four miles to the north. Other nearby faults
include the San Jacinto Fault, located approximately 10 miles to the southwest, and
the Elsinore Fault, located approximately 30 miles to the southwest. Figure 8.1
presents fault lines near Palm Desert and the sphere of influence.
                                                                                             The San Andreas Fault located in close
Fault rupture is a primary seismic hazard that describes the sudden release of energy        proximity to Palm Desert
which results from the sliding of one part of the earth’s crust past another. An
earthquake, or ground shaking, is another type of primary seismic hazard. Thousands
of earthquakes occur frequently in Southern California each year, although most do
not cause significant damage or affect communities. The most recent earthquake in
the Coachella Valley occurred on October 16, 1999, and registered as a magnitude
(M) of 7.1. Relatively negligible damage was reported from the earthquake because
of the epicenter’s remote location. Six major seismic events (magnitude 5.9 or
greater) have been recorded in the Coachella Valley region in the past 100 years,
with none occurring in Palm Desert (SCEC 2014).
                                                                                              Terrain and steep slopes within Palm
Although no active faults run through the community, Palm Desert’s soils and                  Desert
geologic characteristics result in other potential secondary seismic hazards. Due to a
combination of steep slopes, unstable terrain, and proximity to earthquake faults,
the southwestern portions of the city and the SOI are susceptible to landslide risks
ranging from moderate to very high. Areas susceptible to landslide are shown in
Figure 8.2. Susceptible areas include those identified in the Land Use and Community
Character Element for development of new buildings and structures. As of 2015, no
recent landslides had been reported in Palm Desert or the SOI.
Local soil and fault characteristics also result in the potential for liquefaction.
Liquefaction is the loss of soil strength caused by a sudden increase in pore water
pressure during shaking and is one of the most destructive secondary effects of
seismic shaking. The California Geological Survey does not identify liquefaction-
susceptible areas for Palm Desert. However, the Riverside County Land Information
System (Riverside County 2014) identifies that the majority of the city and the entire
northern portion of the SOI are susceptible to moderate liquefaction potential.
2 California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, Riverside Unit Strategic Fire Plan,
http://cdfdata.fire.ca.gov/fire_er/fpp_planning_plans
3 Palm Desert Municipal Code,
http://www.qcode.us/codes/palmdesert/view.php?topic=0&frames=off



Erosion is a normal geologic process whereby earth materials are loosened, worn
away, decomposed, or dissolved and are removed from one place and transported to
another. The City of Palm Desert and the SOI face exposure to potential erosion
hazards due to wind. The geologic orientation of the hills and mountain ranges
throughout the community provide little resistance to air flow down the Coachella
Valley, resulting in increased rates of erosion. For example, the narrow San Gorgonio
Pass actually accelerates the wind speed and further increases erosion rates.
Other factors in the community exacerbate the potential for wind-blown sand
hazards. Local bedrock is characterized by granite and metamorphic rock types,
which are easily transported by the wind. Wind-blown hazards also follow slope and
floodplains. Due to sparse desert vegetation, little groundcover exists to hold
materials in place (County of Riverside 2000).
As shown in Figure 8.3, the greatest areas of potential wind-blown hazards are
located alongside the sand dunes on Highway I-10 and the Whitewater River.

Flooding hazards in Palm Desert can result from stormwater flows and flash runoff
from the Indio Hills and the foothills of the San Jacinto and San Bernardino
Mountains. The threat of localized flash flooding is especially high during summer
storms due to the high intensity and shorter duration of rainfall.
Palm Desert has a history of flood events. Recent regional occurrences include the
Riverside County floods in 1998 that resulted in reported damage of over $12
million. Locally, smaller flood incidents have also occurred in Palm Desert. Previous
local events in Palm Desert include flash floods that occurred in 1998, in addition to
flooding from Tropical Storm Kathleen in 1976 that caused extensive flood damage
throughout the city (Riverside County 2012, City of Palm Desert 2012). Nonetheless,
reported damages from these flood events in Palm Desert are low and far less
extensive than the reported damages from the countywide floods of 1998.
Areas of Palm Desert and the SOI are subject to inundation from flooding. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA’s) Digital Flood Insurance Rate
Map (2014) identifies two types of Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA):
The 100-year floodplain, designating a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in a
given year, and
The 500-year floodplain, designating a 0.2 percent or greater chance of flooding in a
given year.
North of Interstate 10, the majority of Palm Desert and the northern portion of the
SOI are within the 100- or 500-year flood zone. Additional 100- and 500-year flood
zones are present throughout the community along the Palm Valley Stormwater
Channel and the Whitewater River. Figure 8.4 depicts these SFHAs.
Applications for development in SFHAs are subject to Palm Desert Municipal Code
Title 28, Flood Damage Prevention. This title requires an applicant to obtain a
development permit before construction or other development begins in any area of
special flood hazard.
While areas of community flood exposure are indicated by designated flood zones,
other areas of Palm Desert are also susceptible to other types of localized flood risks.
Stormwater runoff or the failure of infrastructure can result in additional flood
events, both within and outside of designated flood zones. Stormwater drainage in
Palm Desert is approaching the end of its useful life. Existing stormwater
infrastructure throughout the Coachella Valley is more than 100 years old, requiring
replacement to control groundwater levels and safely facilitate percolation of
stormwater. As the community continues to urbanize, the need for improved
stormwater infrastructure will increase.
The possibility of dam failure poses additional potential flood hazards to Palm
Desert. Although no dams or reservoirs are located in the community or SOI, the city
is within the potential inundation area of the Wide Canyon Flood Control Dam. While
the city is not expected to be impacted directly by a seiche, or wave, from the dam,
Palm Desert is subject to potential flood hazards if the dam were to fail. Constructed
in 1968 and located in Fun Valley, the dam has the potential to inundate not just
Palm Desert but also other portions of the Coachella Valley.


Palm Desert and the SOI are exposed to fire-related hazards from two potential
sources: wildfires and fires that occur in urban settings. Fire hazards are highest in
areas of the community near the wildland-urban interface (WUI). The WUI refers to
areas where development abuts areas of wilderness or landscapes with higher fuel
loads.
Although Palm Desert does not have record of any reported fire incidents, the
Riverside County MJHMP indicates that from 2001 to 2011, more than 60 large fires
(300 acres or greater in size) were reported in the county.
Figure 8-5 presents the three fire hazard severity zones in Palm Desert. The Very
High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (VHFHSZ) was identified by the California Department
of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire) based on fuel load, slope, fire weather, and
other relevant factors. The High (HFHSZ) and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones
(MFHSZ) were identified by the Riverside County Fire Department based on an
assessment of vegetation, slope, fire history, weather patterns, and the effects of
flames, heat and flying fire embers.
Collectively, areas designated in the fire hazard severity zones on Figure 8.5 face the
highest risk of wildfires. All areas of the community in VHFHSZ and HFHSZ are located
in the southern areas of the city and the SOI, with limited MFHSZ areas along the
city’s urban edge (Cal Fire 2007). Areas of local, state and federal responsibility in
these fire hazard severity zones are shown in Figure 8.5. As urbanization expands
south of Highway 111 in the southwestern portion of the SOI, the community will
face heightened exposure to areas vulnerable to wildfire hazards. Increased infill and
nonresidential development in the city can also increase the probability of urban
fires due to increased potential for hazardous materials accidents, arson or other
hazard events.
Both state and local codes regulate the abatement of fire-related hazards. The
California Health and Safety Code includes requirements for local jurisdictions to
adopt and enforce the Uniform Building Code, including fire-related construction
methods and exterior design measures. Special standards apply to structures in the
state’s designated fire hazard severity zones. California Government Code Section
51182 further requires maintenance of defensible space of 100 feet from each side
of a structure.
The City of Palm Desert has incorporated state requirements with adoption of the
2013 edition of the California Building Standards Code and the 2013 edition of the
California Fire Code by reference in Municipal Code Title 15, Building and
Construction. The state’s fire hazard severity zones shown in Figure 8.6 are
incorporated and established in Palm Desert Municipal Code Section 15.26.040,
supporting the City’s ability to enforce state standards applicable to areas of higher
risk.



The climate in Palm Desert is hot and arid. Exposure to extreme heat or extended
periods of high temperatures results in a variety of health effects, including
increased heat-related mortality (Chestnut et al. 1998; Medina-Ramon et al. 2006).
Because of a changing climate, Palm Desert is anticipated to experience increasing
levels of heat. The region is anticipated to experience an increase ranging from 3.8°F
to 6.8°F (Scripps Institution of Oceanography 2009). Similarly, Palm Desert is
anticipated to experience an increase in the number of days when temperature
exceeds 112°, the threshold for extreme heat. While Palm Desert’s historic number
of extreme heat days through 2011 was four occurrences per year, by 2050 the
number of extreme heat days could increase to more than 40 per year (Scripps
Institution of Oceanography 2009).
A hazardous material is any material that, due to its quantity, concentration, or
physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to
human health and safety or to the environment if released. Hazardous materials
include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, and any
material that a business or local implementing agency has a reasonable basis to
believe would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or would be harmful
to the environment if released.
While Palm Desert has nonresidential land uses, it has very few generators of
hazardous or toxic materials. Potential uses associated with possible hazardous
materials production may include commercial, quasi-industrial or medical
operations. The city and SOI have one abandoned hazardous waste site that is
designated by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as a Superfund site
(EPA 2014). The site, Enfield Chemical, is located at 77539 Enfield Court, just south of
I-10 in Palm Desert. Although listed as a Superfund site, this site is not on the EPA
National Priority List for cleanup, and only requires site cleanup and material
removal.
The potential for exposure to potentially hazardous materials in Palm Desert results
primarily from the transport of hazardous materials. As of 2015, one registered
transporter of hazardous materials is located in the community. In addition, major
transportation corridors such as I-10 may be used to transport hazardous materials;
accidents could result in release of hazardous materials. Major natural gas
transmission lines provide another potential source of hazardous materials exposure.
As of 2012, transmission lines for natural gas run parallel approximately two miles
north of I-10 and transmission lines for hazardous liquid are located along the I-10
corridor (PHMSA 2012).
The City jointly participated with Riverside County and other jurisdictions to adopt
the Riverside County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. The plan supports the
safe management of hazardous materials and waste products with identification of
types of wastes and programs to manage them.
Hazards from airports can result from accidents during takeoff and landing. Airports
can also pose issues associated with land use incompatibilities. Bermuda Dunes

Airport is the closest airport to the city and is located within the SOI. This privately
owned public use airport encompasses over 90 acres. For the 12-month period
ending April 30, 2014, the airport had approximately 27,000 aircraft flights at an
average of 74 per day.
Numerous targets and locations for potential terrorist and civil disturbances are
present throughout California and Riverside County. Areas that may serve as targets
include government facilities, schools, religious institutions, gathering places (for
example, shopping centers, entertainment venues), medical clinics, utility
infrastructure, transportation infrastructure, water storage facilities, locations of
high-profile individuals, and financial institutions. Palm Desert contains potential
target locations such as these and is regionally located near others. The Riverside
County Emergency Management Office is actively involved with planning for
terrorism and other human-caused events. Due to the sensitive nature of these
threats, they are not addressed in extensive detail in this public document.
Critical facilities provide essential community functions that the City has prioritized
as meriting additional attention for emergency preparation. These can include both
public and private assets. Critical facilities identified in the City’s LHMP include City
Hall, local fire stations, the Sheriff’s Station, the Palm Desert Corporation Yard, local
schools, the Palm Desert Library, and the Joslyn Center.
The City of Palm Desert actively prepares to safeguard the community from the
numerous potential hazards that could occur. The City undertakes several
emergency preparedness activities, establishing procedures and responsibilities for
emergency response. Land use rules and service providers also play a role in
achieving readiness for hazards and emergencies. Additionally, the City is supported
by several other external entities to provide response services.
The City of Palm Desert has established a framework for emergency preparation and
response. Key preparation tasks and tools are outlined below, including an overview
of roles identified in the EOP.
Emergency Operations Center
The City’s Desert Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is the central management
entity responsible for directing and coordinating the various City departments and
other agencies in their emergency response activities. The EOC also serves as the
physical location from which information and resources are coordinated. The City’s
Emergency Operations Plan establishes City Hall as the primary EOC, with an
alternate center located at the City Corporation Yard. The EOP provides guidance for
activation and deactivation of an Emergency Operations Center, including an action
plan for the EOC in event of an emergency.
Emergency Notification Program
The City of Palm Desert is a member of Riverside County's Emergency Alert System
(EAS). The EAS is a statewide network of commercial broadcasting stations and

interconnecting facilities authorized by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) to operate during national disasters or emergencies. The EAS provides
immediate warnings for hazards such as flash floods, child abductions, or needs for
evacuation.
Emergency Services – Peak-Load Water Supplies
The availability of water greatly affects the City’s ability to effectively respond to any
occurrences of fire. Water services in the Coachella Valley come from the Coachella
Valley Water District (CVWD). The CVWD provides domestic water services to Palm
Desert using wells to extract groundwater from the Whitewater River subbasin. The
groundwater supply consists of a combination of natural runoff, inflows from
adjacent basins, returns from groundwater, recycled water, and imported water use.
Drinking water is met primarily from groundwater sources, while irrigation water is
supplied primarily from recycled wastewater and imported water.
Annual demand for groundwater has exceeded the ability of the subbasin to
recharge, resulting in overdraft conditions. The CVWD, recognizing the need for
other sources of water to reduce demand on groundwater, initiated water
reclamation in 1967 and currently operates six water reclamation plants (WRPs) in
the valley. Recycled water from two of these facilities has served golf course and
greenbelt irrigation in the Palm Desert area for many years, reducing demand on the
groundwater basin. A third facility (WRP 7), located north of Indio, began providing
recycled water for golf course and greenbelt irrigation in Palm Desert in 1997.
The CVWD continues to expand recycled water services to golf courses and other
nonpotable needs to reduce peak-load supply. Typically, demand is highest during
summer months because of water needs for landscaping. Demand for recycled water
exceeds the CVWD’s current supply and would require additional infrastructure for
recycled water connections. The district has plans to expand pipeline connections to
the Mid-Valley Pipeline (MVP) recycled water system, with the potential to connect
at least 10 additional golf courses. Completion of the MVP project would further
reduce demands on groundwater and enhance the City’s ability to meet peak-load
water supplies during an emergency.
Evacuation Routes
Key evacuation routes in the city consist primarily of the north–south connections
between Palm Desert and I-10 and Highway 111, including Monterey Avenue,
Portola Avenue (following the planned construction of the interchange), Cook Street,
and Washington Street. Both Monterey Avenue and Washington Street provide all-
weather bridges to the highways. Cook Street and Portola Avenue also provide
connections across the Whitewater River.
Coordination with Riverside County will be critical to support connections to
unincorporated SOI areas. Areas of the SOI north of Interstate 10 have higher
potential for isolation in case of a hazard. In the southern SOI, areas along State
Route 74 such as Royal Carrizo could face similar challenges of isolation in case of a
hazardous event.
A process to identify evacuation routes appropriate to given hazards is established in
the City’s EOP. City departments are responsible for development of department-

specific Standard Operating Procedures and Response Plans with evacuation routes,
with varied priorities based on hazard.
Emergency Access – Roadway Widths
To ensure the community is accessible to emergency response personnel, the City
establishes minimum roadway widths and access requirements. Section 26.40.040 of
the Palm Desert Municipal Code establishes minimum roadway widths for
subdivision development. Minimum widths range from 24 to 106 feet, with
standards that vary based on street parking characteristics. To date, roadway widths
or parked vehicles have not hindered emergency response access.
Emergency Services Agencies and Organizations
The City’s Risk Management Department coordinates and manages Palm Desert’s
emergency services and providers. The City’s Risk Manager serves as the
community’s emergency manager. Fire protection, first response emergency medical
services, and natural disaster preparedness services in Palm Desert are provided by
the Riverside County Fire Department (RCFD), in cooperation with the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire). As of 2015, Palm Desert had a
total Fire Department staffing of 44 positions.
Emergency Dispatch Services
Regional communications and dispatch services are provided by the RCFD, which
serves approximately 1,360,000 residents in an area spanning 7,200 square miles. In
2013, the RCFD responded to 133,536 total incidents and 8,172 calls for service in
Palm Desert. The average en-route-to-on-scene response time was 3.6 minutes, with
86.2 percent of call response under 5 minutes.
Flood Services
Countywide, flood control services are provided by the Riverside County Flood
Control and Water Conservation District. The district has the responsibility of
protecting people, property and watersheds in the county from flood damage.
District tasks include regulation of drainage and development in the floodplain, the
construction of channels and flood facilities, and flood warning and early detection.
Both the Coachella Valley Water District and the Riverside County Flood Control and
Water Conservation District are responsible for the management of regional
drainage within and in the vicinity of Palm Desert, including rivers, major streams
and their tributaries, and areas of significant sheet flooding. The City participates in
stormwater management related to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES). For purposes of NPDES permits, the City serves as a co-permittee
with the County of Riverside, CVWD, Riverside County Flood Control and Water
Conservation District, and municipalities in the Whitewater River subbasin.
Police Services
The Riverside County Sheriff’s Department provides contract services in Palm Desert
and the SOI as the Palm Desert Police Department (PDPD). Services include general
law enforcement and police protection services. As of early 2015, the PDPD operated
with 81 staff members.
Regional Services and Coordination
The City of Palm Desert participates in regional forums to monitor and coordinate
emergency preparation tasks. The City participates in the Coachella Valley
Emergency Managers Association, in addition to the Coachella Valley Association of

Governments’ (CVAG) Public Safety Group. Both forums provide an opportunity to
identify and prepare regional evacuation routes and other key emergency response
tasks.
In coordination with the RCFD Office of Emergency Services, the City of Palm Desert
also plans for extreme heat conditions. Together with the County, the City operates
two local cooling stations during extreme heat occurrences: the Joslyn Center
located at 73750 Catalina Way, and the Palm Desert Community Center located at
43900 San Pablo Avenue. These cooling centers offer a safe, air-conditioned space in
times of extreme heat.

1.1 Hazards Information. Establish and maintain a database
    containing maps and other information that identifies and
    describes the community’s hazards.
1.2 Local Hazard Mitigation Plan. Maintain and regularly update the
    City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) as an integrated
    component of the General Plan, in coordination with Riverside
    County and other participating jurisdictions, to maintain
    eligibility for maximum grant funding.
1.3 Hazards Education. Consult with agencies and partners to
    provide public education materials on safe locations and
    evacuation routes in case of emergency or hazardous event.
1.4 Critical Facilities. Prepare existing critical facilities for resilience
    to hazards and develop new facilities outside of hazard-prone
    areas.
1.5 Emergency Plans and Processes. Consult with the Coachella
    Valley Emergency Managers Association and CVAG to maintain
    and update the City’s Emergency Operations Plan, and maintain
    SEMS compliant disaster preparedness plans for evacuation and
    supply routes, communications networks, and critical facilities’
    capabilities.
1.6 Utility Reliability. Coordinate with providers and agencies
    including the CVWD and Southern California Edison for access to
    reliable utilities and water supply to minimize potential impacts
    of hazards and emergencies to pipelines and infrastructure.
1.7 Citizen Preparedness. Continue to promote citizen-based
    disaster preparedness and emergency response through
    Riverside County’s Community Emergency Response Team
    (CERT) training and certifications.

2.1 Seismic Standards. Consider exceeding minimum seismic safety
    standards for critical facilities that ensure building function and
    support continuity of critical services and emergency response
    after a seismic event.
2.2 Structural Stability. Maintain development code standards to
    prohibit siting of new septic tanks, seepage pits, drainage
    facilities, and heavily irrigated areas away from structure
    foundations to reduce potential soil collapse.
2.3 Seismic Retrofits to the Existing Building Stock. Create a phased
    program for seismic retrofits to existing public and private
    unreinforced buildings to meet current requirements.
2.4 Wind Hazards. Support integrated land management for site
    design and improvements that protect the natural and built
    environment, including both public and private structures, from
    hazardous wind events.
3.1 Flood Risk in New Development. Require all new development
    to minimize flood risk with siting and design measures, such as
    grading that prevents adverse drainage impacts to adjacent
    properties, on-site retention of runoff, and minimization of
    structures located in floodplains.
3.2 Flood Infrastructure. Require new development to contribute to
    funding regional flood control infrastructure improvements.
3.3 Stormwater Management. Monitor, update, and enforce
    stormwater management plans in coordination with regional
    agencies, utilities, and other jurisdictions.
3.4 Open Space for Flood Control. Prioritize open space or uses that
    serve recreational purposes as a preferred land use within areas
    of high flood risk.
3.5 Dam Failure. Disseminate information on dam inundation areas
    subject to potential risks of flooding in the event of dam failure
    or seismic hazard, including preparation for seiche events, which
    can be caused by seismic events and consist of the occurrence
    of a standing wave that oscillates in a body of water, such as a
    dam.
4.1 Fire Preparation. Maintain optimal fire readiness and response service
    in coordination with Riverside County and other agencies.
4.2 Fire Hazard Severity Zones. Adopt and implement fire mitigation
    standards for areas designated as High and Very High Fire Hazard
    Severity Zones per CalFire.
4.3 Brush Clearance. Require new development and homeowners
    associations to maintain brush clearance criteria that meets 120% of the
    current state requirement for fire hazard severity zones in the city.
4.4 Inventory of Structures for Fire Risk. Prepare an inventory of all
    structures and ownership information for structures in each fire hazard
    severity zone in the city and the SOI.
4.5 Fire Education. Disseminate information on fire risks and minimum
    standards, including guidance for new development in the wildland-
    urban interface and fire hazard severity zones.
4.6 Future Emergency Service Needs. Require new developments and
    homeowners associations along the wildland urban interface to house
    the proper equipment and infrastructure to respond to wildland fire
    incidents.
4.7 Open Space Preservation. Consult with neighboring jurisdictions,
    private property owners, and other agencies to identify resource
    management activities that can both enhance open space areas and
    reduce wildland fire.
5.1 Extreme Heat Vulnerabilities. Analyze and address groups with
    vulnerabilities to extreme heat, including youth, the elderly, nursing
    homes, or communities with older structures that lack adequate air
    conditioning.
5.2 Education on Extreme Heat. Educate visitors and residents on the risks
    of extreme heat using brochures, public service announcements, and
    other methods.
5.3 Backup energy sources. Obtain and install backup power equipment for
    critical public facilities to ensure they are functional during a power
    failure that might result from extreme weather.
5.4 Below ground utilities. Provide information and education to encourage
    private stakeholders with formation of assessment districts that would
    finance and replace overhead electric lines with subsurface lines that
    will not be affected by fallen trees and branches during windstorms.
5.5 Tree trimming. Support utility companies in their enforcement of the
    national guidelines on tree trimming and vegetation management
    around electric transmission and communication lines to prevent or
    reduce the potential for felled branches or trees to cause power outages
    and disrupted communications.
5.6 Wind barriers. Encourage the preservation and establishment of
    additional wind barriers in the form of hedges and tree lines to reduce
    the effects of dust and sand.
6.1 Site Remediation. Encourage and facilitate the adequate and timely
    cleanup of existing and future contaminated sites and the compatibility
    of future land uses.
6.2 Airport Hazards. Upon annexation of areas within the Bermuda Dunes
    Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan Area, adopt and implement airport
    compatibility zones for protection of people and property.
6.3 Airport compatibility. Require new development in the vicinity of
    Bermuda Dunes Airport to conform to the County’s airport land use and
    safety plans. Notwithstanding the allowable land use intensities and
    densities set forth by the Land Use and Community Character Element,
    there may be more restrictive density and intensity limitations on land
    use and development parameters, as set forth by the Airport Land Use
    and Compatibility Plan. Additionally, per the Airport Land Use Plan,
    there may be additional limits, restrictions, and requirements, such as
    aviation easements, height limits, occupancy limits, and deed
    restrictions, required of new developments within the vicinity of the
    airport.
6.4 Wildlife Hazards Study. New developments proposing golf course or
    significant open space and/or water features shall prepare a wildlife
    hazard study if the site is within the Airport Influence Area.
6.5 Airport Land Use Commission Review. Before the adoption or
    amendment of this General Plan, any specific plan, the adoption or
    amendment of a zoning ordinance or building regulation within the
    planning boundary of the airport land use compatibility plan, refer
    proposed actions for review, determination and processing by the
    Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission as provided by the

     Airport Land Use Law. Notify the Airport Land Use Commission office
     and send a Request for Agency Comments for all new projects, and
     projects proposing added floor area or change in building occupancy
     type located within the Bermuda Dunes Airport Influence Area.
6.6  Federal Aviation Administration Review. Projects that require an FAA
     notice and review will be conditioned accordingly by the City to obtain
     an FAA Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation prior to issuance
     of any building permits.
6.7  Residential Development near airport. New residential development
     within Airport Compatibility Zone D shall have a net density of at least
     five dwelling units per acre. New dwelling units should not be permitted
     as secondary uses of the Urban Employment Center General Plan
     Designation within Airport Compatibility Zone C.
6.8  Nonresidential Development near airport. The land use intensity of
     nonresidential structures within Airport Compatibility Zones B1, C, and
     D shall be limited as set forth by Table 2A of the Airport Land Use
     Compatibility Plan.
6.9  Hospitals near airport. Prohibit hospitals within Airport Compatibility
     Zones B1 and C and discouraged in Airport Compatibility Zone D.
6.10 Stadiums and gathering spaces. Major spectator-oriented sports
     stadiums, amphitheaters, concert halls shall be discouraged beneath
     principal flight tracks.
6.11 Regional coordination. Promote coordinated long-range planning
     between the City, airport authorities, businesses and the public to meet
     the region's aviation needs.
6.12 Railroad Safety. When considering development adjacent to the
     railroad right-of-way, work to minimize potential safety issues and land
     use conflicts associated with railroad adjacency.
                                                                                       Renewable energy in Palm Desert
State law requires all general plans to include a conservation element which addresses
the “conservation, development and utilization of natural resources” (California
Government Code §65302(d)). Natural resources identified by statute include water,
forests, soils, wildlife, minerals, and other resources. This chapter addresses the
conservation of natural resources through goals and policies targeting stormwater
management, energy conservation and utilities, and recycling and solid waste. This
chapter also addresses other topics related to infrastructure, public facilities, and
public services. The Circulation Element includes additional content related to
transportation and street infrastructure.
Infrastructure and utility decisions have widespread impact on housing, development,
investment patterns, and quality of life. As Palm Desert expands, so does the need for
additional buildings to accommodate City personnel and infrastructure to provide
capacity for everything from educational services to wastewater management. It is
imperative to coordinate the timing of new development with infrastructure and
public utility capacity, so demands are adequately met. Also, providing reliable
                                                                                                                   |

                            revenue sources to support the costly maintenance and replacement required for
                            aging infrastructure is of high importance.
                            Services and opportunities should be available and accessible to everyone in the
                            community. At the same time, employment and economic benefits associated with
                            building and maintaining infrastructure should be shared. The means for collecting
                            revenues to fund infrastructure improvements should be determined and applied in
                            ways that are fair and do not disproportionately burden those with lower incomes.
                            New development should not have a negative impact on existing residents and should
                            contribute to City resources so the current level of services can be maintained.
Palm Desert Sheriff Station Policies supporting well-maintained infrastructure, utilities, and sufficient police and
                            fire services are essential for achieving broader development objectives and for
                            supporting the future envisioned by the residents of Palm Desert. The Infrastructure
                            and Public Services Element addresses the changing public service and infrastructure
                            needs and provides for their logical and timely expansion to keep pace with growth.
                            Fire protection, emergency medical services, and natural disaster preparedness
                            services in Palm Desert are provided by the Riverside County Fire Department (RCFD).
                            The Palm Desert Office of the Fire Marshal provides services aimed at reducing the risk
                            of fire and public injury.
 Pam Desert Aquatic Center
                            The Palm Desert Police Department (PDPD) serves under contract by the Riverside
                            County Sheriff’s Department, providing police protection and crime prevention
                            services to residents of Palm Desert and the nearby SOI.
                            Public education services and facilities are provided to Palm Desert by the Desert
                            Sands Unified School District (DSUSD) and Palm Springs Unified School District. The
                            DSUSD operates four elementary schools, one middle school, and one high school in
                            the city and SOI. Public schools are supplemented by fourteen private schools that
                            provide early education to children of residents. The Palm Springs Unified School
                            District owns a future K-8 school site within Palm Desert city limits. In addition, Palm
                            Desert is home to four colleges and universities that provide a variety of vocational
                            and advanced education opportunities.
                            Southern California Edison (SCE) provides electricity to most of Palm Desert, except for
                            a small portion of the city south of Interstate 10. SCE’s facilities include high-voltage
                            transmission lines, which range up to 115 kilovolts (kv) in Palm Desert. Lower voltage
                            distribution lines, which are typically gauged at about 12 kv in the city and SOI, provide
                            electricity to individual residences and other users.
                            The Southern California Gas Company (SoCalGas) is one of California’s investor owned
                            utilities regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. SoCalGas is the
                            primary provider of natural gas to the Southern California region and provides service

to properties within the City of Palm Desert and Sphere of Influence. Existing facilities
and distribution lines are located throughout the City and remain available to business
and property-owners.
The Imperial Irrigation District (IID) is a non-profit, community-owned utility district
that serves customers in Imperial County and parts of Riverside and San Diego
counties. The IID provides electric services to a limited portion of the city and to
Bermuda Dunes and the portion of the SOI north of the I-10. IID facilities in the city
and SOI include 230 kv, 161 kv, and 92 kv transmission lines, as well as 34.5 kv and 12
kv distribution lines. The IID operates several substations, all outside of the city and
SOI north of Interstate 10. The IID obtains its power from a combination of
hydroelectric, diesel, thermal, and geothermal generation sources.
Climate change is a threat to the health and safety of Palm Desert residents, as well as
those in other parts of the region, state, and globe. Concerned about the impact of
climate change, California has adopted a wide variety of legislation and policies aimed
at reducing the state’s greenhouse gas emissions. These include the California Global
Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), which requires state-wide climate planning; SB
375, which requires and encourages sustainable land use and transportation patterns
at the regional and local level; and various actions by the state attorney general’s
office.
In 2010, Palm Desert City Council approved the City’s Environmental Sustainability
Plan and Greenhouse Gas Inventory and formed a citizen’s sustainability committee to
act as an advisory and consulting board regarding the management and conservation
of Palm Desert natural resources. The Citizen’s Sustainability Committee is a
conglomerate of industry professionals that reviews proposals, offers feedback, and
helps develop appropriate policies that help meet the City’s goals. The six resource
areas covered include the built environment, energy management, materials
management, regional air quality, transportation resources, and water management.
Potable and non-potable water is provided to the city by the Coachella Valley Water
District (CVWD). Water demand in Palm Desert and the surrounding regions is
supplied by several sources including: groundwater, surface water from local streams,
imported water from the State Water Project (SWP) and the Colorado River by way of
the Coachella Canal, and recycled water.
Natural sources of groundwater recharge come from runoff and infiltration from the
San Bernardino, San Jacinto and Santa Rosa Mountains, as well as inflow from other
subbasins to the west.
                                                                                          Coachella Valley Water District
                                                                                          Desert water supply is strained by heavy
                                                                                          pumping
                                                                                                                            |

Wastewater and sewage collection and treatment
services are also provided by the CVWD. The only
outlets for groundwater in the Coachella Valley are
through subsurface outflow under the Salton Sea or
through collection in drains and transport to the
Salton Sea via the Coachella Valley Storm Channel
(CVSC). There are five stormwater channels in the
city: Whitewater River Stormwater Channel, and its
tributaries: Dead Indian Creek, the Deep Canyon Channel, the Palm Valley System, and
the East Magnesia Channel.
1.1      Stormwater infrastructure for new development. Require development
         projects pay for their share of new stormwater infrastructure or
         improvements necessitated by that development (regional shallow
         groundwater).
1.2      On-site stormwater retention and infiltration. Whenever possible,
         stormwater shall be infiltrated, evapotranspirated, reused or treated on-
         site in other ways that improve stormwater quality and reduce flows into
         the storm drain system.
1.3      Groundwater infiltration. Encourage the use of above-ground and natural
         stormwater facilities in new development and redevelopment, such as
         vegetated swales and permeable paving .
1.4      Stormwater re-use and recycling. Encourage innovative ways of capturing
         and reusing stormwater for non-drinking purposes to reduce the use of
         potable drinking water.
1.5      Recycled water. Work with the CVWD to encourage existing golf courses
         to connect to its recycled water system.
1.6      Collaborative stormwater management. Encourage collaborative,
         integrated stormwater management between multiple property owners
         and sites.
1.7      Low impact development. Require the use of low-impact development
         strategies to minimize urban run-off, increase site infiltration, manage
         stormwater and recharge groundwater supplies.
 1.8  Green infrastructure in public rights-of-way. Encourage green streets
      with in-street bio-retention and other forms of stormwater retention and
      infiltration in streets and public rights-of-way.
 1.9  Regional and local collaboration. Collaborate with Thousand Palms,
      Rancho Mirage, Cahuilla Hills, Bermuda Dunes, and agencies in the
      watershed to reduce and remove contaminants from stormwater runoff.
1.10  Stormwater in urban context. Development projects shall incorporate
      stormwater management into landscaping, except in downtown
      designations where catch basins shall be prohibited.
1.11  Water quality detention basins. Require water detention basins to be
      aesthetically pleasing and to serve recreational purposes, such as in the
      form of a mini park. Detention basins designed for active uses are
      intended to supplement park and open space and should not be counted
      towards a developer’s minimum park requirements, unless otherwise
      determined by the Planning Commission or City Council.
 1.12 Retention Basins. Encourage storm water retention basins, especially in
      the City Center Area, to be underground in future development so as to
      achieve the most efficient use of land and compact development and
      promote the urban character goals of the General Plan.
 1.13 Soil erosion. Require the prevention of water-born soil erosion from sites,
      especially those undergoing grading and mining activities.
 2.1  Sewer system maintenance. Work with the Coachella Valley Water
      District to ensure sewers are operational and in good working order.
 2.2  Sewer infrastructure for new development. Require development
      projects to pay for their share of new sewer infrastructure or
      improvements necessitated by that development.
 2.3  Sewer connections. In the event that a sewer line exists in the right-of-
      way where a lateral line connection is required to serve a lot, require a
      sewer connection at the time the lot is developed.
 3.1  Agency coordination. Coordinate on an ongoing basis with the Coachella
      Valley Water District, and other agencies responsible for supplying water
      to the region.
                                                                                  |

3.2 Water Supply. Provide a clean, reliable citywide water supply sufficient to
    serve existing and planned development.
3.3 Water infrastructure. Maintain existing water infrastructure to protect
    the supply, quality, and delivery of potable water.
3.4 Water infrastructure for new development. Require development
    projects to pay for their share of new water infrastructure or
    improvements necessitated by that project.
3.5 Recycled Water. Expanded use of recycled water in existing and new
    development.
3.6 Citywide water conservation and efficiency. Encourage and promote
    community water conservation and efficiency efforts, including indoor
    and outdoor efforts that exceed CalGreen requirements.
3.7 Priority infrastructure improvements. Prioritize water infrastructure
    improvements in areas with failing, insufficient or end of useful life
    infrastructure.
4.1 Provide waste and recycling services. Provide solid waste, recycling, and
    green waste services to the community at a reasonable rate.
4.2 Zero waste government operations. Strive for zero waste government
    operations, modeling best practices in solid waste management and
    recycling for the rest of the community.
4.3 Waste reduction. Seek to continually reduce Palm Desert’s rate of waste
    disposal per capita, and to increase the diversion rate of recycling and
    green waste.
4.4 Recycled building material. Encourage the use of recycled building and
    infrastructure materials in new public and private development.
4.5 Paper waste reduction. Reduce paper waste and encourage the use of
    recycled paper in City operations.
4.6 Community coordination. Confer and coordinate with utility and civic
    services providers in planning, designing and siting of distribution and
    supporting facilities to assure the timely expansion of facilities in a
    manner that minimizes environmental impacts and disturbance of
    existing improvements.

5.1  Plan for Fiber. During construction of streets, pathways, etc., and when
     feasible, conduit for future fiber optic cable shall be installed.
5.2  Quality telecommunication services. Support the creation of a
     broadband service throughout Palm Desert.
5.3  Telecommunication services. Power and other transmission towers,
     cellular communication towers, and other viewshed intrusions shall be
     designed and sited to minimize environmental and visual impacts and
     environmental hazards.
5.4  Unobtrusive utility lines. Utility lines on streets and roadways shall be
     designed, sited, and retrofitted to assure minimal environmental and
     visual impacts and environmental hazards.
5.5  Community Utility Undergrounding. Continue assistance in formation of
     assessment districts to facilitate complete community undergrounding of
     all utility distribution lines.
 6.1 Future demand. Cooperate and coordinate with the Desert Sands and
     Palm Springs Unified School Districts and state agencies in identifying
     potential school sites needed to meet future demand, as well as the
     planning, site acquisition and development of educational facilities in the
     city.
 6.2 Higher education. Support and encourage well planned, higher
     educational facilities in Palm Desert including satellite university
     campuses and vocational training schools in medical research and
     technology, particularly in the Cook Street “education corridor.”
 6.3 Library space. Ensure adequate library space, services, books and other
     resources are available to residents and students.
 6.4 Health services. Plan and encourage health care facilities and clinics
     located in close proximity to schools and public facilities.
 6.5 Quality early education. Collaborate with the Desert Sands and Palm
     Springs Unified School Districts and local private schools to maximize
     educational quality.
 6.6 Prioritize higher education. Support new University endeavors within
     Palm Desert including the University of-California Riverside and San
     Bernardino, College of the Desert, and Brandman University.
                                                                                 |

7.1 Quality of service. Provide courteous, responsive, and efficient police and
    fire services.
7.2 Review of new development. Work with the Riverside County Sherriff’s
    Department and the Riverside County Fire Department to review and
    modify development proposals to incorporate defensible space, Crime
    Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED), and other public
    safety design concepts into new development.
7.3 Serving new growth. Expand police and fire service coverage in
    conjunction with new growth to ensure quality of service does not
    diminish.
7.4 Water pressure. Ensure that sufficient water service and pressure is
    available throughout the city for use in firefighting.
7.5 Recycled water for fire Suppression. Consult with the CVWD to support
    efforts to expand reclaimed water supply from municipal wastewater for
    fire suppression needs.
7.6 Increasing fire hazards. Encourage Cal Fire and Riverside County Fire
    Department to explore the trends of increasing fire hazards associated
    with the drought and increasing temperatures and to develop new fire
    hazard mitigation strategies.
7.7 Emergency Preparedness. Work with Riverside County Fire Department,
    the Riverside County Sherriff’s Department and the Palm Desert Police
    Department, along with residents to ensure that sufficient emergency
    plans and resources are established and known by all stakeholders.
7.8 Fire and emergency services. Continue to coordinate with Riverside
    County Fire Department to ensure continued excellent fire and
    emergency services.
7.9 Police services. Work with all available resources to ensure continued
    excellent and cost effective police services in Palm Desert.

                                                                                        CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
10. CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Intent & Overview
The City Center Area Plan is an in-depth plan aimed at establishing a
true city center within Palm Desert by creating a framework, design
objectives and implementation techniques for future development.
Vision
Palm Desert’s 111 Corridor will be systematically transformed from its current outmoded
highway strip character into an attractive, comfortable, and walkable boulevard through
the heart of Palm Desert's expanded mixed-use downtown district, with a character
and quality compatible with El Paseo. City-initiated access, parking and urban design
improvements will support private reinvestment in mixed-use infill development that
will evolve what is already a fine regional shopping destination into a livelier, more
diverse, 18-hour mixed-use district. Over time, a San Pablo streetscape transformation
project and new development along the San Pablo Corridor will connect the El
Paseo/111 downtown district to the Civic Center at Fred Waring to create a unified City
Center -- the nucleus for commercial, civic and cultural life in Palm Desert.
Aeria l v iew of t he 11 1 Ar ea fa c i n g n o r t h
                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN | 139

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                            Process
                                            Introduction
                                            Purpose & Plan Making Process
                                            The desire to develop a plan for Palm Desert’s City Center emerged from the City’s
                                            recent Strategic Planning efforts, Envision Palm Desert. Through the Strategic Plan, the
                                            community specifically expressed interest in “Creating a mixed-use city core integrating
                                            shopping, dining, lodging, and housing” and “revitalizing the Highway 111 corridor
                                            through land use and travel corridor evolution and visual improvement” among
                                            several other goals related to arts and culture, economic development, energy and
                                            sustainability, land use, housing and open space, parks and recreation, public safety and
                                            emergency services, tourism and marketing, and transportation.
                                            As Palm Desert initiated an update to the General Plan, the desire to create a strategy
                                            for catalyzing the transformation of the City Center was identified. Rather than a
                                            separate Specific Plan or Vision Plan, the City determined that the City Center Area Plan
                                            should serve as a subset of the Palm Desert General Plan to avoid conflicting policy or
                                            repetition.
                                            Public Engagement
                                            Throughout the plan development process, the community was invited to participate
                                            and share their ideas for the future of the City Center Area at workshops held on three
                                            different occasions:
                                            October 2014 – Approximately 40 community members gathered for the first of three
                                            workshops to kick off the project and share ideas, issues, concerns, and opportunities
                                            for the future City Center Area.
                                            December 2014 - The second workshop had approximately 30 participants, and served
                                            as an opportunity to check in with the community and present preliminary design ideas
                                            and concepts based on previous input and direction from the community during the
                                            October workshop.
                                            March 2015 - The final workshop focused on presenting a refined set of design ideas
                                            and concepts based to the 35 community members in attendance, prior to developing
                                            policies and an implementation plan.
                                            Area Context
                                            The City Center Area is centrally and strategically located in the heart of the Palm Desert
                                            community, and the larger Coachella Valley region. As illustrated in Figure 1.2, the
Pa lm D esert com m un i t y w o r ks h o p City Center is located at the crossroads of Highway 111, and Highway 74, making the
                                            area ideally suited to meet local, regional, and tourist commercial and entertainment
                                            purposes. The City Center Area boundaries extend the full length of the City, from east
                                            to west along Highway 111, roughly to the south by Shadow Mountain Drive, and to the
                                            north by Alessandro Drive. The City Center Area also extends up San Pablo Avenue to
                                            connect the “downtown” to Civic Center Park and related civic and cultural venues.
In dividual notes from w o r ks h o p # 3
140 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                  CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Existing Conditions
History & Development Patterns
The City Center includes much of the area where Palm Desert began back in the 1940s. The
historic city center has a traditional urban structure of interconnected streets, buildings that
face and are accessed from the street, on-street parking and parking located within the centers
of the blocks.
Historic development began along the north side of Highway 111 in the 1940s and 1950s, and
shifted south toward El Paseo during the 1960s and 1970s, and west of Monterey toward the
Westfield shopping mall.
Building Character
The existing character of the City Center Area can typically be divided into two types of places:
west of Monterey Avenue, where the existing development pattern is automobile-oriented
with very large blocks, no on-street parking, and the primary buildings are separated from
the street by large surface parking lots, and east of Monterey Avenue, where development
includes smaller blocks, more connecting streets, buildings located close to and facing the
street, and many streets with on-street parking for convenient customer and visitor access.
East of Monterey Avenue, 111 is dominated by small footprint retail, restaurant, and office
buildings that typically face and are accessed from frontage roads. Most buildings are located
at or near the front property line and provide a pedestrian-friendly face with street-facing
windows, shopfronts, and entries. Many buildings also have entrances at the rear of the
building, providing access to rear parking lots.
City Center A rea Plan b o u n d a r y
                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN | 141
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                          Street Network & Mobility
                                          The City Center Area contains a variety of streets, each of which plays a different role in
                                          the street circulation network. Within the City Center Area, there are primary arterials
                                          (Hwy 111, Hwy 74, Fred Waring Dr, El Paseo, Monterey Ave, San Pablo Ave, Portola Ave,
                                          Deep Canyon Rd), and a series of collector/neighborhood streets, non-through streets,
                                          private drives, and service alleys.
                                          Existing bicycle facilities within and providing access to the City Center are comprised
                                          primarily of Class II Bike Routes – where the bike (and golf cart) lane is striped within the
                                          paved area of the roadway – and Class III Bike routes – where bikes share the curbside
                                          vehicular travel lane with motor vehicles.
                                          Sunline Transit is the main bus transit service provider in Palm Desert and serves the
                                          City Center Area with five different transit routes: Line 32 provides north-south service
                                          between 111 and Palm Springs through Palm Desert along Monterey Avenue and Bob
                                          Hope Drive; Line 53 provides service along much of 111 to areas north via Cook Street
                                          and Portola Avenue; Line 54 provides east-west service between Palm Desert and Indio
                                          along Fred Waring Drive; Line 111 provides east-west service along One Eleven between
                                          Downtown Palm Springs and Indio; and Commuter Link 220 provides commuter service
                                          between Palm Desert and Riverside.
                                          Property Ownership
                                          Most of the parcels within the Plan Area are privately owned, although there are a few
                                          City-owned parcels (on Portola Avenue, Shadow Mountain Drive, Town Center Way, and
                                          Monterey Avenue). The City owns the site where the Palm Springs Art Museum in Palm
E xisting S an Pablo fr o nta g e r o a d Desert is located. There are also a number of vacant parcels scattered throughout and
                                          near the Plan Area, a few of which are also owned by the City.
                                          Parking
                                          Parking is provided both in surface parking lots and on the street. West of Monterey
                                          Avenue, large surface lots are located between the principal buildings and the street.
                                          East of Monterey Avenue, parking lots are mostly located at the center of the block,
                                          in President’s Plaza, which results in the more pedestrian-and bicycle-friendly streets
                                          that are needed for a successful downtown environment. West of Monterey Avenue,
                                          on-street parking is absent. East of Monterey Avenue, on-street parking is provided
                                          along frontage roads, along both sides of El Paseo, as well as along some of the smaller
                                          streets. Most parking lots are privately owned, although about half of the parking spaces
                                          between 111 and El Paseo are City-owned, public parking lots, or have a public parking
                                          easements.
E xisting H ighway 111 f r o nta g e
ro ad
142 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                      CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Vision
This section provides a long-term vision for land use and development in the City Center
Area of Palm Desert over the next 20 to 30 years. This section articulates the vision for
the City Center area and identifies the key concepts needed to transform the City Center
and achieve the vision.
Area Vision
The City Center is the economic and cultural activity center of the city and the Coachella
Valley. It is intended to be the most intensely developed area of Palm Desert. The area is
anchored by City Hall, the College of the Desert campus, and the shopping district of El
Paseo. The City Center is oriented around a formal arrangement of streets that respects
the original pattern of Palm Desert organized around a multi-way boulevard. This area
of the City will be comprised of a variety of uses, including retail, institutional, public,
                                                                                             Pr es i d ent ’s Pl a za p a r ki n g
tourist accommodations, office, and residential. The future City Center will exhibit
town-scale buildings and development patterns: taller buildings at key intersections
and gateways, compact development, a lively street scape, a pedestrian orientation,
and strong neighborhood connectivity. Key strategies for this transformation will center
around:
Access Improvements: These will simplify automobile access and improve
circulation, moderate traffic to speeds that are more consistent with a comfortable City
Center environment, and greatly improve pedestrian and bicyclist safety and comfort.
Landscape and Urban Design Improvements: New landscaping, street
furnishing, wayfinding and public art will transform streetscapes and public open spaces
of the City Center into a place of unique and unrivaled comfort and beauty.
Parking Improvements: Parking improvements will organize and improve public
parking facilities – including on-street parking, shared parking lots, and future parking
structures – as a managed system that ensures adequate and efficiently utilized parking
as the City Center evolves, diversifies and intensifies over time. Management strategies,
such as time limits on parking, will be employed when they can defer need for capital
investment or cost effectively increse parking efficiency.
                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN | 143

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                          The City Center will be a walkable, mixed-use,
                          amenity-rich place that serves the retail, civic,
                          recreational, and entertainment needs of
                          Palm Desert and the Coachella Valley region.
144 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                  CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Figure 10.1 City Center Design Framework
                                                                                                           0.5 mi.
                                         (See pg. 150 fo r Gatew ay Designs.) 0’ 1000’          2000’
                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN UPDATE | 145

This page is intentio nally left blank
                                                                                                         CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Design Objectives
Access
Primary access to the City Center area is provided by Highway 111. In its current form, it
encourages driving speeds that are higher than recommended for a pedestrian-oriented
City Center environment. Secondly, the pattern of access in and out of the frontage
roads lining 111 is confusing and inconvenient. Finally, pedestrian and bicycle facilities
are inadequate for a mixed-use City Center that aspires to be world class. Key strategies
for correcting these deficiencies include:
A. Improving the pedestrian environment:
Every element of the proposed public improvements are intended to make it safer and
more comfortable for people of all ages and abilities to inhabit the public spaces of the
City Center. Key elements of this improvement include:
  1.	 Wider sidewalks, most buffered from moving traffic by curbside parking, street
       trees, and other street furnishings, and shaded by trees and buildings
  2.	 Wider and better marked crosswalks;
  3.	 Shorter walking routes, facilitated by new pases through the existing very large
       blocks; and
  4.	 Allowing the construction of buildings up to 3, 4 and 5 stories in key locations, as
       defined in the new zoning regulations.
B. Making access safer for all users: Access from 111 to the frontage
roads will be reoriented to provide direct entry and exit from 111 in the manner of a
traditional boulevard, as described on pgs. 154 and 155.
                                                                                             Pr i or i t i ze a l ter n a t i ve t r a nspo rtatio n
C. Improving bicycle access: A safer and more comfortable bicycling                          m od es t h r ou g h ou t t h e ci ty
environment will be provided through the following strategies:
  1.	 Providing new buffered Class II or Class IV protected bike lanes on 111;
  2.	 Introducing new Class II bike lanes on other streets; and,
  3.	 Reducing vehicular speeds on other streets to allow bicycle traffic to safely mix
       with vehicular traffic.
D. Moderate Vehicle Speeds: Wide streets and wide travel lanes invariably
increase vehicular speeds. Wide streets that are flanked by low buildings and are absent
of strong vertical elements, such as dense rows of street trees, lack the spatial definition
and sense of enclosure that not only tempers driving speeds, but also creates a sense of
place. Strategies for addressing these issues include:
  1.	 Re-striping 111 to provide the same number of travel lanes at reduced widths
       and adding buffered bike lanes and reconfigured parking in the resulting excess
       pavement adjacent to the curb;                                                        Exa m p l e of s h a r ed a ccess
  2.	 Managing traffic congestion and speeds with synchronized traffic signals so vehi-
       cles driving at the posted speed can efficiently pass from one green light to the
       next;
  3.	 Planting new double rows of palm trees on both sides of 111 and in the median,
       as described on pgs. 154-177.
                                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN | 147
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                                  Landscape and Urban Design Improvements
                                                  The streetscape improvements described on pgs. 154 and 155 integrate the envisioned
                                                  access improvements with a range of improvements to the spatial definition, aesthetic
                                                  appearance, and pedestrian comfort of the City Center’s public realm, including:
                                                     1.	 Frontage Roads. Introducing new streetscape along the building side of the front-
                                                          age roads;
                                                     2.	 San Pablo and other cross streets; and
                                                     3.	 Gateways
                                                  These improvements will enhance the economic value of City Center businesses,
                                                  offering increased pedestrian-oriented development, public safety, and passive
                                                  gathering and open spaces throughout the corridor.
                                                  Parking Improvements
                                                  Managing Parking as a District-wide Resource	
                                                  Within downtowns, parking can make or break both the economics of new develop-
                                                  ment, as well as create a town center feel. Managing the parking within the City Center
                                                  as a single, cohesive system can enable quality development and further enable the
                                                  achievement of the City’s vision of a people-oriented City Center. In part, new quality
                                                  development can be better facilitated by shared parking structures because the per-
                                                  space costs are typically lower than individual, site specific parking structures. If new
                                                  projects have the option of utilizing the shared district parking supply, a true City Center
                                                  development pattern – rather than a patchwork of buildings and parking lots – can be
                                                  achieved. Strategies for achieving a district-wide parking system include:
                                                     1.	 Adopting and maintaining a district-wide plan for expanding the parking supply in
                                                          an orderly fashion prior to major new development occurring;
                                                     2.	 Implementing a shared parking strategy that allows new private development to
                                                          take advantage of offsite parking facilities;
E xa mp le of a new dow ntow n p a r k i n g         3.	 Constructing new parking structures as catalytic investments;
stru cture for t he 111 a r ea                       4.	 Maintaining the Presidents’ Plaza parking areas, as well as organized, clean, safe
                                                          and comfortable facilities to attract new investment along 111; and
                                                     5.	 Operating the parking supply like a public utility, where supply is managed, so
                                                          that premium spaces are turned over more quickly and available for customers.
Figure 10.2 Parking Integrated with Future Development (Conceputal Plan Only)
              Structure 1               Structure 2                                                     Presidents Parking Lot
                                                                                 Structure 3                  (maintained)
           Residential          Residential over Retail
           Retail               Parking
     (For Conceptual Purposes only.)
For mo re details on p a r k i n g sy stem s , s ee Cent r alize d Park ing St rate gy , p g . 1 9 0 .
148 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                             CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Corridor Plan Overview & Scope
Project Scope & Focus Areas
The primary focus area is approximately 1-mile of the 111 corridor that traverses the
center of Palm Desert. The corridor is bordered by Portola Avenue on the east and
Highway 74 on the west, and it is crossed by seven north-south streets (listed east
to west): Portola Avenue, San Luis Rey Avenue, Larkspur Lane, San Pablo Avenue,
Las Palmas Avenue, Lupine Lane, Sage Lane, San Marcos Avenue, and Highway 74.
The intersections of these streets with 111 will be important locations to implement
new urban design standards as they span the length of the 111 corridor. They will be
primary nodes for vehicular traffic, parking, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, retail and
commercial uses, opportunities for future development, and open spaces. In addition,
numerous frontage roads run parallel with 111, serving existing retail and commercial
found along 111 itself and El Paseo, a major high-end shopping district one block to the
south.
A second focus area is along San Pablo Avenue, extending north from El Paseo. San
Pablo Avenue presents many opportunities related to streetscape renovations and
traffic calming that will bolster connections to the larger community and Civic Center.
In particular, San Pablo Avenue will feature a future roundabout at its intersections
with San Gorgonio Way. This will allow the City and future developers to introduce and
incorporate active and passive open spaces such as the existing community gardens and
other public frontages.
A third focus area lies within San Alessandro Drive, one block north of 111. Currently,
San Alessandro has a number of vacant lots that will be linked and transformed into a
“Woonerf” District, a walkable flexible-use arts district pioneered to integrate live-work
developments with the surrounding community and bolster cultural institutions and
businesses.
                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN | 149

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                          Implementation Overview
                          Implementing the Plan
                          Transforming the City Center will be achieved as follows:
                          1. I I I Frontage Road Median Improvements the entry points providing access
                            to the frontage roads are relocated from the side streets to 111. In addition,
                            the Class I cycle tracks and landscape - including palm trees within the
                            median between 111 and the frontage roads - are introduced.
                            •	 Depending on funding, this project can occur along the entire length of 111
                                within the City Center or only along certain blocks. If only certain blocks are
                                improved, the first blocks to be improved should be those at and near the
                                intersection of 111 and San Pablo Avenue.
                            •	  In addition, if funding is available, the 111 re-striping, center median landscape,
                                new frontage road access points, cycle track, and landscaping and trees between
                                the cycle track and the frontage road could all be introduced all at once, either
                                block by block or for the entire length within the City Center.
                          2. Intersection landscaping			
                            •	 Intersection landscaping can be introduced as a standalone project or along with
                                the 111 Frontage Road Median Improvements (#2) or the Gateway Monument
                                Signage (#6).
                          3. Frontage Road Improvements
                          Frontage road improvements consist of two portions: Reconfiguration of the
                          frontage road pavement area, including reconfiguring the parking orientation, narrowing
                          the travel lanes to make room for wider sidewalks, and introducing street trees between
                          parking spaces. Improving streetscape along the sidewalks next to frontage road
                          facing buildings. These improvements can occur concurrently or separately. These
                          improvements could happen block by block as each block redevelops incrementally over
                          time.
                          4. Traffic Signal Synchronization
                            •	 Concurrent with the re-striping project, traffic signals should be re-synchronized
                                at the very least for the length of 111 within the City Center, but ideally along
                                the entire length of 111 within the City. Like the 111 re-striping, this can also
                                be phased over time: first the length of 111 within the City Center; then, the
                                segments between the City Center and the City’s boundaries.
                          5. I I I Lane Striping and Median Landscape and Class II Buffered Bike Lane
                            •	 First, 111 is re-striped with 10-foot wide lanes and new landscaping is introduced
                                in the center median. In addition, Class II buffered bicycle lanes demarcated
                                by paint are introduced on both sides of 111 - bicycle lanes may be converted
                                to Class IV cycle tracks as detailed below in the 111 Frontage Road Median
                                Improvements (#2).
                          •	 Depending on funding, this project can occur along the entire length of 111 within
                                the City Center or only along select blocks. If only select blocks are improved, the
                                first blocks to be improved should be those at and near the intersection of 111 and
                                San Pablo Avenue.
                          6. Gateway Monuments Signage		                            	
                            •	 Gateway monuments can be introduced as a standalone project or along with
                                other projects such as the 111 Lane Striping (#1), 111 Frontage Road median
                                improvements (#2), or the Intersection landscaping (#5), or mid-block Crossings
                                (#7).
150 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                              CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Figure 10.3 Corridor Framework & Key Nodes
                                                                        .25 mi.
                                           0’    600’             1200’
                                                   GENERAL PLAN UPDATE | 151

This page is intentio nally left blank
                                                                                             CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
7. Mid-Block Crossings	 			
 •	 Mid-Block Crossings can be introduced as a standalone project or along with
    other projects such as the 111 Lane Striping (#1), 111/Frontage Road median
    improvements (#2), the Intersection landscaping (#4), or the Gateway Monument
    Signage.
Phasing from the Center
  1.	 111’s transformation starts at the intersection of 111 and San Pablo Avenue and
      then over time expands eastward and westward along 111 and northward along
      San Pablo Avenue.
  2.	 The frontage roads are transformed and reconfigured with reconfigured parking
      and street streets –starting at and near the intersection of 111 and San Pablo
      – and expanding outwards from there. Other projects – such as gateway mon-
      uments and signage, crosswalks, and gateway landscape – are introduced over
      time and once Palm Desert’s City Center is established.
  3.	 Finally, 111 is re-striped with narrower lanes and a Class II buffered bike lane and
      new landscaping, including stately rows of palm trees, is introduced in the center
      median. Then, the median between 111 and the frontage roads is reconfigured
      and renovated with new frontage road access from 111 rather than from the side
      streets, a new Class I cycle track separated from 111 by landscaping, and new
      landscaping, including rows of palm trees.
Implementing the Design Standards
The standards and alternatives herein are intended to provide the City, civil engineers,
developers, architects and other design-related professionals with a clear vision and
quantifiable standards to implement all new projects within the Palm Desert 111
Corridor. All design standards contained in the Manual are collectively prioritized for
phasing according to their location and general aesthetic importance, influence over
future economic development opportunities, vehicular-bicycle-pedestrian circulation,
public safety, and ease of implementation.
All proposed designs and/or modifications to the Implementation Manual, including
improvements to issues of access, landscape and urban design, and parking should be
followed whenever possible and must meet the baseline standards of the Palm Desert
Municipal Code and the approval of City staff and engineering.
Fi g u re 10. 4 Ph as in g D iag ram
                                               San Pablo
                             Hwy-111         Priority       Hwy-111
                                              Area
                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN | 153

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                          Streetscape & Public Realm Overview
                          111 Corridor
                          Proposed in the 1930s amid growth along the Southern Pacific Railroad, Highway 111
                          extends 130.2 miles to serve as a regional connector for many desert communities,
                          including Palm Springs, Cathedral City, Rancho Mirage, Palm Desert, Indian Wells, and
                          Indio.
                          Today, 111 is the first visual impression of Palm Desert for many people arriving in or
                          passing through the city. A central goal of the 111 Corridor Plan is to systematically
                          evolve the physical design and functional characteristics of 111 from an early 20th
                          Century desert highway to a 21st Century City Center Boulevard. The transformed
                          111 Corridor will provide an aesthetically cohesive, practically connected, safe and
                          welcoming city center that emphasizes pedestrian activity and community life, balanced
                          with and not dominated by high-speed automobile traffic. The 111 Corridor will become
                          the city’s primary gateway as an iconic arrival point and a major hub for civic and
                          commercial life and future developments in the Coachella Valley. In addition to 111
                          itself, the Corridor is supported by the following key districts and streetscape categories:
                          Downtown District: Most properties within the Plan Area - see exbihit to right -
                          are zoned Downtown District, enabling mixed-use development fronting 111, El Paseo,
                          and cross sreets. The center blocks near San Pablo Street - and at some other cross
                          street nodes - are designate for more intense development with a Downtown Core Over-
                          lay, and prioritized for early phases of 111 improvements to catalyze change. Certain
                          areas along the north edge of the Plan are designated as Downtown Edge, to provide for
                          appropriate scale transitions to adjoining single-family neighborhoods. Refer to the City
                          Center Zoning Standards for more information.
                          111 Boulevard Improvements: As presented in some detail on the following
                          pages, frontage roads of various designs currently line the north and south frontages of
                          111, and improvements are intended to improve vehicular circulation and pedestrian
                          and bicyclist comfort and safety, and transform the design character of the street to
                          that of an important downtown boulevard. A series of future "side access lane" config-
                          urations and designs is presented, as models for the evolution of the existing frontage
                          roads. A table is provided, recommending which side access lane configurations should
                          be applied to , to which the existing along with a table recommending which future con-
                          figurations are best targeted to each the several existing conditions.
                          Note that in the same way that the mixed-use zoning allows flexiblity in the location of
                          ground floor commercial and residential uses, the side access lane types offer some op-
                          tions best suited to ground floor retail and restaurant frontages and some more suitable
                          for residential use. The City will coordinate with property owners and developers on a
                          block by block basis to determine which side access lane configuration will be applied.
                          San Pablo Avenue: San Pablo Avenue is the primary linkage between the 111
                          corridor, the City Center, and Palm Desert’s Civic Center to the north. Considering its
                          wide rights-of-way, surrounding commercial and residential uses, and public frontages
                          that include community gardens, significant opportunities exist to transform San Pablo
                          Avenue into a prime area for future public and private development.
                          Three future street types are defined: One for the Downtown Core area from 111 to San
                          Gorgonia, one for the neighborhood edge area from San Gorgonio to Fred Waring, and
                          one for the civic district north of Fred Waring.
154 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                              CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Fi g u re 10.5 M aj or St reet s c ap es & Pu b l i c Fro nt a ge s
                                                                                  .25 mi.
                                                                    0’ 600’ 1200’
                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN UPDATE | 155

This page is intentio nally left blank
Th i s p a g e i s i ntent i on a l l y l eft b l a n k
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Futu re 111 wi t h Cl as s II Bic yc l e Fa c i l i t i e s (Al t. # 1 )
                 D      E F          C                                D                C                  F     E       D
                                                              A
                                Highway 111
                                Existing Conditions
                                The Palm Desert City Center segment of 111 is approximately one mile in length and
                                consists of three vehicular lanes in each direction separated by a planted, center
                                median. It has an average curb-to-curb width of 100 feet and multiple turn pockets at
                                key intersections. There is little shading from sparsely planted palm trees, and there are
                                currently no pedestrian or bicycle facilities for the majority of the corridor. This segment
                                of 111 is a regulated 45-mph zone; however, given the travel lane widths range from 12
                                to 15 feet, higher speeds are likely.
                                Strategy for Change
                                111 will remain the primary corridor traveling through Palm Desert. As such, the existing
                                curb-to-curb width of 111 will continue to provide six travel lanes; however, travel
                                lane widths will be reduced to a standard 10-feet in order to moderate current traffic
                                speeds and provide the required width for new bicycle lanes, medians, and improved
                                landscaping along both sides and the center median of 111. Side access lane entrances
                                and exits will connect directly to 111, greatly simplifying the cross street intersections
                                with 111.
158 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                                                           CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Futu re H ighway 111 w it h Cl as s I “Cyc l e Tra c k ” Fa c i l i t i e s (Al t. # 2 )
     D          E      F                      C                                           D                           C                      F       E   D
                                                                                A
  Table 10.1 - 111 Improvements
                                 Existing                Future
       Project                                                               Notes
                               Conditions            Development
                                                                             1) If only re-striping occurs for Class II bicycle lanes, no change;
  A    Curb-to-Curb              95-100’                 85-100’             2) If Class IV cycle track is installed, reduce curb-to-curb by
                                                                             approximately 10-feet (6’ Class I lane; 4’ buffered median)
  B    Public Frontage            None                 No change             Public frontage will be determined by Frontage Road designs.
                             6-lanes; 3 ea.
                                                  6-lanes; 3 ea. way
  C    Vehicular Lanes             way                                       Re-stripe all Highway 111 travel lanes .
                                                     (10-11’ lanes)
                            (12-15’ lanes)
                                   25’                                       Landscape existing 25-foot center medians the full length of 111 with a
                                                       No change
                          (center median)                                    double-row of palm trees.
  D    Medians                                                               Alternative 1) If only re-striping occurs for Class II bicycle lanes, plant
                                  5-18’                                      single-row of palms in Frontage Road median;
                                                        No change
                             (side median)                                   Alternative 2) If Cycletrack and landscaped buffers are added, plant a
                                                                             double-row of palm trees, one tree in side median and one in buffer.
                                                    6’ Class II Lanes        Bicycle facilities are to be completed in two phases:
       Bicycle Facilities
  E                               None                                          1.	 Class II lanes (separated by paint striping only)
       (2 phases)
                                                 6’ Class IV CycleTrack         2.	 Class IV “cycle track” (fully separated by median) 1
  F    Bicycle Buffer             None                      4’               May be striped or landscaped, depending on alternative.
                                                                             All medians to be fully landscaped with drought-toleratant native plants
   I   Landscaping            Palm/shrubs         Double-row Palms           and a double or single-row of palm trees, depending on phasing or
                                                                             financing.
                                                                             Lighting to match City Code and overall aesthetic appeal of the Palm
       Lighting                   None              Contemporary
                                                                             Desert City Center.
If re- striping, landsca p i n g o n ce nter a n d Fr o nta g e Roa d m ed i a n s , a n d r el oca ted fr onta g e r oa d ent r i es a r e
imp lem ented at t he s a m e ti m e, r a th e r t h a n i n p ha s es , t h e p a i nted C l a s s I I b i ke l a n e p h a s e wou l d b e s ki p ped.
                                                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN | 159

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
E xi sting Front ag e Road Typ e IA
                H         G                       C                            G                 D
                B                                 A
                             Frontage Roads- Type I
                             Existing Conditions
                             The Type 1A Frontage Road - Palm Desert Drive North between Las Palmas Avenue and
                             Monterey Avenue - currently has a 38-foot curb-to-curb width, with two (2) 12-foot
                             lanes (two-way traffic). The road has 7-foot parallel parking spaces on either side, with
                             an 8-foot sidewalk along the building frontages. Landscaped medians (ranging 5-18 feet)
                             separate the frontage road from Highway 111. Standard pole-and-arm street lights are
                             present along the building frontages, approximately every 150 feet.
                             Ty p e I Fr o nta g e Roa d
160 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                   CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
E xi stin g Front ag e Road Typ e II
           H                   C                                     G                           D
           B                                      A
                              Frontage Roads-Type II
                              Existing Conditions
                              The Type II Frontage Roads are the most prevalent type along the 111 corridor. They
                              occur on the north side of 111 between Portola Avenue and Larkspur Lane and between
                              Panorama Drive and Portola Avenue. Type II roads occur on the south side of 111
                              between Highway 74 and Lupine Lane, between Larkspur Lane and Portola Avenue, and
                              the eastern end of El Paseo. Along the north side of Highway 111, the Type II roads have
                              an average curb-to-curb width of between 35 and 40 feet, while along the south side
                              the average width is around 30 feet. Type II roads consist of a single one-way travel lane
                              with diagonal parking on the Highway 111 side of the road, separated from Highway 111
                              by an approximatively 10-foot wide landscaped median. Sidewalks vary in width from 7
                              to 15 feet. Standard pole-and-arm street lights are present along the building frontages,
                              approximately every 200 feet.
                              Ty p e I I Fr onta g e Roa d
                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN | 161
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
E xi sting Front ag e Road Typ e III
            H             G                                C                           G                      D
            B                                              A
                             Frontage Roads- Type III
                             Existing Conditions
                             The only Type III Frontage Road within the 111 corridor occurs on Palm Desert Drive,
                             North between San Carlos Avenue and Las Palmas Avenue, connecting through San
                             Pablo Avenue.
                             The Type III Frontage Road has a curb-to-curb width of 56 feet and consists of a 22
                             foot wide drive aisle flanked by diagonal on both sides. A sidewalk lines the building
                             edge and varies in width from 7 to 15 feet. A landscaped berm, varying widths from
                             10 to 16 feet, separates the frontage roads from Highway 111. Standard pole-and-arm
                             street lights, spaced approximately 200 to 300 feet apart, are present along the building
                             frontages.
                             Ty p e I I I Fr onta g e Roa d
162 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Strategy for Change
Depending on the existing curb-to-curb width, the types and intensities of adjacent uses, and the
underlying zoning, the various frontage roads can be transformed to side access lanes, as shown in
below Table 10.2 and as illustrated on the pgs. 164 - 168.
The Type I frontage roads are converted from a two-lane, two-way road to a single one-way side
access lane, with the building side of the road treated in one of two alternative ways. Alternative A
retains the existing curbs, keeps the parallel parking on the building side, and converts the parallel
parking on the Highway 111 side to 45 degree diagonal parking. Street trees are introduced between
every four diagonal parking spaces and between every two parallel parking spaces. Alternative
B reduces the curb-to-curb width to provide wider sidewalks, providing diagonal parking just on
the Highway 111 side with new street trees as in Alternative A. The new, wider sidewalks will
accommodate street trees, street furniture and pedestrian-scaled light fixtures.
The Type II frontage roads retain their one-lane, one-way configuration as well as the angled
parking on the Highway 111 side of the road. Roadways with 38 - 40 ft. curb-to-curb widths can be
transformed in the same manner as the Type I road described above (introducing parallel parking
along the building side or widening the sidewalk). The configuration of roadways with 35 - 38 ft.
curb to curb widths are recommended to be kept as is, with diagonal parking along the Highway
111 side only, but potentially at 60 degrees to increase parking counts. Or, parallel parking along
the building side could be introduced if the angle of the diagonal parking is very shallow, perhaps 30
degrees. Roadways with 30-32 ft. curb to curb dimensions keep their existing configuration, with 45
degree diagonal parking along Highway the 111 side only.
Per Alternative C, Type I and Type II frontage roads - with existing or future curb to curb widths of 30
to 32 feet - can be configured for a single, one-way lane with parallel parking along both sides. This
would be most suitable for blocks with significant amounts of ground floor residential frontages.
The Type III frontage roads are transformed to Alternative D side access lanes, retaining their current
configuration of one-way traffic with diagonal parking along both sides. The curb to curb width is
reduced to slow traffic and to accommodate a wider sidewalks and double-row of street trees along
building frontages. The wider sidewalks will accommodate, pedestrian-scaled light standards, street
furniture and bicycle racks. Palm trees are introduced between every fourth diagonal parking space.
In all these alternatives, the on-street parking stalls will count towards the required off-street parking
requirements for development that occurs on the adjacent parcels.
 Table 10.2 - Frontage Road Improvement Alternatives
                                                                        Future Side Access Lane Alternative
       Existing       Curb-to-Curb           Alternative A             Alternative B        Alternative C (Parallel     Alternative D
  Frontage Road           Width          (Angled Parking One      (Angled One Side Only)         Both Sides)        (Angled Both Sides)
        Type                             Side / Parallel Other)
                                                                                          Yes, with widened
 Type I                 38 - 40 ft.               Yes                       Yes
                                                                                          sidewalk
                                                                                          Yes, with widened
 Type II                38 - 40 ft.               Yes                       Yes
                                                                                          sidewalk
                                                                                          Yes, with widened
 Type II                35 - 38 ft.     Yes, but not preferred              Yes
                                                                                          sidewalk
                                                                                          Yes, with widened
 Type II                30 - 32 ft.                                         Yes
                                                                                          sidewalk
 Type III               50 - 56 ft.                                                                                          Yes
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN | 163
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Si d e Acces s L an e Al ter n at ive A
                                                   H                             C                           G                        D
                                                   B                                           A
 Table 10.3 - Alternative A Side Access Lane Improvements
                                                              Future
                          Existing Conditions                              Notes
                                                          Development
                                                                           Maintain or reduce to allow one travel lane, wide sidewalk, and
  A Curb-to-Curb                 30-40'                       30’-40'
                                                                           diagonal parking
                                                                           Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
  B Public Frontage                  8’                        8-16’
                                                                           regular intervals
                                 2 lanes                       1 lane
  C Vehicular Lanes                                                        Reduce to (1) one-way travel lane, no more than12-feet wide
                               (two-way)                    (one-way)
  D Median                   9-14’ Median                   No Change      Maintain existing width with added landscaping on 111
  E    Bicycle Facilities         None                     Bicycle Racks   Bicycle racks to be added at regular intervals on sidewalk
                           Diagonal (1 side)
  G Parking Facilities                                   Diagonal (1 side) Diagonal parking and tree breaks to be added adjacent to Highway-111
                          or Parallel (2 sides)
  H Sidewalk                         8’                        8-16’       Widened sidewalks for pedestrian safety, comfort, and aesthetics
                                                                           1) Street trees added to sidewalk approximately every 40 feet;
                                                       Parking Tree Wells
  I    Landscaping                None                                     2) Palm trees added in between diagonal parking (G) to create double-
                                                       and Sidewalk Trees
                                                                           row of palm trees with Highway 111 median trees (D)2
       Lighting           Std. Pole-and-arm               Contemporary     Decorative light poles/fixtures added
Pa lm t rees added to d i a g o n a l p a r k i n g ( G ) m a y b e
phased to occ ur afte r 1 1 1 Fr o nta g e Ro a d m e d i a n t r ees
(D ) a re added.
164 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Si d e Acces s L an e Al ter n at ive B
            H              G                                  C                           G                       D
            B                                                               A
 Table 10.4 - Alternative B Side Access Lane Improvements
                                                              Future
                          Existing Conditions                                Notes
                                                          Development
  A   Curb-to-Curb                35-40'                    No change        Maintain existing curb-to-curb widths
                                                                             Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
  B   Public Frontage                8’                     No change
                                                                             regular intervals
                                 2 lanes                       1 lane
  C   Vehicular Lanes                                                        Reduce to (1) one-way travel lane,10-feet wide
                               (two-way)                    (one-way)
  D   Median                 9-14’ Median                   No change        Maintain existing width with added landscaping on 111
  E   Bicycle Facilities           None                    Bicycle Racks     Bicycle racks to be added at regular intervals on sidewalk
                           Diagonal (1 side)                                 1) Add diagonal parking and tree breaks next to111;
 G    Parking Facilities                                Diagonal / Parallel
                          or Parallel (2 sides)                              2) Add parallel parking and tree wells along building frontages
  H   Sidewalk                       8’                     No change        Sidewalk widths will be maintained
                                                                             1) Street trees added to sidewalk approximately every 40 feet;
                                                        Parking Tree Wells
  I   Landscaping                  None                                      2) Palm trees added in between diagonal parking (G) to create double-
                                                       and Sidewalk Trees
                                                                             row of palm trees with Highway 111 median trees (D) 3
      Lighting            Std. Pole-and-arm               Contemporary       Decorative light poles/fixtures added
Pa lm t rees added to d i a g o n a l p a r k i n g ( G ) m a y
be p hased to occ ur a f ter 1 1 1 Fr o nta g e Ro a d
med ian t rees (D ) are a d d e d .
                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN | 165

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Si d e Access L an e - Al ter n at ive C
 Private D evelo p m e nt & F ro nta ge       H            I       G                 C                G              D
                                                   B                                 A
 Table 10.5 - Alternative C Side Access Lane Improvements
                                                      Future
                          Existing Conditions                      Notes
                                                   Development
                                                                   Reduce to allow for two rows of parallel parking, expanded sidewalks,
  A   Curb-to-Curb              30' - 40’               30’
                                                                   and extended public frontages
                                                                   Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
  B   Public Frontage             6-8'                 8-17’
                                                                   regular intervals
                           2 lanes (two-way)
  C   Vehicular Lanes       or 1 lane (one-      1 lane (one-way)  Reduce to 12-feet wide, maintain one-way
                                  way)
  D   Median/Berm                8-14’               No change     Maintain existing width with added landscaping on 111
  E   Bicycle Facilities         None              Bicycle Racks   Bicycle racks to be added at regular intervals on sidewalk
                                                                   Two rows of parallel will be added on both sides of the new travel
                           Diagonal (1 side)        Two rows of
  G   Parking Facilities                                           lane. Tree wells will be incorporated every three spaces (or as
                          or Parallel (2 sides)   Parallel Parking
                                                                   determined by the City engineer).
  H   Sidewalk                    6-8’                  18’        Widened sidewalks for pedestrian safety and aesthetics
                                                                   1) Street trees added to sidewalk at adequate intervals;
                                                                   2) Palm trees added to tree wells in between parallel parking (G) on
                              Landscaped        Parking Tree Wells
  I   Landscaping                                                  along building frontages;
                                median          and Sidewalk Trees
                                                                   3) Street trees added to tree wells in between parallel parking (G) on
                                                                   along Highway 111 side.
      Lighting            Std. Pole-and-arm       Contemporary     Decorative light poles/fixtures
166 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                             CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Si d e Access L an e - Al ter n at ive D
                    H                                  G                            C                             G                       D
                    B                                                               A
 Table 10.6 - Alternative D Side Access Lane Improvements
                                                              Future
                           Existing Conditions                            Notes
                                                         Development
  A    Curb-to-Curb                 56’                        50’        Reduce to allow for expanded sidewalks, and public frontages
                                                                          Street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at regular
  B    Public Frontage             7-15’                      20-23’
                                                                          intervals
  C    Vehicular Lanes        22’ (one-way)              18’ (one-way)    Reduce to 18-feet wide, maintain one-way
  D    Median                     10-16’                   No change      Maintain existing width with added landscaping on 111
  E    Bicycle Facilities          None                   Bicycle Racks   Bicycle racks to be added at regular intervals on sidewalk
  G    Parking Facilities        Diagonal                   Diagonal      Add diagonal parking with tree breaks to each side of travel lane
  H    Sidewalk                    7-15’                      14-20’      Widened sidewalks for pedestrian safety and aesthetics
                                                                          1) Street trees added to sidewalk approximately every 40 feet;
                                                                          2) Palm trees added in between diagonal parking (G) on side adjacent
                               Landscaped              Parking Tree Wells
   I   Landscaping                                                        to buildings
                                 median               and Sidewalk Trees
                                                                          3) Palm trees added in between diagonal parking (G) to create double-
                                                                          row of palm trees with 111 median trees (D) 4
       Lighting            Std. Pole-and-arm             Contemporary     Decorative light poles/fixtures
Palm t rees added to d i a g o n a l p a r k i n g ( G ) m a y
b e p hased to occ ur a f ter 1 1 1 Fr o nta g e Ro a d
median t rees (D ) are a d d e d .
                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN | 167

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
E xi sting S an Pab l o Aven ue - D ow ntown Co re
 H           G          E     C                     D             C             E             G                 H
 B                                                  A                                                           B
                               San Pablo Avenue - Downtown Core
                               Existing Conditions
                               Currently, this segment of San Pablo has a curb-to-curb width of 106 feet and includes:
                               4 vehicular travel lanes with turn pockets, a 6-foot Class II bicycle lane on each side, and
                               diagonal parking on each side. A 5-foot center median divides the north and south lanes.
                               Existing sidewalks range in width from 16 to 18 feet with one-story buildings on both
                               sides. Landscaping consists of single palm trees planted every 25 to 30 feet. There are no
                               street lights along this stretch of San Pablo Avenue.
                               Strategy for Change
                               In Alternative #1, San Pablo Avenue’s median is widened to approximately 20 feet to
                               serve as a passive open space with a double row of large street trees shading the space
                               below. Additional street trees are planted in new tree wells along new parallel parking
                               and reconfigured “back-in diagonal” spaces in order to slow traffic and create a truly
                               bicycle and pedestrian-oriented street.
                               Finally, San Pablo Avenue will be rezoned to allow for 3 and 4-story buildings overlooking
                               this new pedestrian street. All of these combined strategies will not only beautify the
                               Palm Desert, but they invite further investment and activity throughout the City Center.
                               Sa n Pa b l o Aven u e S ou t h
168 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                      CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Futu re S an Pab l o Aven ue - D ow ntown Co re | Al te r n at i ve # 1
    H                G          E         C      G            D            G           C         E          G                  H
    B                                                         A                                                                B
 Table 10.7 - San Pablo Avenue - Downtown Core - Alternative #1 Improvements
                                                  Future
                        Existing Conditions                     Notes
                                               Development
 A   Curb-to-Curb             106-108’          No change       Maintain existing curb-to-curb widths
                                                                Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
 B   Public Frontage           16-18’           No change
                                                                regular intervals
                                                                Reduce to two 10-foot travel lanes to allow for widened median and
 C   Vehicular Lanes    4 lanes (two-way)   2 lanes (two-way)
                                                                added parallel parking
                                                                Widen central median with enhanced landscaping, shading, and the
 D   Median/Berm             5’ median        15-20’ median
                                                                opportunity to serve as passive open space
 E   Bicycle Facilities    Class II Lanes       No change       Maintain existing bicycle lanes and striping
                              Diagonal      Diagonal “Back-in” Diagonal stalls may be reoriented as back-in stalls to provide further
 G   Parking Facilities
                        (north/south side)   / Parallel Spaces safety for cyclists.
 H   Sidewalk                  16-18’           No change       Sidewalk widths will be maintained
                                               Parking Tree
                                                                1) Large palms will line the sidewalk
                                              Wells, Median
                             Single-row                         2) Smaller street trees in in-street tree wells between every third
  I  Landscaping                                  Trees,
                            Palm Trees                          diagonal parking space;
                                               and Sidewalk
                                                                3) Double-row of street trees added to landscaped median
                                                   Trees
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN | 169

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Futu re S an Pab l o Aven ue - D ow ntown Co re | Al te r n at i ve # 2 A
     H         G     E    C G                    D                   G         C         E       G             H
     B                                           A                                                             B
                              San Pablo Avenue - Downtown Core
                              Strategy for Change (#2A)
                              Expanding from Alternative 1 above, Alternative 2A reorients diagonal parking to be
                              parallel parking on both sides of San Pablo Ave. In turn, this will allow for a wider
                              median that can function as an active public open space. This new open space will be
                              wide enough for the City to consider adding recreational facilities, such as a gazebo or a
                              pavilion and/or public use programming to the center median, while achieving slower
                              vehicular traffic and intensified developments on both sides of San Pablo.
                              Strategy for Change (#2B)
                              Alternative 2B retains many of the aforementioned improvements with the
                              reconfiguration of bicycle lanes to have a striped buffer from vehicular traffic.
                              Sa n Pa b l o Aven u e S ou t h
170 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Futu re S an Pab l o Aven ue - D ow ntown Co re | Al te r n at i ve # 2 B
    H         E        G         C         G                D                   G           C          G        E           H
    B                                                       A                                                               B
 Table 10.8 - San Pablo Avenue - Downtown Core - Alternative #2 Improvements
                         Existing Conditions     Alt #2A        Alt #2B    Notes
 A   Curb-to-Curb              106-108’        No change      No Change    Maintain existing curb-to-curb widths
                                                                           Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and
 B   Public Frontage            16-18’           15-20’         15-20’
                                                                           shading at regular intervals
                                                 2 lanes        2 lanes    Reduce to two 10-foot travel lanes to allow for widened
 C   Vehicular Lanes     4 lanes (two-way)
                                               (two-way)      (two-way)    median and added parallel parking
                                                                           Widen central median with enhanced landscaping,
 D   Median/Berm                   5’            30-40’         30-40’     shading, and the opportunity to serve as active open
                                                                           space.
                                                             Class I Lanes 2A) Maintain existing bicycle lanes and striping
 E   Bicycle Facilities     Class II Lanes   Class II Lanes
                                                              Cycle Track  2B) Reconfigure bicycle lanes next to sidewalk with buffer
                                                                           2A) None
 F   Bicycle Buffer              None             None            2-4’
                                                                           2B) May be striping or landscape buffer
                               Diagonal          Parallel
 G   Parking Facilities                                            2A      Parallel stalls to replace existing diagonal parking
                               (2 sides)        (2 sides)
 H   Sidewalk                   16-18’         No change      No change    Sidewalk widths will be maintained
                                              Parking Tree                 1) Large palms will line the sidewalk
                                             Wells, Median                 2) Smaller street trees in in-street tree wells between
                             Single-row
  I  Landscaping                                  Trees,           2A      every third diagonal parking space;
                             Palm Trees
                                              and Sidewalk                 3) Double-row of street trees added to landscaped
                                                  Trees                    median
     Lighting                    None        Contemporary          2A      Decorative light poles/fixtures
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN | 171

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Exi sting S an Pab l o Aven ue - Nei gh b o rh o o d S o u t h
Communi ty Gardens       H E                        C                                  E       H            I
              B                                     A                                                    B
                             San Pablo Avenue - Neighborhood South
                             Existing Conditions
                             North of the City’s proposed roundabout at San Gorgonio Way, the existing San Pablo
                             Avenue is the central link between Palm Desert’s Civic Center and City Center. Various
                             residential communities line San Pablo at this point with some existing open space
                             features, including community gardens from Royal Palm Drive to Santa Rosa Way.
                             Despite this area being intended to be more residential, it hosts a 4-lane (two-way)
                             thoroughfair with a central turning lane. Landscaping and public amenities are sparse,
                             but this area presents numerous excellent opportunities.
San Pa blo Av enue No r th
                             Strategy for Change
                             The City’s improvement strategy includes combining the existing Class II bicycle lanes
                             into a bufferd Class I two-way cycle track adjacent to the community gardens. Vehicular
                             lanes will be consolidated into a two-lane throughway with 10-foot lanes. The existing
                             turning lane will be removed, allowing for parallel parking and tree wells to be installed
                             along the east side of San Pablo Ave. Public amenities upgrades will include public
                             structures that compliment the community gardens and transform the west side of the
                             street into a passive/active open space. Street trees will also line both sides of the street
                             and the median buffer to provide adequate shade for pedestrians and cyclists.
172 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                   CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Futu re S an Pab l o Aven ue - Neig h b o rh o o d S o u t h
Communi ty Gardens         H          I         E          F                   C                   G          H              I
              B                                                         A                                                B
 Table 10.9 - San Pablo Avenue - Neighborhood South Improvements
                                                 Future
                        Existing Conditions                  Notes
                                            Development
 A   Curb-to-Curb               62’               50’        Reduce curb-to-curb widths to allow for Class I bicycle lanes and buffer
                                                             Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
 B   Public Frontage           15-16’            20-25’
                                                             regular intervals
                        4 lanes (two-way);      2 lanes      Reduce to two 10-foot travel lanes to allow for widened median and
 C   Vehicular Lanes
                         Center Turn Lane     (two-way)      added parallel parking along one side
 D   Median/Berm               None                6’        Median will serve to buffer bicycles and pedestrians from traffic
                                                             1) Install two-way Class I cycle track next to sidewalk with buffer;
 E   Bicycle Facilities    Class II Lanes    Class I Lanes   2) Bicycle racks and other support facilities will be installed in regular
                                                             increments on both sides of the street
 F   Bicycle Buffer            None                6’        Median will serve as adequate buffer from traffic
                                                Parallel
 G   Parking Facilities        None                          Parallel stalls added on east side of street
                                                (1 side)
                                                             Sidewalk widths will be maintained and better incorporated into overall
 H   Sidewalk                   7-8’             15-20’
                                                             streetscape and public frontage features
                                                             1) Double-row of street trees span sidewalk and bicycle median buffer;
                            Occasional
  I  Landscaping                             Street Trees    2) Street tree wells provided between every 2-3 parallel parking stalls;
                             Palm Tree
                                                             3) Existing community gardens incoporated in overall streetscape
     Lighting                  None         Contemporary     Decorative light poles/fixtures
                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN | 173

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Exi sting S an Pab l o Aven ue - Civ i c Ce nte r
                                                   C                                    I       H              I
                                                   A                                                     B
                             San Pablo Avenue - Civic Center
                             Existing Conditions
                             North of Fred Warring Drive, San Pablo Avenue passes to the east of a golf driving
                             range and the College of the Desert campus and to the west of City Hall and Civic
                             Center Park, terminating at Magnesia Falls Drive. The vacant edge of the College of the
                             Desert campus offers an opportunity to introduce housing along the west side of San
                             Pablo Avenue. This portion of San Pablo Avenue is comprised of a 4-lane (two-way)
                             thoroughfair with a central turning lane.
                             Strategy for Change
                             The improvement strategy for this portion of San Pablo Drive includes consolidating
                             the vehicular lanes into a two-lane throughway with 10-foot lanes and introducing a
                             buffered Class I two-way cycle track adjacent to the driving range and the campus. The
                             existing turning lane will be removed, allowing for parallel parking and tree wells to be
                             installed along the west side of San Pablo Avenue and diagonal parking separated by
                             palm trees along the east side of the street. Street trees will also line both sides of the
                             street and the median buffer to provide adequate shade for pedestrians and cyclists.
S an Pa blo Av enue No r t h
174 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Futu re S an Pab l o Aven ue - Civ ic Ce nte r
                        H        I        E      F        G        C                 G             I       H            I
                            B                                A                                                  B
 Table 10.10 - San Pablo Avenue - Civic Center Improvements
                                                   Future
                          Existing Conditions                 Notes
                                              Development
 A   Curb-to-Curb                  76’               50’      Reduce curb-to-curb widths to allow for Class I bicycle lanes and buffer
                                                              Introduce street trees, furniture, decorative lighting, and shading at
 B   Public Frontage               20’             20-25’
                                                              regular intervals
                          4 lanes (two-way);       2 lanes    Reduce to two 10-foot travel lanes to allow for widened median and
 C   Vehicular Lanes
                           Center Turn Lane      (two-way)    added parallel parking along one side
 D   Median/Berm                  None                6’      Median will serve to buffer bicycles and pedestrians from traffic
                                                              1) Install two-way Class I cycle track next to sidewalk with buffer;
 E   Bicycle Facilities           None         Class I Lanes  2) Bicycle racks and other support facilities will be installed in regular
                                                              increments on both sides of the street
 F   Bicycle Buffer               None                6’      Median will serve as adequate buffer from traffic
                                                   Parallel
                                               (west side) /
 G   Parking Facilities           None                        Parallel stalls added on east side of street
                                              diagonal (east
                                                    side)
                                                              Sidewalk widths will be maintained and better incorporated into overall
 H   Sidewalk                      7-8’              7-8’
                                                              streetscape and public frontage features
                                                              1) Double-row of street trees span sidewalk and bicycle median buffer;
                              Occasional
  I  Landscaping                                Street Trees  2) Street tree wells provided between every 2-3 parallel parking stalls;
                               Palm Tree
                                                              3) Existing community gardens incoporated in overall streetscape
     Lighting                     None        Contemporary    Decorative light poles/fixtures
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN | 175

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
L a ne - with Re s id ent ial G roun d Fl o o r
                                                  I                    C                   H
                                                 B                     A                   B
                                 Lane
                                 Design Strategy
                                 Lanes are provided between parking lots or parking structures located at the center
                                 of the block and residential, commercial, or mixed-use development located at the
                                 perimeter of the block. Lanes are two lane, two-way roads that provide a pedestrian
                                 walk or sidewalk along the building side and landscaping along the parking lot/garage
                                 side. Buildings with commercial ground floors may be located right behind the walkway
                                 or sidewalk, whereas buildings with residential ground floors are setback behind
                                 landscaping. Frequent crosswalks provide pedestrian access between the garage and
                                 the buildings. Crosswalks are align with paseos that provide access between the parking
                                 located at the center of the block and the street.
176 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
L a ne - with Co mmerc ial G roun d Fl o o r
                                             I                      C                  H
                                            B                       A                  B
 Table 10.11 - San Pablo Avenue North Improvements
                              Future
                                          Notes
                           Development
 A   Curb-to-Curb               20’
 B   Public Frontage          5’ min.     Walk or sidewalk along building side; landscpaing along garage side.
 C   Vehicular Lanes    2 lanes (two-way) Two 10-foot travel lanes.
 E   Bicycle Facilities      Optional     Bike racks may be provided
 G   Parking Facilities        None
                                          Walk or sidewalk along building side. Walks located at street level
 H   Sidewalk                 5’ min.     should be paved with materials that are different color, texture, or
                                          materials than roadway.
  I  Landscaping              5' min.     Trees and drought-tolerant landscpaing.
     Lighting                  None       Lighting provided on building and or garage
                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN | 177

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                     Palm Desert Gateways
                                     Design Strategy
                                     The purpose of Gateways within the 111 Corridor planning area is to reinforce the
                                     experience of “entry/arrival” into changed and new environments, as one passes
                                     through the various “parts” of Palm Desert. The overarching goal of the 111 Corridor
                                     Plan is to convert the 111 Corridor into a “zipper” that supports, ties together, and
                                     establishes connectivity between the very successful El Paseo downtown core and south
                                     neighborhoods, and the San Pablo Neighborhood Center, Civic Center, neighborhoods
                                     and resorts, north of 111. The various types of gateways described in this section are
                                     intended to compliment the streetscape transformation described on pgs. 154-177, and
                                     generally define the extents or boundaries of each unique place/environment within the
                                     City Center “Core” of the 111 Corridor. While each gateway type has a unique function
                                     and design, each gateway is intended to contribute to a unified design experience/
                                     environment of the “Core” of the 111 Corridor.
                 Type A:	 	 Type B:	 	         Type C:	 	        Type D:
178 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                   CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Gateway Types
The following pages describe implementation guidelines for a
variety of “gateway types” within the 111 Corridor Planning Area.
They can generally be summarized into the following types, as
indicated below:
Type A. Corner Gateways at Major Cross-Streets:
In general, all major cross streets along 111 are marked by clusters
of palm trees that add verticality along 111 and create “pedestrian
oases” - areas of shade and refuge - marking crossing points along
111.
Type B. 111 City Center “Core” Gateways:
These gateways reinforce entry/arrival into the City Center “Core”
area of 111, and can double-function as new, specialized pedestrian  Typ e A C or n er G a tewa ys a t Ma jor C r os s S treets
crossings enhancing connectivity and circulation north and south of
111.
Type C. El Paseo Shopping District Gateways:
Special gateway signage on El Paseo - generally denoting the
eastern and western extents of the shopping district, in addition
to a gateway on San Pablo Ave, just south of (but visible from) 111
announcing entry into the El Paseo District.
                                                                     Typ e B C i t y C enter “C or e” G a tewa ys
Type D. San Pablo “Main Street” Gateways:
The southern portion of San Pablo Ave - generally from 111 to San
Gorgonio Way is being reconceived of as a neighborhood center
/ main street environment. As such, streetscape interventions -
a roundabout at San Gorgonio Way and a combination of palm
clusters and a new landscaped median, creates the north and south
gateways of this important neighborhood center.
                                                                     Typ e C “El Pa s eo S h op p i n g Di st r i ct ” G a tew ays
                                                                     Typ e D S a n Pa b l o “Ma i n S t r eet ” G a tewa ys
                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN | 179

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                              Gateway Type A - Corner Gateways at Major
                                              Cross Streets
                                              Design Strategy
                                              The figure on pg. 181 indicates the proposed locations of “Type A “gateways -- should
                                              be prioritized at all major cross-streets within the City Center “Core” area of the 111
                                              Corridor - the west and east-most cross-streets where these gateways are provided
                                              being HWY 74/Monterey Ave, and Cabrillo Ave/El Paseo respectively - though these
                                              gateways may be utilized at any significant crossing along the 111 Corridor within Palm
                                              Desert as funding permits.
                                              Relocating access to the 111 frontage roads from the cross streets to 111 provides the
                                              dual benefit of improved frontage road functionality, in addition to providing new corner
                                              “plazas” along 111 at most intersections. These plazas provide new opportunities for
                                              significant planting and gateway design, and their ultimate design should:
                                              A. Use vertical elements to identify all major crossings:
                                              Clusters of 6-9 Washingtonia Palm Trees are proposed at each corner of all major cross-
                                              streets along 111, spaced approximately 10-15’ on center in a geometric / grid pattern
                                              complimentary to the overall plaza design. Tree height should be a minimum of 20’ at
Exa mp le of a c luster o f p a l m tr ee s , planting. Additional or supplemental vertical elements may be used provided they are
s imila r in size and sp a c i n g a s
p ro posed design for Ty p e A g a tew a y    complementary to the overall plaza design.
inters ec t ions.
                                              B. Provide shade during the day and lighting at night:
                                              Palm trees should be spaced approximately 10-15’ on center to create a shade canopy
                                              (and refuge)for corner plazas during hot daytime hours. Additional shade structures
                                              may be incorporated into the plaza provided they are complementary to the overall
                                              design. Palms should be uplit with LED fixtures integrated into the ground plane of the
                                              plaza. Colored lighting as well as light projection are encouraged provided they are part
                                              of a unified lighting plan for the 111 Corridor as a whole.
                                              C. Optionally incorporate additional gateway/wayfinding signage:
                                              Corner plazas may optionally incorporate additional gateway /wayfinding signage -- in
                                              particular as they relate to the El Paseo Shopping District, and the San Pablo Main Street
                                              District, provided they are complementary to the overall plaza design, and consistent
                                              with gateway and wayfinding signage within the City Center “Core” of 111.
180 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                          CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Illu stra t iv e plan of a t y p i ca l co r n er p l a za g a tew ay a t
cross- st reet along 11 1 .
                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN | 181
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                                       Gateway Type B - 111 City Center “Core”
                                                       Gateways
                                                       Design Strategy
                                                       This gateway type is used to reinforce arrival/entry into the City Center “Core” of the
                                                       111 Corridor, with design consistency of the east- and west-most gateways emphasized,
                                                       and design flexibility of any potential additional crossings in between. This gateway type
                                                       should follow or accompany (not precede) - improvements to the public realm and/
                                                       or new private development at “gateway nodes,” as they are intended to announce/
                                                       reinforce a transformed environment, not function as standalone elements.
                                                       These gateways can also double-function as new, specialized pedestrian/bicyclist
                                                       crossings for 111, alerting motorists to the potential of pedestrians and bicyclists in the
                                                       crossing zones. New pedestrian crossings are proposed at two key locations along 111 -
                                                       namely one at the intersection of Sage Lane and 111 and another at the intersection of
                                                       Lupine Lane and 111. Additional mid-block pedestrian crossings could also be provided
                                                       in the future to improve non-motorist circulation across 111, as funding permits. Each
                                                       crossing, whether newly constructed or modified over time should:
E xa mp le of a pedest r i a n c r o s s i n g g a tew a y a c r o s s 1 1 1 i n con ju n ct i on wi t h n ew i n fi l l d evel op ment to t h e n o rth and so uth
 of 111.
                Type B.1:	               Type B.2:
182 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                             CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
A. Reinforce entry/access into City Center “Core” from
111:	 				
This gateway type should be utilized strategically to reinforce arrival
into the City Center “Core” of Palm Desert for motorists traveling on
111. “Spanning” gateway elements, such as the gateway illustrated
in Type B.1 reinforce “arrival” into a new place or environment, and
are recommended at the east and west extents of the City Center
“Core”. Any future crossings added within the Core should use
non-spaning vertical elements, such as columns, specialized lighting,
landscaping, etc.
B. Include City branding/messaging through a uni-
fied design:	 		
Each gateway should communicate “Palm Desert” either literally or
through a unified design theme of color, material, landscape, lighting,
and messaging consistency along the corridor. Each gateway should
be designed using a “desert palette” of materials, including Corten
steel, glass mosaic, concrete (board-formed concrete encouraged for
column bases) metal cables, and recommended landscape materials.
                                                                          Typ e B. 1 : I l l u st r a t i on of a s p a n n i n g g a tew ay
                                                                          el em ent r ecom m en d ed for t h e ea st a n d w est
C. Alert motorists to specialized pedestrian crossing                     ex tent s of t h e C i t y C enter C or e of t h e 1 11 Co rrido r.
zones:					
Any future mid-block pedestrian crossings should visually “narrow”
111, and alert motorists to the potential of pedestrians and/or bicy-
clists within the crossing zone. Type B.2 illustrates the use of vertical
columns to visually mark a specialized crossing zone. Crossing signals,
signage, landscape (including Palms, or other vertical elements), en-
hanced paving and/or ground surface lighting is recommended, and
should be incorporated into the overall gateway design.
D. Reinforce connection between the north and                             Typ e B. 2 : I l l u st r a t i on of a n on -s p a n n i n g gatew ay
south sides of 111:	 		                                                   el em ent r ecom m en d ed for en h a n ced p edestrian/
                                                                          b i cycl i st cr os s i n g zon es wi t h i n t h e C i t y Center Co re
Particularly important for potential new pedestrian/bicyclist cross-      of t h e 1 1 1 C or r i d or.
ing zones and within the City Center “Core” of 111, these gateways
should visually reinforce the importance of circulation across 111 -
transforming 111 into the “zipper” that ties the City Center together.
E. Provide Mid-Crossing Refuge for pedestrians and
bicyclists:	 		
Because of the very large width of 111, center medians of 111
at these enhanced pedestrian/bicyclist crossings should provide
mid-crossing refuges for safer, more comfortable crossing of 111.
                                                                          Des i g n i n s p r i r a t i on for t h e m os a i c col u mns
                                                                          i l l u st r a ted i n Typ e B. 2 comes fr om t h e mo saic
                                                                          col u m n s a t Monter ey a n d G er a l d For d Drive.
                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN | 183

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
Gateway Type B - 111 City Center “Core” Gateways (continued)
184 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                 CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
 These illustrations describe a series of design alternatives for
 gateways spanning and crossing 111 while communicating/
 reinforcing entry/arrival into the City Center Core. The top-left
 illustration shows a potential pedestrian overcrossing that
 could be utilized if at-grade crossings were deemed to be
 infeasible with circulation requirements along 111.
Ph otot ransform at ion i l l u st r a t i n g a n ew p ed e str i an cr os s i n g , g a tewa y
column s, and st reet s ca p e i m p r ovem e nts a l o n g 1 11 .
                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN | 185
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                          Gateway Type C - El Paseo Shopping District
                                          Gateways
                                          Design Strategy
                                          Map below indicates suggested locations of Type C - “El Paseo Shopping District”
                                          gateways. El Paseo has to date, been considered the “downtown” of Palm Desert --
                                          and has, experienced tremendous success, despite its lack of visibility/exposure along
                                          111. This plan describes strategies for creating a unified City Center “Core” -- centered
                                          around San Pablo Ave, 111, and El Paseo - establishing strong connections - visual,
                                          functional, and circulation-wise, between all three - as well as with the civic center
                                          and neighborhoods to the north -- to add value to the already successful downtown.
                                          This City Center “Core” will have multiple “Centers”, each with their own unique
                                          environement, with the El Paseo Shopping District being a very important one of those.
            Type B.1:	       Type B.2:
Conceptual gateway signage on San Pablo Ave (just south of 111) for the El Paseo Shopping District.
186 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                            CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Special gateways are recommended to reinforce arrival/entry
into the El Paseo Shopping District as a unique place within
the City Center “Core” and add visual exposure from 111. The
City of Palm Desert, concurrent with the 111-Corridor Plan, has
commissioned conceptual design of a gateway, wayfinding, and
branding signage package for the District.
The City’s initial study included a new gateway on San Pablo
Ave, just south of 111, and this plan recommends additional
gateways of some form at generally the west- and east- extents
of the shopping district on El Paseo - as indicated pg. 186 It is
recommended that the final design and location of any new
gateway on San Pablo Ave, be completed in conjunction with (or
following) new infill development at the corner(s) of San Pablo
and 111. While design and location will be subject to change,
their ultimate design should:                                      Typ e C . 1 : I l l u st r a t i on of a s p a n n i n g g a tewa y element
                                                                   com m i s s i on ed by t h e C i t y of Pa l m Des er t for San Pablo
                                                                   Ave. S i mi l a r g a tewa ys cou l d b e u s ed on El Paseo at the
A. Reinforce entry/arrival into the El Paseo Shop-                 ea st a n d west ex tent s of t h e S h op p i n g Di st r ict.
ping District:
This gateway type should be utilized strategically to generally
define the extents of the El Paseo Shopping District as a part of
the larger City Center “Core” of Palm Desert. Major “spanning”
gateways (See Type C.1) would be appropriate on San Pablo Ave,
and on El Paseo proper - generally at the east and west extents
of the Shopping District (just east of HWY 74, and just west of
San Luis Rey, respectively) - additional minor gateways could be
used on additional “minor” streets connecting to El Paseo within
the Shopping District.
B. Include City Branding/Messaging through a
unified design:
Each gateway should communicate “Palm Desert” - either
literally or through a unified design theme of color, material,
landscape, lighting, and messaging consistency within the El
Paseo Shopping District. Each gateway should be designed using
a “desert palette” of materials, including Corten steel, glass mo-
saic, concrete (board-formed concrete encouraged for column
bases) metal cables, and landscape materials.
                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN | 187

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                             Gateway Type D - San Pablo Main Street
                                             Design Strategy
                                             At the heart of the City Center Core of Palm Desert is a recast vision for an enriched
                                             main street environment on San Pablo Ave, from San Gorgonio Way to 111,
                                             incorporating a new dining plaza in the center of an enlarged center median, improved
                                             (and additional) on-street parking, and improved bicycle facilities that connect into
                                             a new cycle track north of San Gorgonio Way. To frame this new environment -- for
                                             motorists traveling south on San Pablo Ave, and those traveling on 111, two unique
                                             gateways are proposed.
Illustration of the new “Main Street” environment envisioned for San Pablo Ave.
188 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                             CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
A. Intersection of 111 and San Pablo Ave:
Similar to the Type A gateways previously described, the south
gateway of the San Pablo “Main Street” shall be articulated by
clusters of 9-16 Palms arranged in a geometric/grid pattern. The
center median of San Pablo Ave should be planted with addition-
al palms using the same planting pattern, tree size, etc. as the
corner plazas. While its ultimate plaza design will require further
study, based on the final geometry of the access lanes for the
frontage roads to the east and west, its design features should
include:
   1.	 All palms should be uplit, with fixtures affixed to their
       trunks.
   2.	 Lights and/or gateway signage may be spanned across San
       Pablo Ave (similar to Gateway Types B&C) and should an-
       nounce entry/arrival into a new main street environment.
   3.	 Corner plazas should provide adequate shade during the
       daytime, and lighting during the evening to make them
       comfortable places of pedestrian refuge.
   4.	 Public art, lighting, enhanced paving materials, landscape,
       etc. are encouraged and should be part of a unified street-
       scape design for San Pablo Ave.
B. New roundabout at San Gorgonio Way:
While adding improved circulation and safety to the intersection
of San Pablo Ave and San Gorgonio Way, the proposed round-
about double-functions as a new gateway, particularly as San
Pablo transitions from a free-flowing neighborhood street to an
urban main street in the heart of Palm Desert’s City Center.
While its ultimate geometry and design will require further
study, its design features should include:
   1.	 A grid of 9-16 Palms, spaced/arranged, and lit consistently
       with the median/corner plazas of the corner of 111 and
       San Pablo Ave.
   2.	 Public art and lighting within the roundabout is encour-
       aged and should announce entry/arrival into San Pablo
       “Main Street”
                                                                    I l l u st r a t i ve Pl a n of S a n Pa b l o “Ma i n S t r eet ” w ith no rth
   3.	 Care should be taken to ensure that all design elements      a n d s ou t h g a tewa ys -- a n ew r ou n d a b ou t a t San Pablo
       placed within the roundabout do not adversely effect         Ave & S a n G or g on i o Wa y, a n d n ew cor n er p l azas at the
       visibility.                                                  n or t h cor n er s of t h e i nter s ect i on of S a n Pa b lo Ave and
                                                                    111.
                                                                                                  Potential Detour Route for Special Events
                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN | 189

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                                                Centralized Parking Strategy
                                                Existing Conditions
                                                As Palm Desert’s 111 Corridor matures from its early form – as an old highway next to
                                                a fine retail street – to a more complete, more intense, more diverse City Center, it will
                                                be vitally important that its parking supply evolve to support that growth and change.
                                                Current parking arrangements are simple – most of the parking for all the businesses is
                                                provided in the large, shared Presidents’ Plaza lots within the large blocks between 111
                                                and El Paseo. On-street parking along those two main streets and cross streets provides
                                                additional convenient customer parking in front of businesses, and some businesses
                                                have their own dedicated parking lots. All the parking is free and there is generally
                                                plenty of it, although at times the empty parking spaces are some distance from the
                                                busiest businesses.
Ty pica l com m erc ial-r eta i l f r o nta g e Park Once Strategy
with o n-grade parall e l p a r k i n g         As new, multi-story buildings begin to replace existing one-story buildings, as new
and a ddit ional parkin g b eh i n d .
                                                businesses are added to the City Center mix, and as housing is introduced to the City
                                                Center to generate a more 18-hour mixed-use environment, it is clear that existing
                                                parking resources must be – and can be – more efficiently managed and utilized, and
                                                it is clear that at some point more parking will be required. The central concept that
                                                will organize all of the strategies and techniques for ensuring a parking supply that will
                                                support the City Center transformation will be “Park Once.”
                                                A successful city center is a place where customers, visitors and residents easily move
                                                from shop to shop, from work to lunch, from home to dinner on foot. Most visitors
                                                and shoppers arrive in the district by car, they easily find a safe parking space, and then
                                                park their car while they go about their business for an extended period of time. This
                                                is very different from the way in which one patronizes a typical shopping center or strip
                                                mall – where one drives up very close to a store, patronizes the store, gets back in the
                                                car, and drives to the next store. And for this different City Center form of development,
                                                different parking arrangements are required.
Acces s alley bet ween p a r ki n g
gara ge and pedest ria n r eta i l              Parking as a utility
district .                                      Individual projects and buildings in cities are not expected to provide their own power,
                                                water and sewer, they connect to the system provided by the community. Rural
                                                buildings often must have their own well and septic system, and suburban buildings
                                                must have their own parking lots. But in the City Center, where the focus is on
                                                concentrating larger amounts of more activities into a smaller area, more efficient ways
                                                of delivering parking services are required. Key elements of the Park Once strategy
                                                include:
                                                Focus on the pedestrian 			
                                                As described on pg. 154, the streetscapes and other public spaces of the City Center will
                                                be increasingly comfortable and attractive to pedestrians, with wide, shady sidewalks
                                                passing interesting and useful businesses and residences. This will increase the average
                                                length of stay for customers and visitors – which should improve the economic perfor-
                                                mance of the City Center, and will reduce the importance for many users of finding a
                                                parking space right next to their first target destination. This in turn will help to even
                                                out the “hot spots” where everyone wants to park and fill in the “cold spots” where lots
                                                have often stayed underutilized.
190 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                       CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
Parking types for user types 			
Within a more diverse City Center, several distinct types of “parking users” must be rec-
ognized and accommodated. These include the shopper in a hurry, the tourist spending
the day, the couple going to dinner and a movie, the office worker, and the resident
coming home at night. The shopper in a hurry wants a space close to the store they are
going to and is willing to pay for convenience, so on-street parking with a cost attached
may work just fine. Other user types are willing to walk a bit more. The parking supply
planned for Palm Desert’s City Center includes a large number of well-organized on-
street parking along newly beautified streets, shared public parking in existing lots with
improved landscaping and wayfinding, and future shared parking structures in some of
the Presidents’ Plaza lots with convenient, beautiful paseos connecting them to El Paseo
and 111.
Wayfinding
In any City Center it is very important that parking be easy to find for those arriving from
                                                                                             C ent r a l i zed of f-st r ee p a r king
outside the district. This is doubly true for a City Center where a high percentage of the st r u ct u r e, l i n ed wi t h h ou sing.
visitors are from out of the area and may be visiting for the first time. From both 111
and El Paseo, entry points to shared lots and future parking structures must be clearly
marked, and additional electronic wayfinding – in the form of apps that provide real
time parking availability information and GPS direction – will guide visitors to waiting
spaces.
Shared supply
Parking lots or structures that are shared by many businesses and other uses can be
more efficiently utilized than parking facilities dedicated to a single business or use.
Parking areas occupied by office workers tend to be nearly empty in the evening, and
if they are near restaurants with peak customer counts in the dinner hour, each space
replaces what would be two spaces in another setting. The City Center environment
encourages shoppers to patronize multiple stores and restaurants over a multi-hour
period, whereas in another setting those same visits might have required several car
trips and hence several parking spaces. In a City Center environment, the number
of parking spaces required per 1,000 square feet of business floor area can easily be
half that required in a typical suburban shopping center. As the City Center grows and
parking structures become necessary, the cost savings in such efficient use of parking
resources mount rapidly to many millions of dollars, which can be better spent on
landscape, maintenance, and community activities and events.
Managed supply
No matter how wonderfully walkable the City Center becomes over time, there will
always be prime parking areas and less convenient parking areas. That is where
management comes in. It makes no sense to have the store patron drive away because
the employees were parked on the street in front of the store, and it makes no sense for
the young couple with a baby sitter waiting at home to dine elsewhere because the bus
boys filled up the most convenient parking garage. Solutions to these easily identifiable
problems may include time limiting some spaces, charging a fee for some prime spaces,
and ticketing those who do not comply with regulations.
                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN | 191

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                               Expandable parking supply
                               If the City Center thrives as the community has envisioned, with more customers plus
                               new residents entering the mix, more parking spaces will be required. These will be pro-
                               vided in new multi-level parking structures within the large blocks between 111 and El
                               Paseo, as illustrated in Figure 10.6 below. The City will monitor parking utilization from
                               year to year and plan for the construction of new facilities as the demand increases.
                               Parking supply as economic development tool
                               Not only can shared parking arrangements deliver parking spaces more economically
                               than is possible on a building by building, project by project basis. Many cities have
                               used the provision of shared parking structures – into which individual projects pay for
                               the use of the parking they need – as an enticement to new investment in fine mixed-
                               use buildings.
                               Parking to accomodate EV and active transit users
                               New parking facilities will, as appropriate, provide spaces with charging stations for Elec-
                               tric Vehicles (EV) - including golf carts as permitted by the City. Facilities should accomo-
                               date parking for bicycles in addition to bike racks located throughout the City Center.
Fi g u re 10.6 Cent ral ized Park in g Co n ce p t u a l S i te P l a n
192 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

                                                                                                                         CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
 Existing Parking Yields
                         Surface Lot             On-Grade
                                                                           Total
                           Spaces                Street Sp.
 BLOCK #1                    ±375                   ±100                   ±475
 BLOCK #2                    ±265                    ±30                   ±295
 BLOCK #3                    ±425                    ±30                   ±475
 BLOCK #4                    ±420                   ±180                   ±600
 Total                     ±1,485                   ±340                  ±1,845
 Conceptual Parking Yields
                      Structure           Total Parking Levels               Structure       On-Grade
                                                                                                                Total
                    Spaces/Level             (Incl. On-Grade)                 Spaces         Street Sp.
 BLOCK #1               ±220                           3                        ±660            ±35             ±760
 BLOCK #2               ±205                           4                        ±820            ±20             ±820
 BLOCK #3               ±160                           4                        ±640            ±40             ±640
 BLOCK #4               ±225                           1                        ±225           ±160             ±225
 Grand Total                                                                  ±2,345           ±255           ±2,600
                                                                                                                                                     500’
                                                                                                                 0’             200’          400’
*No te: S ite plan, par k i n g str u c tu r es , a n d p a r k i n g yi el d n u mb er s a r e for con cept u a l p u r p os es on l y.
Fin al l ocat ions, desig n s , h ei g ht s , a n d c i r c u l a t i o n to b e a p p r oved by t h e C i t y.
                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN | 193

CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                          Goals & Policies
                          Goal 1.	         A vibrant, regionally significant down		
                          town centered on the 111 corridor.
                           1.1	 Downtown. Facilitate the development of the City Center as a vibrant,
                                active downtown that is the civic and cultural heart of the community.
                           1.2 	San Pablo. Prioritize the development of a local serving, Main Street envi-
                                ronment at San Pablo Street and 111.
                           1.3	 El Paseo. Preserve El Paseo as a premier visitor and shopping destination.
                           1.4	 Phasing. Prioritize public investment and private development at key
                                nodes, as shown in the City Center Area Plan, giving preference to invest-
                                ments at the intersection of San Pablo and 111.
                           1.5	 Mix of uses. Encourage a diverse mix of uses in the City Center to create a
                                vibrant, downtown environment and strengthen the downtown presence
                                for El Paseo.
                           1.6	 Compact, infill development. Require new infill development in the City
                                Center to be compact in scale and flexible in design so as to maximize
                                the pedestrian orientation of the area and to facilitate market responsive
                                economic development.
                           1.7	 Mixed-use buildings. Allow buildings to contain a wide range of uses,
                                giving preference to buildings with ground floor retail and upper floor
                                residential.
                           1.8	 Moderate scale buildings. Moderate building heights in the City Center,
                                allowing taller buildings at key intersections and gateways.
                           1.9	 Wide range of housing. Encourage a wide range of housing types in the
                                City Center.
                           1.10	 Unique public realm. Encourage and facilitate streetscape and building
                                designs that are unique to Palm Desert so as to create a distinctive City
                                Center.
                          Goal 2. 	        A safe, multi-modal City Center boulevard
                          that ties the north and south sides of the downtown to-
                          gether into one cohesive center.
                           2.1	 Streetscape. Facilitate a comprehensive streetscape improvement effort
                                that helps define the street and the enhances the pedestrian experience
                                in a manner consistent with the concepts presented here in the City
                                Center Area Plan. Streetscape improvements should include tall, vertical
                                elements along the boulevard, shade trees over sidewalks and parking
                                areas, wide sidewalks, street furnishings, and pedestrian scale lighting.
                           2.2	 Landscaping. Require new development to incorporate landscaping con-
194 | CITY OF PALM DESERT
                                                                                      CHAPTER 10: CITY CENTER AREA PLAN
       sistent with the concepts presented here in the City Center Area Plan.
  2.3	 Lighting. Require all new street lights to be pedestrian-oriented and
       scaled, attractively designed, compatible in design with other street furni-
       ture, and to provide adequate visibility and security.
  2.4	 Frontage roads. Redesign and facilitate the realignment of the frontage
       roads to take access off of 111, facilitate improved flow of traffic, and
       improved access to businesses on the frontage roads.
  2.5	 Pedestrian focus. Design 111, San Pablo, and other significant City Center
       roads to balance regional traffic flow with pedestrian movement and safe-
       ty and the unique physical environment of the area.
  2.6	 Pedestrian access. Prioritize pedestrian access in the design of public and
       private facilities within the City Center Area.
  2.7	 Infill. Encourage investment and infill development through the provision
       of incentives, such as parking programs and density bonuses.
  2.8	 Gateway elements. Direct new public investment into significant land-
       scaping, art, signage and streetscape improvements to key intersections,
       as identified by the City Center Area Plan, as a way of defining key inter-
       sections within the City Center.
  2.9	 Shared roadways. Consider shared roadway design strategies such as
       woonerfs for low volume streets such as Alessandro.
Goal 3. 	          A vibrant district that fosters an active and
interesting pedestrian environment.
  3.1	 Pedestrian network. Ensure that new public and private projects in the
       City Center consider pedestrian connectivity and contribute to improving
       the pedestrian network through the application of strategies such as side-
       walk improvements and pedestrian crossings.
  3.2	 Development requirements. Require development projects to be urban in
       character and to provide for enhanced pedestrian activity through the use
       of compact buildings sited at or near front lot lines, a high percentage of
       lot coverage, and building facades and entrances directly addressing the
       street and with a high degree of transparency.
  3.3	 Ground floor retail. Require the first level of building where retail uses are
       allowed have a minimum 15 feet floor to floor height for non-residential
       uses.
  3.4	 Auto-oriented uses. Prohibit uses that serve occupants of vehicles (such
       as drive-through windows) and discourage uses that serve the vehicle
       (such as car washes and service stations) within the City Center.
  3.5	 Parking frontages. Require both public and private parking lots and struc-
       tures be designed so as to ensure parking areas do not dominate street
       frontages and are screened from public views whenever possible.
                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN | 195
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PLAN
                            3.6	 Parking strategy. Encourage district-scale and shared parking strategies
                                 while discouraging new surface parking lots.
                            3.7	 Unbundled parking. Allow and encourage developers of residential,
                                 mixed-use and multi-tenant commercial projects to unbundle parking
                                 costs from unit sale and rental costs in denser, mixed-use areas to give
                                 tenants and owners the opportunity to save money by using fewer parking
                                 spaces.
                            3.8	 Street parking. Encourage and maintain street parking as a strategy to
                                 provide adequate parking and create buffers for sidewalks.
                            3.9	 Tree planting. Encourage the planting of trees that shade the sidewalk
                                 and improve the pedestrian experience throughout the City Center.
                            3.10	 Public gathering spaces. Direct public investment in the City Center so
                                 as to improve existing and create new gathering spaces throughout the
                                 City to provide beautiful, comfortable, and inviting public and pedestrian
                                 spaces, encouraging walking and public gathering spaces.
                            3.11	 Public plazas. Incentivize private investment to incorporate public pla-
                                 zas, seating, and gathering places, especially in prominent locations and
                                 areas of pedestrian activity.
                            3.12	 Outdoor cafes. Allow for the development of outdoor plazas and dining
                                 areas; including the use of sidewalk areas for outdoor cafes.
                            3.13	 Artists live/work studios. Consider incentives for the inclusion of live/
                                 work studio space in the City Center.
                          Goal 4. 	         An interconnected City Center that is easily
                          accessible by the surrounding neighbors and the City at
                          large.
                            4.1	 Bicycle network. Facilitate the development of bicycle facilities that
                                 connect the City Center with surrounding neighborhoods, districts, and
                                 centers.
                            4.2	 Pedestrian network. Facilitate the development of pedestrian facilities
                                 that connect the City Center with surrounding neighborhoods, districts,
                                 and centers.
                            4.3	 Transit. Work with Sunline to improve transit access to and within the City
                                 Center.
                            4.4 	City-wide connections. Develop transit, alternative transportation, and
                                 wayfinding strategies that facilitate easy navigation to and from the City
                                 Center, the University Area, and other important centers within Palm Des-
                                 ert.
                            4.5 	Traffic flow. Manage traffic flow and speeds through the use of signal
                                 synchronization to ensure safe speeds and minimal traffic congestion at
                                 intersections.
196 | CITY OF PALM DESERT

This page is intentionally left blank
   12. WORK PLAN
                                                                                                                                                  This section is organized by type of action: physical improvement, process, program, or rule making. Each action indicates the
                                                                                                                                                  responsible party, priority level, potential funding source, and timeframe.
In many cases, implementation of the General Plan will occur incrementally as private landowners develop their land in accordance
                                                                                                                                                  Palm Desert is a city with a clear vision of its future. The City staff and elected officials welcome and encourage community
with the General Plan. For some topics in this General Plan, the new adopted policies are sufficient to realize certain goals. However,
                                                                                                                                                  organizations, the business community, other public agencies, neighborhood groups and passionate individuals to help implement
most goals will require additional implementation actions to help make those operational. This section identifies those additional
                                                                                                                                                  many of these actions. While, some actions are prioritized as a “supportive” instead of “critical,” that should not preclude any
implementation actions.
                                                                                                                                                  partner organization or individual from making it a top priority in their own work in collaboration with the City.
  An actionable description of the                   Identification of the agency or department responsible        Identifies                                  Identifies potential funding sources          A broad timeframe that refers to when the action should be implemented.
  implementation action. Some actions include        for implementing the action.                                  whether the action is critical or                                                         The timeframes are as follows:
  end-note references to supportive background                                                                     supportive                                                                                Once: A one time action with a set completion date
  material or example projects.                                                                                                                                                                              As Needed: Implementation contingent on other identified events, decisions,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             or benchmarks
                                                                                                                                                                                                             On-going: Reoccurring or immediate action

Following are a set of indicators that will serve to gauge our progress, as articulated in the Vision & Guiding Principles chapter of this General Plan. Following the completion of the General Plan, the City will measure each indicator to establish a
baseline for measuring success. The indicators will be evaluated on either a quantitative or qualitative basis depending on the data type and availability, with a directional goal (increase/decrease/maintain).
 Topic                       Indicator (unit)                                                          2040 Target               Topic                        Indicator (unit)                                                         2040 Target
 Crime rate                  Combined violent and property crimes per 10,000 people                    Decrease                  Access to health care        Clinician shortage                                                       Maintain
                                                                                                                                 Social engagement            Extent to which residents engage with other community members            Increase
 Access to parks             Number of parks within a half-mile of neighborhoods                       Increase
                                                                                                                                 Arts and entertainment       Total number of performing arts venues per 10,000                        Increase
 Access to                   Residential parcels within ¼ mile of a neighborhood service such as       Increase
 neighborhood services       a restaurant, convenience store, childcare center or dry cleaner
                                                                                                                                 Entertainment venues         Creation of available spaces for live and outdoor music, community       Increase
 Elementary and Middle       % of housing units within ½ mile of school                                Increase
                                                                                                                                                              events and festivals, a local multipurpose theater/arts center, and
 School Access
                                                                                                                                                              creative connections and partnerships which impact the economy
 Transit-oriented            % of housing units within ¼ mile of frequent transit                      Increase                                               through increased tourism and revenue.
 development                                                                                                                     Historic resources           Number of Eligible and Protected Historic Resources                      Maintain or
 Mix of uses                 Mix of jobs within a mile of neighborhoods                                Increase                                                                                                                        Increase
                                                                                                                                 Economic opportunity         Jobs per person                                                          Increase
 Activity Density            Number of jobs and people per square mile                                 Increase at key
                                                                                                       centers                   Expansion of university Student Enrollment                                                            20,000 CSU
 Pedestrian network          Sidewalk coverage                                                         Increase                  campuses over the next                                                                                students by
                                                                                                                                 20 years                                                                                              2040
 Bicycle network             Bicycle lanes                                                             Increase                  College eligibility          Number of students with a-g completion (eligibility to enter the Cal     Increase
                                                                                                                                                              State/UCR systems)
 Walkability                 Walk score                                                                Increase                  Retail and fiscal Health Sales tax revenues                                                           Increase
 Transportation balance      Percent mode split for work trips                                         Increase                  Industrial/R&D vacancy       Industrial vacancy rates                                                 Reduce
 Automobile                  Annual per capita VMT                                                     Decrease                  Transit occupancy tax         Occupancy Tax                                                           2-3% annual
 dependence                                                                                                                                                                                                                            growth for the
 Traffic congestion          Traffic volumes on key roadways                                           Reduce                                                                                                                          next 10 years
                                                                                                                                 Percent of Employees         Percentage of persons both living and working inside Palm Desert         Increase
                                                                                                                                 Living in city
 Travel Time                 Travel time for key destinations                                          Maintain
                                                                                                                                 Jobs/housing balance         Ratio of jobs to the number of employed residents                        Increase
 Parking demand              Parking demand at key centers                                             Reduce
                                                                                                                                 Water use                    Per capita potable water use                                             Decrease
 Travel safety               Vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian collisions, deaths, and severe         Reduce
                             injuries
 Access exercise             Percentage of people who live within a half-mile of parks and             Increase
 opportunities               within 1 mile of recreational facilities

These implementation actions are specific physical infrastructure necessary for achieving the General Plan Vision.
 San Pablo Avenue: Introduce angled parking.                                                                 Public Works Critical   City General Fund CIP, Assessment District                                 Once
 San Pablo Avenue: Introduce bike lane improvements                                                          Public Works Critical   CDBG, Bicycle Transportation Account, Measure A, Special Fund              Once
 San Pablo Avenue: South of San Gorgonio Way, introduce wide median with possible additional
                                                                                                             Public Works Critical   Development Impact Fees, State Fund                                        Once
 programming (small buildings, farmers market, etc.).
 San Pablo Avenue: Introduce roundabout at intersection of San Pablo Avenue and San Gorgonio Way.            Public Works Critical   MAP-21, TUMF, City General Fund CIP, Development Impact Fee, Special Fund  Once
 Alessandro Alley West of San Pablo: Introduce parking and landscaping per City Center Area plan             Public Works Supportive Development Impact Fees, Assessment Districts                              Once
 City Center Area: Implement pedestrian improvements including sidewalks, crosswalks, street furniture,
                                                                                                             Public Works Critical   City General Fund CIP, State Fund, Special Fund, Grants                    On-going
 and other amenities during the construction of new roadways or the reconstruction of existing roadways.
 City Center Area: Implement the proposed bicycle network by building the proposed facilities concurrent
                                                                                                             Public Works Critical   City General Fund CIP, State Fund, Special Fund, Grants                    Periodic
 with the construction of new roadways or the reconstruction of existing roadways.
 El Paseo/111 Parking Improvements: Parking Structure 1 - Block between Sage Lane and Lupine Lane            Public Works Supportive State Fund, Development Impact Fees, Special Funds, Assessment Districts   Once
 El Paseo/111 Parking Improvements: Build Parking Structure 2 - Block between Lupine Lane and San
                                                                                                             Public Works Supportive Development Impact Fees, Assessment Districts, State Fund, Special Fund    Once
 Pablo Avenue
 El Paseo/111 Parking Improvements: Build Parking Structure 3 - Block between San Pablo Avenue and
                                                                                                             Public Works Supportive Development Impact Fees, Assessment Districts, State Fund, Special Fund    Once
 Larkspur Lane
 El Paseo/111 Parking Improvements: Build Parking Lot between Larkspur Lane and San Luis Rey Avenue          Public Works Supportive Development Impact Fees, Assessment Districts, State Fund, Special Fund    Once
 Highway 111: Reconfigure frontage roads so they are entered and exited directly from Highway 111
                                                                                                                                     MAP-21, Federal Fund, Measure A, TUMF, Development Impact Fees, Assessment
 (instead of from cross streets). Introduce new landscaping in median between Highway 111 and frontage       Public Works Critical                                                                              Once
                                                                                                                                     Districts, Special Fund
 roads.
 Highway 111: Reconfigure frontage road parking with street tree planters between parking spaces on the
                                                                                                             Public Works Critical   Measure A, TUMF, Development Impact Fees, Assessment Districts State Fund  Once
 111 side (on-street parking counts towards required parking of adjacent development).
 Highway 111: Introduce new streetscape along building side of frontage roads.                               Public Works Critical   Assessment District, State Fund                                            Once
 Highway 111: Introduce new gateway landscaping at key intersections:
 a. Monterey Avenue
 b. San Pablo Avenue                                                                                         Public Works Supportive Assessment District, Special Fund                                          Once
 c. San Luis Rey Avenue
 d. Eastern end of El Paseo.
Highway 111: Introduce gateway monuments/signage
• Phase 1: Obtain funding
                                                                                                        Public Works Supportive CDBG, Assessment District                              Once
• Phase 2: Set-up competition for design of gateway monuments/signage
• Phase 3: install gateway monuments/signage
Highway 111: Introduce mid-block crosswalk at Sage Lane.                                                Public Works Supportive City General Fund CIP                                  Once
Highway 111: Synchronize all traffic signals between eastern and western city boundaries.               Public Works Supportive City General Fund, MAP-21, State Fund, Measure A, TUMF As needed
Highway 111: Introduce new landscaping in center median and restripe narrower traffic lanes to
between 10 and 11 feet (keeping 3 travel lanes in each direction) and add buffered bike lane in surplus
pavement area adjacent to curbs.
• Option 1: Phase 1: Repave roadway (optional), introduce median landscape, restripe traffic lanes and
                                                                                                        Public Works Critical   City General Fund CIP, State Fund                      Once
provide striped bike lane and buffer. Phase 2: Introduce cycle track and associated landscape.
• Option 2: Repave roadway (optional), introduce median landscape, restripe traffic lanes, and install
cycle
track and associated landscape.

These actions are activities for the City to undertake to improve, amend, or expand its procedures or inform future actions.
 Periodically review fee structures for potential opportunities to provide financial and administrative incentives to
                                                                                                                             Economic
 support installation of renewable energy generators, energy efficiency measures, land use patterns, and other                                    Supportive City General Fund CIP                 As needed
                                                                                                                             Development
 measures that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
 Proactively develop strategies to reduce the community’s vulnerability to climate change impacts.                           Special Programs     Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         On-going
 Work with nearby local and regional agencies to develop a community choice aggregation system in order to secure
                                                                                                                             Special Programs     Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 alternative energy supply contracts for the community.
 Implement a program to install the latest energy-efficient technologies for street and parking lot lights to meet City and                                  City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                             Public Works         Supportive                                       Once
 state standards.                                                                                                                                            Grants
                                                                                                                                                             City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
 Replace City fleet vehicles with low emission vehicles, such as EVs and Plug-in EVs wherever possible.                      Public Works         Supportive                                       Ongoing
                                                                                                                                                             Grants
 Track and publically support legislation and regional, state, and federal efforts that improve air quality.                 Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 Coordinate air quality planning efforts with other local, regional and state agencies, and encourage community
                                                                                                                             Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 participation in air quality planning.
 Work with the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to ensure the earliest practicable attainment of
                                                                                                                             Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 federal and State ambient air quality standards.
 Form partnerships with school districts and other educational institutions, non-profit organizations, and regional
 governmental agencies to foster and participate in efforts promoting prevention, healthy lifestyles and positive health     Special Programs     Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Ongoing
 outcomes.
 Develop a standardized citywide process to permit community gardens on vacant lots, rooftops, parkways and
                                                                                                                             Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 residential property.
 Work with Sunline to identify opportunities to improve access to medical centers, especially for communities in need
                                                                                                                             Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         As needed
 such as those with physical or mental disability or seniors.
 Create a healthy development review checklist for use in review new development proposals.                                  Planning             Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 Commission a community economic impact study to assess the current cultural landscape of Palm Desert and its                Economic
                                                                                                                                                  Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 economic benefit to the community.                                                                                          Development
                                                                                                                             Economic
 Study the benefit of an arts and culture district in Palm Desert.                                                                                Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
                                                                                                                             Development
                                                                                                                             Economic
 Investigate funding methods for the arts and culture sector.                                                                                     Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
                                                                                                                             Development
                                                                                                                             Planning, Public
 Play an active role in the Coachella Valley Association of Governments, the Southern California Association of
                                                                                                                             Works, City Manager, Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 Governments and other regional agencies to protect and promote the interests of the City
                                                                                                                             City Council
 Regularly review and, as needed, update the impact fees to keep pace with changing economic conditions and
 community needs. Adopt and update the City’s authority for collection of development fees within the full extent            Finance              Critical   City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 allowed under state law.
                                                                                                                             Planning Division,
 Develop and provide incentives to assist developers in revitalization and rehabilitation of existing structures, uses and
                                                                                                                             Economic Dept,       Critical   City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 properties through improvement programs, innovative development standards, specific plans and assessment districts.
                                                                                                                             Finance Dept

Every five years, review and adjust, as needed, the General Plan’s population and employment capacities to meet
                                                                                                                          Planning              Supportive City General Fund CIP             Periodic
changes in economic and demographic conditions.
Develop a plan to encourage businesses to relocate to Palm Desert to bridge the gap between June and September with       Economic
                                                                                                                                                Supportive City General Fund CIP             Once
year-round residents and jobs.                                                                                            Development
                                                                                                                          Bld & Safety Dpt,
Regularly review the City’s permit processing for comparisons with other California cities.                               Public Works Dpt,     Supportive City General Fund CIP             Ongoing
                                                                                                                          Planning Division
                                                                                                                          City Council, City
Promote campus development and campus life through participation in the University Planning Committee.                    Manager, Planning     Critical   City General Fund CIP             Ongoing
                                                                                                                          Division
Follow best practices for traffic study guidelines for development and transportation projects that address all modes of
                                                                                                                          Public Works          Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
transportation.
Identify and update transportation service levels for all modes of transportation including autos, transit, bicycles, and
                                                                                                                          Public Works          Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
pedestrians which will be included in the traffic study guidelines.
                                                                                                                          Public Works, Special
Regularly meet with Sunline Transit to discuss new development proposals and any updates to transit routes to support
                                                                                                                          Programs (lead),      Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
projects with an appropriate levels of density, mix of uses, and connections to the bicycle/pedestrian networks
                                                                                                                          Planning
Regularly review bicycle and pedestrian connections to existing bus stops to maintain safe access for all users           Public Works          Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
Regularly update transportation impact fees to include both capital costs related to all modes of travel including        Finance (Lead) Public
                                                                                                                                                Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
automobiles, transit, bicycles, and pedestrians                                                                           Works
Regularly collect data on the performance of all transportation modes                                                     Public Works          Critical   City General Fund CIP             Periodic
Regularly evaluate traffic signal operations along coordinated corridors to ensure that signal coordination and
                                                                                                                          Public Works          Supportive City General Fund CIP             Periodic
operations reflect changes in transportation conditions.
                                                                                                                                                           City General Fund CIP, Assessment
Develop and regularly update parking management plans for all applicable areas along the 111 Corridor.                    Planning              Supportive                                   Periodic
                                                                                                                                                           District
                                                                                                                          Public
Regularly meet with Sunline Transit to review bus stop locations and amenities                                                                  Supportive City General Fund CIP             Periodic
                                                                                                                          Works/Planning
Regularly evaluate new data collection, analysis techniques, and tools including real time Big Data sources for use by
                                                                                                                          Public Works          Supportive City General Fund CIP             Periodic
City Staff and residents.
Regularly coordinate with Caltrans, RCTC, and CVAG for the planning, design, and construction of new transportation       Public Works
                                                                                                                                                Supportive City General Fund CIP             On-going
facilities including both roadways and non-motorized routes.                                                              (Lead)/Planning
Regularly coordinate with CVAG for the siting of a Metrolink stop in Palm Desert.                                         Planning              Supportive City General Fund CIP             On-going
Facilitate community policing and neighborhood watch organizations aimed at increasing awareness and decreasing
                                                                                                                          Police Department     Supportive City General Fund CIP             Ongoing
opportunities for crime activity.
Continue to confer and coordinate with the solid waste franchisee to fully meet and if possible exceed the provisions
from AB 939 by expanding recycling programs that divert valuable resources from the waste stream and returning these      Public Works          Supportive City General Fund CIP             Ongoing
materials to productive use.
                                                                                                                          Economic
Investigate the feasibility of broadband service throughout Palm Desert as an economic development strategy.                                    Supportive City General Fund CIP             Ongoing
                                                                                                                          Development
Update the City’s public GIS database with information on the extent and potential impact of seismic, geotechnical, fire,
and flood hazards occurring in the city and the SOI. All future developments will be required to submit their data for    Planning              Supportive City General Fund CIP             As needed
incorporation into this database.
Consult Riverside County and other jurisdictions to monitor and update the City’s LHMP.                                   Special Programs      Supportive City General Fund CIP             Periodic

Update the City’s Critical Infrastructure/Facilities inventory included in the Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
Mitigation Plan.
Evaluate critical City facilities for seismic safety.                                                                          Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
Identify and analyze vulnerabilities of key privately owned critical facilities, such as hospitals and businesses, in the city
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
that should remain in operation after an emergency event.
Encourage participation of representatives from local schools, universities, hospital facilities, and other local
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
organizations in regional emergency planning efforts.
Conduct an inventory of all unreinforced structures with higher potential susceptibility to seismic hazards, and develop
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
a prioritized list of recommended phasing for retrofits, based on severity of vulnerability.
Partner with Riverside County, regional entities, and local financial institutions to explore and promote financing
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
options for seismic retrofits.
Coordinate with FEMA, state agencies, Riverside County, and other jurisdictions to understand potential changes to the
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
extent or severity of flood hazards based on the impacts of a changing climate.
Prohibit development in the 100-year floodplain, unless adequate flood mitigation is provided on-site as well as
                                                                                                                               Public Works  Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
downstream of the project area.
Monitor and update the floodplain management ordinance and continue participation in the National Flood Insurance
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
Program.
Continue to maintain and enforce regulations and guidelines for the development and maintenance of project-specific
on-site retention/detention basins to control stormwater and implement the NPDES program, including measures to
                                                                                                                               Public Works  Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
enhance groundwater recharge, complement regional flood control facilities, and address applicable community design
policies.
Identify opportunities for creative public projects that provide “proof of concept” for innovative dual-use and
                                                                                                                               Public Works  Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
stormwater management while also addressing risks to floods.
Identify barriers to access to safe cooling centers for vulnerable populations.                                                Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
Coordinate with local partners to supplement gaps in services and needs for safe cooling centers during extreme heat
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
events.
Identify populations that, due to economic or other circumstances, do not have the resources to cool or heat their living
environment during hot summers, or cold winters, and thus may be at risk for temperature-related illnesses or death.                                    City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive                                       Ongoing
During high heat or extreme cold events, check on these individuals, and if necessary, transport them to cooling centers                                Grants
or heated shelters.
Enforce Cal-OSHA’s Heat Illness Prevention Program, especially in the sectors where employees are exposed to extreme                                    City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive                                       Ongoing
heat conditions at outdoor worksites.                                                                                                                   Grants
Consult with the Riverside County Department of Public Health to identify and reduce risks from existing and new                                        City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive                                       Ongoing
hazardous waste sites in the city and the SOI.                                                                                                          Grants
Designate appropriate access routes to facilitate the transport of hazardous and toxic material in consultation with                                    City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                               Public Safety Supportive                                       Ongoing
emergency service providers through CVAG and the Coachella Valley Emergency Managers Association.                                                       Grants
                                                                                                                                                        City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
Investigate exceeding minimum seismic safety standards for critical facilities that ensure building function.                  Public Safety Supportive                                       Once
                                                                                                                                                        Grants

These are actions that are outwardly focused and intended to directly benefit the community.
 Support and expand programs to educate and incentivize the community on water conservation practices for                                                 City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                         Planning              Supportive                                       Ongoing
 landscaping.                                                                                                                                             Grants
 Work with the Riverside County Public Health Department to establish social networks and website updates to
 distribute information on climate change impacts to vulnerable populations including actions they can take to reduce    Special Programs      Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 exposure to unhealthy conditions.
 Actively promote the City as a place for renewable energy generation, and a place for energy conservation businesses    Economic
                                                                                                                                               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 to locate.                                                                                                              Development
 Create incentives to convert vacant lots into small parks or open spaces throughout the City.                           Planning/Parks        Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Ongoing
 Create incentives for new development to include small parks, tot lots, passive gardens, outdoor eating areas, plazas,
                                                                                                                         Planning/Parks        Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 paseos and other outdoor open spaces.
 Continue work with the school districts and other community organizations to provide and support after-school fitness   Parks/Special
                                                                                                                                               Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
 and education programs for school age children.                                                                         Programs
 Partner with local academic, medical and technology organizations to explore the potential for developing a satellite   Economic
                                                                                                                                               Supportive City General Func CIP, Grants         Ongoing
 campus or research & technology campus for high education training.                                                     Development Dept
 Develop a comprehensive community agriculture program that includes schools and parks.                                  Parks                 Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
  Sponsor and support a variety of community events focused on health and wellness such as walk/run events, weight-      Special Events/ Parks
                                                                                                                                               Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Ongoing
 loss programs, fitness programs, and similar activities. Consider a health theme at summer and holiday activities       & Rec
                                                                                                                         Economic
 Work to expand the number and occurrence of farmer’s markets in Palm Desert.                                                                  Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Once
                                                                                                                         Development Dept
 Work to establish Community Supported Agriculture programs to serve Palm Desert residents.                              Special Districts     Supportive City General Fund CIP, Grants         Ongoing
 Allocate municipal resources to help promote the strong and diverse arts facilities and programs offered by the college Economic
                                                                                                                                               Supportive City General Fund                     As needed
 and universities.                                                                                                       Development
 Develop incubators for medical and agriculture industries.                                                              Economic Dept.        Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 Update policy and procedures for the purchase of City owned vehicles to prioritizes the acquisition of alternative
                                                                                                                         Public Works          Supportive City General Fund                     Periodic
 fueled vehicles
 Continue to provide the At-Home Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) Collection program on a semi-annual basis.              Public Works          Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 Support the creation of a community-based education coalition.                                                          Special Programs      Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
 Regularly support or host educational summits and symposiums.                                                           Special Programs      Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
 Continue to fund School Resources Officer (SRO) positions for the Palm Desert public schools by coordinating with
                                                                                                                         Police Department     Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 school officials, and the DSUSD to provide a safe learning environment for Palm Desert students.
 Consult with the RCFD Office of Emergency Services, the CVWD, Southern California Edison, the Southern California
 Gas Company, the Imperial Irrigation District, and other utilities and agencies, as appropriate, to develop and
                                                                                                                         Public Safety         Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
 disseminate public education materials advising visitors, residents, and local businesses of appropriate responses in
 preparation for and during an emergency.

Disseminate materials on the hazards of extreme heat, as well as cooling center locations, in consultation with local
                                                                                                                       Public Safety    Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
hospitals, nursing homes, community centers, and public and private school districts.
Continue to operate cooling centers in coordination with Riverside County.                                             Special Programs Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
Create a database to track incidents of windstorms, dust storms and other sever weather events to develop a better
understanding of the frequency, magnitude, and costs associated with severe weather. Use this knowledge to
                                                                                                                                                   City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
determine the value of establishing a ‘bad weather’ fund to pay for repairs, cleaning and other direct costs of severe Public Safety    Supportive                                       Ongoing
                                                                                                                                                   Grants
weather. Periodically review the effectiveness of existing plans, programs, codes and ordinances in protecting health
and safety.
Work with the emergency response team and community action partnership of Riverside County to expand access to
the drop-in cooling centers for people vulnerable to high heat days. This should also include organizing a                                         City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                       Public Safety    Supportive                                       Ongoing
transportation-assistance program for individuals without access to vehicles, develop a robust heat warning system                                 Grants
and provide up-to-date information to residents about cooling center locations and the health risks of extreme heat.
                                                                                                                                                   City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
Create a phased program for seismic retrofits to existing public and private buildings to meet current requirements.   Public Safety    Supportive                                       Once
                                                                                                                                                   Grants

These are actions that would amend or update the City’s ordinances, codes, design guidelines and other rules and requirements.
 Continue to consider and evaluate new construction practices and standards that increase building energy efficiency.    Planning               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 On-going
 Update the City's Zoning Code, Subdivision Ordinance, and other related development standards to fully implement                                          City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                         Planning               Critical                                         Once
 the General Plan, emphasizing the realization of the community character envisioned in the General Plan.                                                  Grants
 Develop opportunities for live/work "artist loft" housing through zoning, regulatory incentives and funding. An
                                                                                                                         Planning & Economic    Supportive City General Fund                     As needed
 example would be to encourage or provide incentives for the inclusion of live/work space in planned developments.
 Develop creative and innovative zoning and incentives to promote a variety of high-quality residential units that will                                    City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
                                                                                                                         Planning               Critical                                         Ongoing
 also encourage a balance between housing and jobs.                                                                                                        Grants
                                                                                                                                                           City General Fund CIP, Special Funds,
 Revise zoning to encourage inclusive residential housing products.                                                      Planning Division      Supportive                                       Ongoing
                                                                                                                                                           Grants
                                                                                                                         Building & Safety Dpt,
 Update development standards to allow flexible development standards in the university area to encourage a highly
                                                                                                                         Public Works Dpt, &    Critical   City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 connected, highly walkable campus community.
                                                                                                                         Planning Division
                                                                                                                         Building & Safety Dpt,
 Update development standards to allow flexible development standards in the City Center Area to encourage the
                                                                                                                         Public Works Dpt, &    Critical   City General Fund CIP                 Ongoing
 development of a vibrant, walkable downtown.
                                                                                                                         Planning Division
 Update the City Municipal code to allow the use of shared parking, unbundled parking, and other similar techniques
                                                                                                                         Planning               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
 for private land owners.
 Develop and update guidelines for development projects that require connections from the site to the external           Public
                                                                                                                                                Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
 pedestrian network (both for residential developing and on commercial sites).                                           Works/Planning
                                                                                                                         Public
 Develop and update guidelines for development projects that promote connections to existing transit facilities                                 Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
                                                                                                                         Works/Planning
 Revisit and upgrade Noise Ordnance to reflect the commercial core, surrounding neighborhoods, and mixed-use areas
                                                                                                                         Planning               Critical   City General Fund CIP                 Once
 to better equip the City for regulating a downtown type environment.
 Require homeowners associations and gated communities to identify gaps in services, potential vulnerabilities, and
                                                                                                                         Public Safety          Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Periodic
 strategies to reduce risks to hazards in residential communities.
 Establish a local ordinance with a deadline for existing structures to meet current seismic safety standards.           Public Safety          Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
 Prepare an ordinance that require future developments to use construction techniques and methods that minimize
                                                                                                                         Planning               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
 wind-borne sediments and impacts to existing developments throughout the city.
 Update the City’s landscape ordinance to require new public facilities or park improvements to be designed using
                                                                                                                         Planning               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
 drought-tolerant tree plantings, landscaping, fences, berms, or other methods to serve as windbreaks.
 Update and enforce Title 28 of the Palm Desert Municipal Code to integrate and account for FEMA flood maps, as
                                                                                                                         Planning               Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once
 necessary.
 Incorporate new fire hazard severity zones and related state standards from CalFire.                                    Public Safety          Supportive City General Fund CIP                 Once



