3 LAND USE ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Land Use Element is to plan for and shape the future physical development of Livermore
  and to preserve and enhance Livermore’s current quality of life, so that the City can remain a community with
  a mix of land uses providing varied job and housing opportunities while maintaining its surrounding agricul-
  ture and open space. The Land Use Element is the central chapter of the General Plan.
  As required by State law, this Land Use Element contains text and maps that designate the
  future use and reuse of land within Livermore City limits. The Land Use Element also in-
  cludes standards of density and building intensity for the City of Livermore, which is also
  required by law.
  While Alameda County has direct control over land in the unincorporated part of the Plan-
  ning Area, the Livermore General Plan Land Use Element also provides guidance for this
  part of the Planning Area, which will be used by the City in commenting on projects in the
  Planning Area.
  A. Background Information
  Land Uses in 2002
  In order to verify how land was being used in the City of Livermore and the surrounding
  Planning Area, a field reconnaissance was conducted in the summer of 2002. Additional in-
  formation pertaining to 2002 land uses was obtained by reviewing the City’s land use data-
  base, as well as examining aerial photographs. Land uses, as were in existence in 2002, are
  shown illustratively in Figure 3-1.
  The existing land uses were grouped in the following general categories:
     Single-Family Residential. This is the predominant existing land use in the City. It re-
      fers to parcels which contain a single residence and related structures, such as garages
      and sheds. Some single-family residential parcels -- especially those on the edges of the
      City limits – are referred to as rural residential because they also contain orchards, vine-
      yards, and/or structures related to raising animals. Mobile homes and townhouses are al-
      so included in this category.
                                                                                                            3-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D   U S E E L E M E N T
   Multi-Family Residential. Refers to parcels containing more than one residence in the
      form of condominiums, apartments, and group housing. Multi-family housing is found
      primarily on major streets such as East Avenue, Murrieta Boulevard, and Portola Ave-
      nue.
   Office. Refers to parcels containing structures which are used to conduct business, but
      do not contain a retail component. Office buildings are located primarily on the western
      part of the City on either side of I-580, as well as in the Downtown.
   Retail. Refers to parcels that are used for the purposes of buying or selling goods and
      services (e.g., food markets, restaurants, banks, and car dealerships). Service commercial
      uses and lodging are also included in this category. Retail uses are concentrated in the
      Downtown and along major streets including First Street, Portola Avenue, and Liver-
      more Avenue.
   Industrial. Refers to parcels used for production and manufacturing, and includes
      warehouses, research and development, and production-oriented small businesses. In-
      dustrial uses are located primarily on the eastern side of the City near I-580. Additional
      industrial uses are found in the western part of the City near the Municipal Airport.
   Public. Public uses are government-owned and operated facilities such as public schools,
      post offices, the Civic Center, and fire stations.
   Churches/Religious Uses and Other Institutions. Parcels used for the practice of
      religion or spirituality including churches, synagogues, and religious residences. This cat-
      egory also includes cemeteries and private clubs.
   Parks, Recreation and Open Space. Includes recreational spaces like Robertson Park,
      the Las Positas and Springtown Golf Courses, and the rodeo grounds. This category also
      includes trails and areas of protected habitat.
3-2

                                                          FIGURE 3 - 1
                                 2002 EXISTING LAND USES
                                       (FOR ILLUSTRATIVE
                                            PURPOSES ONLY)
                                       Vacant Industrial
                                       Underdeveoped Industrial
                                       Developed Industrial
                                       Vacant BCP
                                       Developed BCP
                                        Vacant Commercial
                                       Underdeveloped Commercial
                                       Developed Commercial
                                       Public Uses
                                       Vacant Public Uses
                                       Residential Care Facilities
                                       Open Space/Agriculture
                                       Vacant Residential
                                       Allocated Residential
                                       Developed Single Family Residential
                                       Developed Multi Family Residential
N O RT H
         0      2,500 5,000 Feet
           SOURCE:
                                       LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D   U S E  E L E M E N T
   Agriculture. Includes agricultural uses such as vineyards and orchards. This use also
    includes uses that support agriculture, such as tasting rooms and touring facilities. Some
    of these parcels appear to be completely undeveloped or are utilized for grazing and oth-
    er low-intensity agriculture.
   Airport. Livermore’s Municipal Airport is located in the western portion of the City.
    Examples of Airport operations include flight instruction, fuel sales, aircraft rental, and
    maintenance and storage of aircraft.
   Undeveloped Land. This designation includes land inside the urbanized area that is be-
    ing held for development but is not yet developed.
Table 3-1 quantifies how much land within the City limits was taken up by each major land
use in 2002. Single-family residential land uses occupy 5,123 acres, the largest amount of
land in the City. Multi-family residential occupies 400 acres. Parks, recreation and open
space are the second major existing use in the City, occupying 1,696 acres, while undevel-
oped parcels occupy 1,785 acres, and agriculture occupies 1,068 acres. Public uses occupy
703 acres, and industrial uses occupy 960 acres. Office uses occupy 248 acres, retail 561
acres, and churches and other institutional uses occupy 149 acres.
Residential Growth Rate
Livermore has had a residential growth policy in place since 1976. The residential growth
rate was initially established at two percent on a first-come, first-served basis for developers.
By 1979, this strategy evolved into the Residential Development Policy (RDP), which re-
quired an extensive project review process in order to establish priority for individual devel-
opment projects. In 1988, the RDP was replaced by the three-year Housing Implementation
Program (HIP), which permitted a growth rate of between 1.5 percent and 3.5 percent annu-
ally for a three-year period. The HIP permits the City to target specific types of housing and
growth management objectives in each three-year period (see LU 2.1 and subsequent policies
and actions). As part of the 2003 General Plan update, the growth rate was changed to a
numerical range between 140 and 700 dwelling units per year, equivalent to a 0.5 to 2.5 per-
cent growth rate, based on the existing number of dwelling units as of November 2002, as
stated in policy LU-2.1.P6.
                                                                                                     3-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D  U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE 3-1         2002 EXISTING LAND USES
                                          *Net Acres Within City
Existing Land Uses
                                                 Limits
Single-Family Residential
Detached Single-Family Residential                3,919
Couplet and Zero Lot Line Residential              123
Townhouse Residential                              172
Mobile Home                                        63
Rural Residential                                  846
Total                                             5,123
Multi-Family Residential
Condominium Residential                            55
Duplex, Triplex or Fourplex                        83
Apartment (5 or more dwellings)                    241
Group Quarters                                     21
Total                                              400
Office                                             248
Retail                                             561
Industrial
Manufacturing                                      369
Research and Development                           23
Warehousing                                        118
Construction Services                              241
Repair Services                                    78
Wholesale Trade                                    131
Total                                              960
Public Uses
Educational                                        414
Governmental Offices                               41
Utility, Government Service                        252
Medical                                            26
3-6
                                                                      C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       L A N D   U S E  E L E M E N T
Total                                                                         703
Churches and Institutions
Religious Uses and Private Clubs                                              132
Cemeteries, Crematories, Mortuaries                                            17
Total                                                                         149
Parks and Recreation
Recreational Park (Golf Course)                                               353
Private Recreational                                                          196
Entertainment and Recreation                                                   62
Local Park                                                                    331
Trailways and Creeks                                                          473
Habitat Areas                                                                 282
Total                                                                        1,696
Agriculture                                                                  1,061
Agricultural Uses
Agricultural Product Sales                                                      7
Total                                                                        1,068
Airport**                                                                     400
Undeveloped Parcels                                                          1,785
Total                                                                       13,123
Source: City of Livermore, 2002.
*Total acres provided are “net” and exclude public right-of-way areas.
**Airport acreage identified represents the area used for Airport operations, including re-
quired FAA safety areas. Total area owned by the Airport, including portions used for agri-
culture which are additional safety areas, is 643 acres.
Urban Growth Boundary
Livermore is completely surrounded by an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The location
of the UGB is shown in Figure 1-2. This boundary is intended to protect existing agricultur-
al uses and natural resources outside the City from future urban development.
                                                                                                  3-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D  U S E E L E M E N T
Livermore’s UGB was completed in two phases. The South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary
Initiative, passed by local voters in March 2000, established the UGB around the southern
edge of the City. In December 2002, the City Council passed the North Livermore Urban
Growth Boundary Initiative, which completed the UGB around the northern edge of the City.
While both UGBs share goals of preserving agriculture and open space and preventing ur-
banization, the policies regarding development beyond each UGB and changes to each UGB
are different. These policies are discussed in greater detail under Objectives LU-5.1, 5.2,
10.1, 11.1, 17.1, 18.1, 19.1, and in Section F, Allowed Development in South Livermore.
Jobs/Housing Balance and Match
Jobs/housing balance is a measure of the number of jobs available in a specific area com-
pared to the number of housing units in the same area – or, more precisely, the number of
employed residents living in these housing units. As of 2002, Livermore had a fairly healthy
jobs/housing balance, with 1.5 jobs for each housing unit, resulting in about one job for eve-
ry employed resident. However, a more critical tool in assessing the environmental and eco-
nomic sustainability of a community is its jobs/housing match. Jobs/housing match com-
pares the wages paid by the jobs in an area with the cost of housing in the area. In 2002,
Livermore had relatively expensive housing units compared to relatively lower paying jobs; it
lacked affordable housing for lower paid workers and higher paying jobs for residents of
more expensive housing. The process of matching types of jobs and wages with housing
costs is critical to address potential traffic congestion and other growth impacts. The Gen-
eral Plan seeks to attain a jobs/housing balance and match without compromising other
commitments.
B. Land Use Designations
This section provides descriptions of land use designations within the City limits. All new
development in the City must conform to these designations. Public and quasi-public uses
are not described in this section, but are conditionally allowed in all land use designations.
Public and quasi-public uses are typically valued as important to community identity and
function.
3-8

                                                                           C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            L A N D    U S E  E L E M E N T
FIGURE 3-2
2002 Comparative Acreage of General Plan Land Use Categories
                                                                               Agriculture, Open
                                                                               Space and Parks
                                                                                        19.3%
                                                                               BART-owned
                                                                                    0.6%
       Residential                                                          Community Facilities
         49.9%                                                                        6.7%
                                                                                Retail and Office
                                                                                      8.2%
                                                                               Downtown
                                                                                   1.9%
                                   Mixed Use                    Industrial
                                     0.4%                        12.9%
Public and quasi-public uses include public and private schools; civic, community, and gov-
ernment buildings and uses; fire and police stations; churches; museums; parks; hospitals;
and similar essential services. Within the Open Space designation, however, only parks,
trails, and similar recreational areas and their related facilities and uses are allowed as public
or quasi-public uses. Figure 3-2 shows the comparative acreage of General Plan Land Use
Designations within City limits in 2002. Land use designations are mapped on Figure 3-3.
Residential Development
Thirteen levels of residential development are shown on the General Plan Map to accom-
modate different densities and housing styles. Each residential density is expressed in terms
of a number of dwelling units per acre, where “acre” refers to gross acres including all the
                                                                                                        3-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D  U S E E L E M E N T
land within the boundaries of the property. Gross acre may include all or a portion of adja-
cent street frontage, which is the area between the street right-of-way boundary and the mid-
line of the adjacent fronting streets (except freeways or highways). Properties with more
than one street frontage may only use the longest street frontage for purposes of calculating
residential density. Where appropriate, residential density calculations may be based on a
designation-wide/district-wide basis. The gross acre does not include any of the following:
(1) land that is to be purchased by a public agency; (2) land required for parkland dedication;
or (3) land proposed for non-residential uses. The number of residential units permitted on
each parcel or in each project shall be calculated by rounding down to the nearest whole
number when the number of units permitted on a lot is less than the next whole number.
(Reso. 2005-178; Reso. 2006-245)
Land Use Designations
Rural Residential (RR) (1 du/ac - 1 du/5 ac; Minimum lot size - 1 acre.)
The Rural Residential designation encourages large lot development with a rural character,
generally on the urban edge. This designation provides a transition between developed areas
and the agricultural and open areas surrounding the community.
Urban Low Residential (UL) (UL-1: 1 - 1.5 du/ac; UL-2: 1.5 - 2.0 du/ac)
Areas designated as Urban Low Residential may be either rural in character or may be devel-
oped at a higher density with compensable open space utilizing clustering of development.
Urban Low Medium Residential (ULM) (2.0 - 3.0 du/ac)
The Urban Low Medium Residential designation applies to a significant portion of the City
used for residential purposes, as identified on the General Plan Map. These areas provide a
transition from lower densities at the edges of town to the higher densities in the center of
the community.
3-10
                                       FIGURE 3 - 3
                                  GENERAL PLAN
                                  LAND USE MAP
         0 2,000 4,000 feet
N O RT H
                            LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D   U S E  E L E M E N T
Urban Medium Residential (UM) (3.0 - 4.5 du/ac)
The Urban Medium Residential designation also applies to a significant area used for resi-
dential land uses. These areas are generally located closer to the center of the community and
in areas surrounding commercial development.
Urban Medium High Residential (UMH) (4.5 - 6.0 du/ac)
This designation accommodates a higher-density development than Urban Low Medium and
Urban Medium designations. This designation encourages the use of “clustering” residential
development patterns to ensure the reservation of urban open spaces.
Urban High Residential (UH) (Categories 1-6)
These designations accommodate the highest range of residential densities in the City. They
provide attached housing types such as townhouses, garden apartments, and apartments.
        Category 1 (UH-1): (6 - 8 du/ac)
        Category 1 of this designation is allowed in the central and outlying areas within the
        City. Both attached and detached units are possible under this designation.
        Category 2 (UH-2): (8 - 14 du/ac)
        Category 2 of this designation is allowed in the central and outlying areas within the
        City. Townhouses and duplexes are typical under this designation.
        Category 3 (UH-3): (14 - 18 du/ac)
        Category 3 is located in areas near major roads with adequate infrastructure, public
        services, and amenities to support higher densities. This category is intended to pro-
        vide housing opportunities for all income groups in the community, including afford-
        able housing. Townhouses and garden apartments are typical under this designation.
        Category 4 (UH-4): (18 - 22 du/ac)
        Category 4 is located in areas near major roads, with adequate infrastructure, public
        services and amenities to support higher densities. This category is intended to pro-
        vide housing opportunities for all income groups in the community. Townhouses
        and apartments are typical under this designation.
                                                                                                   3-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
         Category 5 (UH-5): (22 - 38 du/ac)
         Category 5 is located in areas in or adjacent to Transit Oriented Development
         (TOD), near major roads with adequate infrastructure, public services, and amenities
         to support higher densities. This category is intended to provide housing opportuni-
         ties for all income groups in the community, including affordable housing. Primarily
         apartments, condominiums, and townhouses are typical under this designation. To
         allow flexibility in applying the density range, this category is further divided into
         UH-5a, which allows 22 - 30 du/acre and UH-5b, which allows 30 - 38 du/acre
         (Reso. 2013--153).
          Category 6 (UH-6):     (38 - 55 du/ac)
          Category 6 is located in areas in or adjacent to Transit Oriented Development
          (TOD), near major roads with adequate infrastructure, public services, and amenities
          to support higher densities. This category is intended to provide housing opportuni-
          ties for all income groups in the community, including affordable housing. Primarily
          apartments, condominiums, and townhouses are typical under this designation.
 Transferable Development Credit (TDC) Receiving Site Designations
 The residential categories listed above apply when the designation of a parcel is not subject
 to the Transferable Development Credits (TDC) Program provisions. Parcels shall be sub-
 ject to TDC Program provisions when the 2003 General Plan or any subsequent general plan
 amendments result in new residential land use designations or an increase in residential den-
 sity. Where a parcel is subject to TDC requirements, the land use designation shall incorpo-
 rate the following provisions. These provisions implement the North Livermore Urban Growth
 Boundary Initiative's requirement to provide a use for credits granted for the preservation of
 land in North Livermore. In specific plan areas, the specific plan itself states TDC require-
 ments, if any apply.
3-14
                                         FIGURE 3-4
                         TDC RECEIVER SITES
                     D
                       M
                   M
                 B             TDC Designations
             E   C
                               A      RR/UM
                               B      ULM/UH-2
J                              C      ULM/UH-3
           I
J                              D      UMH/UH-4
                 G             E      UMH/UH-2
                 G             F
          HH
                                      LII/ULM
                               G      HII-UH-3
                               H      LII-UH-3
                                I     NC/UH-4
  L     F                       J     BCP/UH-4
                               K      NML
                               L      NMM
               L               M      NMH
      K
    A
                          LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Each residential designation subject to the TDC provisions contains a baseline density
achievable without the need to comply with the City's TDC Ordinance through the acquisi-
tion of transferable development credits (TDCs) or payment of an in-lieu fee if one is adopt-
ed. This baseline density is equal to the maximum density allowed without the use of TDCs.
The baseline density shall be equal to the maximum density allowed prior to the adoption of
the 2003 General Plan or any subsequent general plan amendments that result in new resi-
dential land use designations or an increase in residential density. Applicants who wish to
exceed this baseline density must comply with the City's TDC Ordinance by purchasing
TDCs or paying an in-lieu fee, if one is adopted. Under the TDC option, total development
shall not exceed the maximum density allowed under the General Plan designation.
For projects that incorporate affordable or other types of special housing as defined by the
TDC Ordinance and/or utilize designated State, county, or City incentive density bonus
programs, the City Council may waive some or all of the TDC requirement and/or increase
the baseline density.
To promote awareness of these TDC provisions, the General Plan Land Use Map shall iden-
tify TDC receiving areas by means of a two-part classification. The first part of the classifi-
cation indicates baseline or maximum density allowed when developers choose not to use
the TDC option. The second part of the classification states the maximum density allowed
when developers choose to exceed the baseline density and comply with the requirements of
the City's TDC Ordinance. The following list identifies the TDC receiving area classifica-
tions. The letters preceding each classification correspond to Figure 3-4 (TDC Receiving Areas)
indicating the location of these TDC receiving areas.
Type A – Rural Residential/Urban Medium Residential (RR/UM)
Baseline of 1 du/ac – 1 du/5 ac (the maximum density when developers decline to use TDC
option) or a maximum of 3 du/ac – 4.5 du/ac maximum when developers choose to exceed
the baseline and comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
                                                                                                3-17

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Type B – Urban Low Medium Residential/Urban High Residential-2 (ULM/UH-2)
Baseline of 2 du/ac – 3 du/ac (the maximum density when developers decline to use TDC
option) or a maximum of 8 – 14 du/ac when developers choose to exceed the baseline and
comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type C — Urban Low Medium Residential/Urban High Residential-3 (ULM/UH-3)
Baseline of 2 du/ac – 3 du/ac (the maximum density when developers decline to use TDC
option) or a maximum of 14 – 18 du/ac when developers choose to exceed the baseline and
comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type D – Urban Low Medium Residential/Urban High Residential-4 (ULM/UH-4)
Baseline of 2 du/ac – 3 du/ac (the maximum density when developers decline to use TDC
option) or a maximum of 18 – 22 du/ac when developers choose to exceed the baseline and
comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type E – Urban Medium High Residential/Urban High Residential-2 (UMH/UH-2)
Baseline of 4.5 du/ac - 6 du/ac (the maximum density when developers decline to use TDC
option) or a maximum of 8 – 14 du/ac when developers choose to exceed the baseline and
comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type F – Low Intensity Industrial/Urban Low Medium (LII/ULM)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option choose to use the industrial
designation, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC
option and comply with the City’s TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density
of 2 du/ac – 3 du/ac.
Type G – High Intensity Industrial/Urban High Residential-3 (HII/UH-3)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option choose to use the industrial
designation, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC
option and comply with City's TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density of
14 – 18 du/ac.
3-18

                                                                      C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Type H – Low Intensity Industrial/Urban High Residential-3 (LII/UH-3)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option choose to use the industrial
designation, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC
option and comply with City's TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density of
14 – 18 du/ac.
Type I- Neighborhood Commercial/Urban High Residential -3 (NC/UH- 3)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option choose to use the commer-
cial designation, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC
option and comply with City’s TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density of
14-18 du/ac. (Reso. 2006-246)
Type J – Business & Commercial Park/Urban High Residential-4 (BCP/UH-4)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option chose to use BCP designa-
tion, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC option
and comply with the City’s TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density of 18 –
22 du/ac.
Type N – Office Commercial/Urban High Residential-2 (OC/UH-2)
Baseline of 0 du/ac (developers who decline to use TDC option choose to use the commer-
cial designation, which allows no residential development). Developers who choose the TDC
option and comply with the City’s TDC Ordinance can build a maximum residential density
of 8-14 du/ac. (Reso. 2007-239)
Commercial Development
Five basic commercial use designations are shown on the General Plan Land Use Map in
Figure 3-3: Service Commercial, Highway Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Com-
munity Serving General Commercial, and Office Commercial. Downtown commercial is
described in the Mixed-Use section, below. Commercial designations encourage a range of
conveniently located goods and services that meet the needs of Livermore residents, and also
include measures to reduce competition between Downtown and other large retail centers in
the City. Allowed building intensity for commercial uses are described by Floor Area Ratio
(FAR).
                                                                                               3-19

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Land Use Designations
Service Commercial (SC) (.30 FAR)
Service Commercial uses, which support other activities in the Downtown, include auto sales
and service, nurseries, home maintenance centers and wholesale establishments. This desig-
nation is applied to areas outside of the Downtown along major streets, in the general vicini-
ty of freeway interchanges, or at other locations with significant access potential from the
community at large.
Highway Commercial (HC) (.30 FAR)
The Highway Commercial designation is applied to commercial development near I-580 in-
terchanges and is intended to primarily serve the traveling public. Future expansion of
highway commercial development shall be limited to the freeway interchange locations that
are consistent with visual resource policies. Appropriate uses include hotels and motels, res-
taurants, and motor vehicle and gasoline service stations. Additional uses include freeway-
dependent uses and freeway signs, which provide services to the traveling public and allow
for convenient freeway access. Since Highway Commercial areas are also visible from the
interstate and function as gateways to the community, the City shall prepare specific devel-
opment plans for these areas to ensure they are attractive. Freeway uses and signs shall be
located within freeway quadrants to provide services to the traveling public while allowing
for visibility and convenient freeway access.
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) (.30 FAR)
Neighborhood Commercial areas will serve neighborhood convenience shopping needs.
Neighborhood Commercial areas are defined as planned commercial centers, with a grocery
store and smaller supporting uses, located on a major arterial. Neighborhood Commercial
areas shall be limited to general daily service needs. Examples of uses that serve a daily need
are large grocery stores, drug stores, informal restaurants, video stores and personal services
such as beauty salons and dry cleaners. Examples of existing Neighborhood Commercial
areas in Livermore are Vintner Square (First and P Streets), Arroyo Park (First Street and Las
Positas Road), Granada Shopping Center (Concannon Boulevard and Holmes Street), Porto-
la Village (Portola Avenue and North Livermore Avenue), and Peppertree Plaza (Murrieta
Avenue and Stanley Boulevard). Neighborhood-serving professional and commercial offic-
3-20
                                                                         C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
es, such as real estate offices, law offices, insurance agencies, or medical offices, are also ap-
propriate.
Community Serving General Commercial (CSGC) (.30 FAR)
The Community Serving General Commercial (CSGC) designation provides for commercial
uses appropriate to locations outside of the Downtown, in areas with significant access po-
tential from the region and the community at large. The CSGC designation identifies loca-
tions along major streets, and adjacent and accessible to a highway or freeway, where any
one or combination of significant community serving retail, office, and service activity is ap-
propriate. A broad range of potential commercial uses are appropriate. The precise com-
mercial mix and uses will be identified at the time of zoning or specific project review. In
general, the CSGC encourages the location of commercial uses generally consisting of a size,
bulk, and coverage found in a regional retail shopping center environment, including:
   Destination-oriented prime retail tenants and accessory retail uses;
   Business and commercial services; and
   Professional and administrative offices.
CSGC areas will be compatible with surrounding land uses, including surrounding commer-
cial activity, and will complement commercial uses within the Downtown. The CSGC will
be implemented through the Planned Development (PD) zoning district process utilizing
market research, site design, and access to assure that community impacts have been identi-
fied and fully ameliorated. The PD Zoning District would identify the appropriate range of
land uses and development standards consistent with the intent of the designation to ensure
compatibility within the development and with adjacent land uses.
Office Commercial (OC) (.30 FAR)
The Office Commercial designation applies to areas throughout the City, and is intended to
have minimum to no adverse impacts upon immediate neighborhoods and residential char-
acter. Office Commercial areas provide sites for offices for medical, legal, insurance, and
similar uses. In order to ensure maximum compatibility with land use development patterns,
these areas permit limited, small-scale neighborhood serving retail uses for the convenience
                                                                                                  3-21

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
of and benefit to the surrounding neighborhood, and medium density residential develop-
ment consistent with the Urban High-3 Residential land use designation (14 to 18 du/acre).
Neighborhood serving commercial uses are typically locally-based stores or small scale shops
selling various types of merchandise. Larger planned or strip commercial centers with re-
gional or national retailers would not be considered appropriate for this designation. (Reso.
2010-034)
Mixed-Use
Mixed-use development allows or encourages different but compatible uses to be located in
close proximity to each other. A common example of mixed-use is a two- or three-story
building with retail or office space on the ground floor and apartments on the upper floors.
Mixed-use development provides housing close to jobs and services, thereby reducing the
need to drive and encouraging people to walk or bike to their destination. Mixed-use devel-
opment is also often located around transit services, increasing transit usage and reducing
automobile dependency.
Land Use Designations
Downtown Area (DA)
The Downtown Area (DA) designation is a general designation that applies to the area tradi-
tionally known as Downtown Livermore. The DA seeks to provide a unique, locally-
oriented, pedestrian-friendly shopping environment. Higher-intensity residential develop-
ment of a density that will support the predominantly commercial environment is integral to
the economic viability of this district. This area encompasses approximately 270 acres and
supports a variety of mixed uses, including commercial, office, entertainment, cultural arts,
lodging, and residential. Anticipated maximum development potential in the DA analyzed in
the Final Environmental Impact Report (FEIR) prepared and certified in 2003 and the Sub-
sequent FEIR certified in 2009 for the General Plan and Downtown Specific Plan, by land
use, is as follows: Commercial – 1,000,000 square feet; Office – 356,000 square feet; Enter-
tainment – 2,500 performance art seats and up to 15 movie theater screens; Lodging – 300
rooms; and Residential – 3,600 units (Reso. 2009-055). Land uses, development, and rede-
velopment in the Downtown Area shall be implemented through a specific plan. More spe-
cific designations, development standards, design requirements, and land use specifications
applicable to the Downtown are provided in the Downtown Specific Plan.
3-22

                                                                      C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
The initial maximum residential development potential within the Downtown Area shall be
2,000 new units as of February 2004. After approval of 1,400 new residential units, the City
Council shall review the progress of the implementation of the specific plan. The City
Council shall consider increasing the maximum number of new dwellings to 3,259 from the
February 2004 base number, for a build-out total of 3,600 residential units, unless there is a
compelling reason not to implement the build-out scenario analyzed in the FEIR prepared
and certified for the 2003 General Plan and Downtown Specific Plan.
Neighborhood Mixed-Use (NM)
The Neighborhood Mixed-Use designations are intended to help improve the pedestrian ori-
entation of Livermore’s neighborhoods by providing neighborhood commercial services
within walking distance of existing residents and integrating housing with commercial devel-
opment on a single site. Neighborhood serving commercial uses are typically locally-based
stores or small scale shops selling various types of merchandise, as well as small-scale food
service uses such as a local market, deli, or coffee shop. Mixed residential and commercial
land uses are required at these sites. Projects developed primarily for residential uses must
provide a minimum of 20-percent floor area for commercial uses. Section H (New Mixed-Use
Neighborhoods) discusses particular requirements for two specific mixed-use planning areas,
being the East Side Transitional Areas and the Greenville BART Transit Oriented Devel-
opment (TOD) Area. (Reso. 2010-034)
Parcels designated Neighborhood Mixed-Use are TDC receiving areas. As with all of the
residential receiving areas described above, developers can achieve a baseline density for res-
idential development on land with these classifications without complying with the City's
TDC Ordinance. To exceed the baseline density, developers must comply with the TDC
Ordinance, but in no event can developments exceed the maximum density allowed by these
designations. The letters preceding each classification correspond to Figure 3-4 (TDC Receiv-
ing Sites) indicating the location of these TDC areas.
Type K – Neighborhood Mixed-Use Low Density (NML)
A maximum of .30 FAR is allowed for the commercial portion development on these sites.
The residential baseline density is 2 du/ac – 3 du/ac (maximum density when developers
                                                                                               3-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
decline to use TDC option) or 12 du/ac – 15 du/ac maximum when developers choose to
exceed the baseline density and comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type L – Neighborhood Mixed-Use Medium Density (NMM)
A maximum of .30 FAR is allowed for the commercial portion development on these sites.
The residential baseline density is 3 du/ac – 4.5 du/ac (maximum density when developers
decline to use TDC option) or 15 du/ac – 24 du/ac maximum when developers choose to
exceed the baseline density and comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Type M – Neighborhood Mixed-Use High Density (NMH)
A maximum of .30 FAR is allowed for the commercial portion development on these sites.
The residential baseline is 6 du/ac – 8 du/ac (maximum density when developers decline to
use TDC option) or 24 du/ac – 38 du/ac maximum when developers choose to exceed
baseline and comply with City's TDC Ordinance.
Industrial Development
Industrial designations are applied to certain areas of the City where existing industrial use
occurs or where industry can be isolated or buffered from residential uses. The three indus-
trial designations included on the General Plan Land Use Map are Business and Commercial
Park, High Intensity Industrial, and Low Intensity Industrial. Many of the areas designated
for industrial uses are located near the Airport and freeway interchange approaches to the
City. Therefore, quality site planning and design standards should be carefully applied in or-
der to maintain an attractive image of the City.
Land Use Designations
Business and Commercial Park (BCP) (Site coverage provided by use)
This designation identifies locations along major streets, and in the general vicinity of free-
way interchanges, where a mix of limited service and highway commercial, communi-
ty/regional commercial retail, office and light industrial activities may be appropriate. The
BCP designation encourages the development of employment-generating activities adjacent
to destination-oriented and limited retail commercial uses. In addition to office and light in-
dustrial activities, uses could include large, planned commercial centers or stand-alone big-
3-24

                                                                          C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                           L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
box retailers with service uses of a scale and function to serve both surrounding employ-
ment-generating activities and the regional market.
The BCP designation is placed on areas of a minimum of 20 acres where it will promote the
location of:
   Community/regional commercial uses that, due to their size and land requirements, have
     specialized locational criteria, including:
      Large, destination-oriented retail commercial uses (e.g. factory outlet centers, ware-
         house wholesale/retail stores) (Maximum site coverage - .30)
      Large commercial service uses (e.g. home improvement centers, furnishings and ap-
         pliance stores, automobile and recreational vehicles sales) (Maximum site coverage -
         .30)
   Professional and administrative offices (Maximum site coverage - .40)
   Highway-oriented commercial uses where appropriate (e.g. hotel/motel, convention cen-
     ter) (Maximum site coverage - .40)
   Support and ancillary services (e.g. restaurants, service stations) (Maximum site coverage
     - .50)
   Low Intensity Industrial uses compatible with the above uses. (Maximum site coverage -
     .45)
Low-Intensity Industrial (LII) (Maximum site coverage - .45)
Appropriate uses for this designation include manufacturing, warehousing, research and de-
velopment facilities, fully-enclosed recycling facilities, and administrative and professional
offices. Unlike uses within the High-Intensity Industrial designation, light industrial uses
should not include objectionable levels of noise, vibration, odors, glare, or hazard that would
create a nuisance for surrounding uses. Low-intensity industrial uses are focused around the
Municipal Airport. Low-intensity industrial uses are also located within the area east of the
Airport runway but may not violate the “clear zone” restrictions, or impact existing residen-
tial areas.
                                                                                                   3-25

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
High-Intensity Industrial (HII) (Maximum site coverage - .60)
Appropriate uses for this designation include manufacturing, warehousing, research and de-
velopment facilities, recycling facilities, and heavy industry that uses, stores, or processes raw
materials. The High-Intensity Industrial designation is intended to provide an insulated area
for uses that may be objectionable in other areas due to noise, odors, vibration, glare or haz-
ards. High-intensity industrial uses are concentrated between Patterson Pass Road and I-
580, generally between Mines Road and Greenville Road.
Open Space and Agriculture
Open Space and Agriculture designations are applied primarily to outlying areas of the City,
creating a “greenbelt” around the City and preserving Livermore’s agriculture and scenic vis-
tas. There are eight Open Space and Agriculture designations, reflecting various levels of use
and resource protection.
Land Use Designations
Open Space (OSP)
The Open Space designation is applied to areas to be maintained as permanent or semi-
permanent open space. This designation may be applied to areas that are already open
space, and those that should remain open space because they have valuable natural or scenic
resources, or because they are unsuitable for development due to environmental hazards.
This designation includes parks, trailways, recreation areas, recreation corridors, and protect-
ed areas, such as creeks and arroyos, or similar open space uses determined appropriate for
the site. All proposed structures on parcels designated OSP are subject to City Design Re-
view. General locations for potential future park facilities are indicated on the General Plan
Land Use Map by a floating designation as a circular symbol and the text “OSP.” Floating
designations indicate the need for the facility within the general area of the City where future
need for this facility is anticipated. Floating designations are not intended to be site specific.
Agriculture/Viticulture (AGVT) (100-acre site minimum; 1 du/100 ac)
Agriculture/Viticulture areas have been designated to preserve and promote agriculture and
viticulture uses in locations suitable for cultivated agriculture, and to protect sensitive or
unique environmental and land characteristics, including an area’s rural character. Additional
3-26

                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
discussion on the AGVT designation is provided in Land Use Element Section F, Allowed
Development in South Livermore Valley, including provisions for a Rural Density Program.
Limited Agriculture (LDAG) (20-acre minimum site)
The Limited Agriculture designation applies to those areas where 20-acre parcels may be ap-
propriate due to existing parcel size. Appropriate uses are similar to those in the Agricul-
ture/Viticulture designation. This designation may be used to create a transition between
the areas of Large Parcel Agriculture or Agriculture/Viticulture surrounding the City and the
low-density residential areas on its outskirts.
Hillside Conservation (HLCN) (1 du/20 ac to 1 du/100 ac)
The intent of this designation is to protect the natural resources of hillside areas, avoid de-
velopment in areas with potentially hazardous hillside conditions, maintain the visual quality
of hills and ridgelines, create a public trail system, and retain the existing rural character and
small-scale agriculture of the area. This designation establishes a series of performance
standards for determining density, based on physical and environmental features such as
slope gradient, ridgelines, and existing and potential landslides. Relatively unconstrained
sites, those with slopes below 20 percent gradient, will be permitted up to 1 dwelling unit per
20 acres; sites with steeper slopes and additional constraints will be permitted 1 unit per 100
acres. No development is permitted on the steepest slopes or ridgetops. However, these
areas may be given a density credit of 1 unit per 100 acres that could be transferred to other
portions of the property or within the Hillside Conservation designation when using a spe-
cific plan.
Large Parcel Agriculture (LPA) (100-acre minimum site)
This is a designation from the Alameda County East County Area Plan (ECAP) that applies
to locations outside the City UGB but within the Planning Area. Only the following uses, as
identified in the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, and their normal and appro-
priate accessory uses and structures (as well as uses preemptively authorized by federal and
State law), may be permitted in North Livermore, including: agricultural uses, agriculture
processing facilities, limited agricultural support uses, secondary residential uses, visitor serv-
ing commercial facilities, recreational uses, public and quasi public uses, solid waste landfills
and related waste management facilities, quarries, wind farms and related facilities, utility cor-
                                                                                                    3-27
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
ridors, and similar uses compatible with agriculture. This is the default designation for un-
designated parcels on the General Plan Land Use Map.
Resource Management (RMG) (100-acre minimum site size; 1 du/parcel)
This is also a designation from the ECAP. It is intended mainly for land designated for
long-term preservation as open space, but may include low-intensity agricultural or residen-
tial uses. The Resource Management designation provides for agricultural uses, recreational
uses, habitat protection, watershed management, public and quasi-public uses, secondary res-
idential units, active sand and gravel and other quarries, reclaimed quarry lakes, and similar
and compatible uses. This designation is also applied to areas unsuitable for development
because of public health and safety hazards or environmentally-sensitive features. One sin-
gle-family home per parcel is allowed provided that all relevant development standards are
met.
Water Management Lands (WML) (100-acre minimum site; 1du/parcel)
This designation is also from the ECAP. It provides for active sand and gravel quarries, re-
claimed quarry lakes, watershed lands, arroyos and similar and compatible uses. One single-
family home per parcel is allowed provided that all relevant development standards are met.
Open Space/Sand and Gravel (OSP/S & G)
These are areas of Statewide concern due to their demonstrated level of quality aggregate.
The primary use allowed in areas designated OSP/S & G is open space, as defined above
under Open Space (OSP), and sand and gravel extraction, processing and related activities
shall be secondary. Use of S & G lands for agricultural use shall be given priority over min-
eral extraction in areas where the soils are designated for prime or unique farmland. Extrac-
tion of aggregate shall be conditionally permitted only after appropriate mitigation for poten-
tial impacts to environmental resources and surrounding uses has been provided. Processing
and distribution of aggregate uses shall be limited to ensure that impacts on downwind land
uses are appropriately mitigated.
3-28
                                                                         C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Community Facilities
The Community Facilities designation provides areas for public agencies and institutions,
including City, County, State and federal government facilities, Livermore Valley Joint Uni-
fied School District property, and the Livermore Municipal Airport. General locations for
potential community facilities (i.e., schools and parks) are indicated on the General Plan
Land Use Map by a floating designation; parks are indicated by a circular symbol and the text
“OSP,” and schools are indicated by a building–shaped symbol and the text “CF-S” or “CF-
H.” Floating designations indicate the need for the facility within the general area of the City
where future need for these facilities is anticipated. Floating designations are not intended to
be site specific. Community Facility designations identify areas for the following specific
public uses:
Land Use Designations
CF-Elementary School (CF-E)
CF-Intermediate School (CF-I)
CF-High School (CF-H)
CF-Community College (CF-JC)
CF-Fire Station (FS)
CF-Civic Center (CF-CC)
CF-Cemetery (CF-CE)
CF-Government Services (CF)
CF-Airport (CF-AIR)
CF-Post Office (PO)
CF-Hospital (HOSP)
CF-BART (BART)
CF-Government Research and Development (CF-R&D)
                                                                                                  3-29

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
C. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal LU-1         Protect the unique qualities of Livermore, which include a historic
                  Downtown, a variety of residential neighborhoods, vineyards, ranches,
                  natural habitats and open space.
 Objective LU-1.1 Locate new development so as to create a consolidated pattern
 of urbanization, maximizing the use of existing public services and facilities.
      Policies
        P1.      Except where special conditions warrant, the City shall allow development only on those prop-
                 erties immediately adjacent to established urban areas, in accordance with the North Liver-
                 more Urban Growth Boundary Initiative. (NLUGBI)
        P2.      Residential development shall be limited to those areas within the UGB.
        P3.      The City shall annex all lands currently under County jurisdiction and within
                 the UGB prior to development in areas designated for urban uses.
        P4.      The City shall encourage the use of the planned development concept where
                 possible to decrease construction costs, provide open space, increase the varie-
                 ty of housing types and provide integrated very low-, low-, and moderate-
                 income housing.
      Actions
      A1.     Maintain a file in the Community Development Department of vacant residential
              acreage which provides an inventory of land suitable for single-family and multi-
              family residential development, in accordance with Housing Element goals, pro-
              grams, and objectives. Maintain maps indicating current zoning as well as public
              facilities and services to these sites. In addition, identify sites which could be
              made available through changes in zoning on the General Plan Map.
3-30
                                                                                 C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
   A2.    Periodically review and, as necessary, update City codes and regulations for con-
          sistency with General Plan policy.
Objective LU-1.2 Create neighborhoods that include a mix of uses and a range of
housing types to meet the needs of all residents.
   Policy
   P1.    Where possible, neighborhood and community commercial uses shall be integrat-
          ed with public uses in similar areas as comprehensively designed service centers
          that include public facilities, day care centers, multi-purpose meeting places,
          health care facilities, housing for the elderly, transportation centers, and schools.
Objective LU-1.3 Utilize the transferring of density in order to preserve environ-
mentally and aesthetically sensitive areas.
   Policies
   P1.    The density transfer must be based upon a “general public benefit,” such as re-
          moving density from a hillside location to a valley location with fewer environ-
          mental and aesthetic consequences.
   P2.    The density transfer must involve a “receiving site.” (NLUGBI)
   P3.    The final density of a receiving site must fall within the designated range of density specified for
          the site. (NLUGBI)
   P4.    Any transfer must look at the total “public benefit facility” capacity serving the
          receiving site. That is, there needs to be sufficient infrastructure (roads, water,
          sewer, storm drainage, etc.) and public services (police, fire, schools, etc.).
                                                                                                          3-31

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Objective LU-1.4 Encourage commercial development that will support and en-
hance a vibrant Downtown and serve existing neighborhoods.
      Policies
      P1.     The Downtown shall serve as the primary local commercial area and as the City’s
              historic and pedestrian-oriented retail shopping area within the period of the
              General Plan.
      P2.     The City shall encourage a combination of specialty retail, office, entertainment
              (e.g., movie and performing art theaters), and other retail uses that serve a daily
              and occasional need in the Downtown. Such uses are those in neighborhood-
              service retail centers, as well as stores selling specialty goods, quality goods, and
              quality and specialty restaurants.
      P3.     Downtown shopping shall be supplemented by neighborhood shopping centers,
              consisting of retail convenience and personal service uses. Neighborhood shop-
              ping centers should be located so that the “trade area” residents are within rela-
              tively easy walking distance. Neighborhood centers should be more than one-
              mile apart so as not to overlap with adjacent trade areas. Regional and communi-
              ty serving uses are to be located in areas designated as Business and Commercial
              Park or Community Serving General Commercial.
      P4.     Neighborhood-serving retail centers shall be limited to general use daily service
              needs, such as grocery stores, informal restaurants, drug stores, salons, and dry
              cleaners. Neighborhood-serving retail centers are defined as planned commercial
              centers with a grocery store and smaller supporting uses located on a major arteri-
              al.
      P5.     Before new development is allowed in designated Neighborhood Commercial ar-
              eas, a planned development shall be developed for each such area showing circu-
              lation and land use in the interest of safety, convenience, and maximum benefit
              for tenant and shopper alike. This process shall be done in cooperation with the
              property owners and tenants of each area. The planned development will estab-
3-32

                                                                  C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
    lish a basic framework for circulation, land use, building, signage, and landscaping
    that will permit orderly growth as the service area of each center expands.
P6. Regional and community serving retail centers shall be limited only to retail uses
    that are regional-serving, e.g., big box retailers and other large national retailers.
    Regional centers are defined as large, planned commercial centers or stand-alone
    big-box retailers with service uses of a scale and function to serve a regional or
    community-wide market and a location adjacent and accessible to a highway or
    freeway.
P7. Highway commercial development adjacent to I-580 shall be limited to areas in
    close proximity to freeway interchanges.
P8. The City shall prohibit strip commercial development, whether retail, office, or
    service commercial, to avoid the following problems:
    (a) traffic congestion resulting from inadequately controlled areas;
    (b) high public costs of widening and improving major streets in order to accom-
        modate traffic movement;
    (c) difficulty in containment of such areas;
    (d) poor aesthetic character where site planning, architectural style, landscaping,
        and signing are inadequate; and
    (e) the spread of blight into adjacent neighborhoods.
P9. The Business and Commercial Park (BCP) designation shall be implemented
    through the Planned Development (PD) zoning district or the Highway Service
    Commercial (CHS) zoning district, either of which requires site plan approval.
    The PD zoning district would identify the appropriate range of land uses con-
    sistent with the intent of the designation to ensure compatibility within the devel-
    opment and with adjacent land uses. The CHS zoning district may apply to ap-
    propriate locations within each interchange quadrant for freeway dependant uses,
    which provide an essential highway service to the traveling public. The CHS zon-
    ing district restricts freeway signs to freeway dependant uses located within free-
                                                                                           3-33
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
              way interchange quadrants. Freeway uses should provide services to the traveling
              public while allowing for visibility and convenient freeway access.
Objective LU-1.5 Protect the City’s investments in public property and preserve
public lands for the use of the whole community.
      Policies
      P1.     The City shall protect the public investment in the Las Positas Community Col-
              lege site through policies and land use proposals which will assure compatible use
              of adjacent properties.
      P2.     The City shall not dispose of publicly-owned lands or commit undeveloped pub-
              licly-owned lands to long term use unless such actions are consistent with policies
              and proposals of the General Plan. The City shall not dispose of or otherwise relinquish
              easements granted under the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative (NLUG-
              BI).
      P3.     Public lands and buildings which are no longer used or suitable for the functions
              for which they were originally acquired shall not be considered “surplus” without
              careful consideration first being given to their potential for other public use, in-
              cluding sites for affordable housing, where appropriate. The availability of public
              lands shall be viewed as an asset for the long-term benefit of the community
              which shall not be sacrificed for short-term gain. Leasing shall be considered as
              an alternative to land sales where their disposition is consistent with the General
              Plan.
      P4.     In connection with LU-1.5.P3 above, the City shall investigate purchasing or leas-
              ing surplus State or federal lands for local use prior to giving up its right-of first-
              refusal. In any event, the City shall study the potential of such lands for non-City
              local use and advise the appropriate local body of such potential.
3-34

                                                                        C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                         L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-2     The City recognizes that it has an overriding responsibility to promul-
              gate policies and programs, which will result in the management of
              growth to best serve the health, safety, and general welfare of its resi-
              dents. (NLUGBI)
Objective LU-2.1 Develop and phase new housing at a rate that can be absorbed by
public infrastructure and in a manner that fits within Livermore’s character.
   Policies
      P1.    The City shall ensure that the management of community growth will assure
             that the natural amenities and environmental qualities which are among its
             greatest assets can be successfully improved, preserved, and enhanced.
      P2.    The City shall strive to achieve a balanced relationship between residential de-
             velopment and commercial and industrial development to provide local em-
             ployment and to realize an adequate tax base.
      P3.    Future growth shall not exceed the community’s capability to provide services.
             School classroom facilities, sewage treatment capacity, treated domestic water,
             public parks and recreation, and public safety services shall be the principal fac-
             tors considered.
      P4.    The quality and design of residential facilities shall also be an important com-
             ponent of the City’s population growth policies. It shall be the continuing re-
             sponsibility of the City to monitor these factors to assure compliance with the
             goals and policies of the Plan.
      P5.    The City shall establish a growth range which supports the goals and policies
             for well-managed growth. The Planning Commission shall develop general
             policy recommendations, and the Growth Review Committee, appointed by
             the City Council, shall develop growth range recommendations for well-
             managed growth. Recommendations shall take into consideration the follow-
             ing factors:
                                                                                                 3-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
              (a) State and federal policies and standards relating to the environment, including
                  air quality;
              (b) The need for the City to accommodate a reasonable share of regional popula-
                  tion growth with regards to Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)
                  population projections;
              (c) Energy conservation;
              (d) Historical growth patterns relative to the Bay Area and Alameda County;
              (e) The need to encourage infill development in the City;
              (f) The need to provide very-low and low-income housing consistent with
                  ABAG’s housing needs determination;
              (g) The need to support viable local employment and commerce opportunities;
              (h) The need for well-designed, high quality housing;
              (i) The need to ensure that public facilities and services can adequately support
                  future growth; and
              (j) The desirability of providing a jobs/housing balance, as well as a jobs/housing
                  match.
        P6.      It shall be the residential growth policy of the City to plan for an average resi-
                 dential population growth fixed range between 140 and 700 dwelling units an-
                 nually (based on 0.5 to 2.5 percent of 2002 housing units). The computation of
                 the growth range shall not include small projects of four (4) units or less, which
                 are exempt from growth management. The City may guarantee yearly housing
                 allocations through approved specific plans to encourage and support residen-
                 tial development within the specific plan planning area. In this circumstance,
                 the Citywide yearly housing allocations shall not be less than the number of
                 dwelling units guaranteed under approved specific plans. In addition, the City
                 shall grant 100 housing allocations per year for six years (2004 through 2009)
                 and 200 housing allocations per year for an additional seven years (2010
                 through 2016) to TDC-retiring projects, as explained in LU-2.1.P15. (Reso.
                 2005-015)
        P7.      The targeted growth determination may vary, plus or minus, up to 10 units. In
                 order to exceed the targeted growth determination, a project must meet the fol-
                 lowing criteria:
3-36

                                                                 C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
    (a) The project receives a “Good” or better in the Housing Implementation Pro-
        gram;
    (b) More than one-half of the units of the project could be accommodated within
        the targeted growth determination; and
    (c) If needed, the tiebreaker is that the project is in a targeted category in the
        Housing Implementation Program.
    To encourage development of very-low income units, projects that reserve a
    minimum of 35 percent of the units for very-low income residents shall not be
    required to participate in the competitive review process. Very-low income
    projects will be included in the calculation of the City’s annual growth
    determination.
P8.    To promote the permanent protection and expansion of cultivated agriculture
       in the South Livermore Valley, bonus parcels created within the City under the
       Agriculture/Viticulture land use designation, Conditional Urban Overlay Dis-
       trict, and Transferred Development Overlay District are not required to partic-
       ipate in the competitive review process. An average of up to 200 units per year
       will be authorized within the Agriculture/Viticulture, Conditional Urban Over-
       lay District, and Transferred Development Overlay District pursuant to proce-
       dures set forth in the Land Use Element Section F, Allowed Development in South
       Livermore Valley, and in the South Livermore Valley Specific Plan for the period
       beginning January 1, 1998 and ending December 31, 2005. Bonus parcels with-
       in the Overlay Districts will be included in the calculation of the City’s annual
       growth determination.
P9.    To promote development and redevelopment in the Downtown, 200 units per
       year shall be authorized within the Downtown Area, for a maximum of 2,000
       units for the period beginning February 2004 and ending December 31, 2013.
       For this period of time, Downtown Area units are not required to participate in
       the competitive review process. Please refer to the Downtown Specific Plan
       for the implementation details of this policy.
                                                                                          3-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
        P10.     The detailed implementation process of the growth determination shall be
                 adopted by resolution of the City Council and outlined in the program admin-
                 istration pamphlet, but shall include the following general steps:
              (a) Determine a Specific Three-Year Housing Implementation Program: Using the Housing
                  Element of the General Plan as a guide, the City shall develop a Three-Year
                  Housing Plan. In developing the Plan, the City shall consider, among other
                  issues, infrastructure requirements and limitations as they relate to the
                  proposed growth, including but not limited to capacities of the sewer and
                  water and street systems of the City; service requirements including schools,
                  safety and administrative services; environmental impacts and constraints; the
                  very-low and low income housing needs of the City; and the current job
                  growth rate in Livermore.
                  The program would delineate:
                    (1) The type and/or location of residential units targeted for development;
                    (2) Project specific criteria that will be used to evaluate individual projects;
                           and
                    (3) The process and schedule by which the Competitive and Non-
                           Competitive Housing Implementation Program will be undertaken.
              (b) Determine the Specific Yearly Growth Determination for the Three Year Period: Using
                  the total number of dwelling units to be built during the three-year period as
                  determined in LU-2.1.P10(a)(1) above, the annual growth determination shall
                  be determined. This annual growth determination must be within the range of
                  140 to 700 units, as set by the General Plan.
              (c) Calculation of Yearly Housing Allocation: Determine the yearly housing allocation
                  in the range of 140 to 700 units.
                  (1) If during the current three-year Housing Implementation Program, the
                       annual applications for allocations exceed the three-year growth
                       determination, the City Council may allocate up to 150 units per year
3-38
                                                                    C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
             from the first two years of the next three-year Housing Implementation
             Program (Reso. 2005-015).
     (d) Determine Allocation Recipients in a competitive Review Process: Developers shall
         submit an application consisting of:
         (1) A concept site plan showing street and lot layout, number and types of
               units, building footprints, etc.
         (2) Typical elevations of buildings, walls, carports, fences, etc.
         (3) Plans that show landscaping, usable open spaces and other amenities.
         The City will evaluate and rank the applications using the goals of the Three-
         Year Housing Plan (See LU P7(1)), and the other criteria and standards of the
         implementation process.
     (e) Award Housing Allocations: Those projects determined eligible to receive
         allocations will proceed with the normal subdivision, site plan, design review,
         and other necessary approval processes.
     (f) Exempt Projects: Projects that are exempt from either the competitive process
         or the growth range are subject to the normal subdivision, site plan, design
         review, and other necessary approval processes.
P11.    When residential growth applications fall below the established growth range of
        the residential management program, the City shall allocate residential units
        without a competitive review process. The City will identify procedures in the
        Housing Implementation Program to be utilized in years when the number of
        units required are less than those established by this policy. These procedures
        shall maintain the administrative integrity of the program, but will not attempt
        to manage the range of growth or implement other growth management objec-
        tives.
       The unused portion of any year’s approved development, if the development is
       not extended, may only be reallocated for use within the specific three-year HIP
       cycle. The actual growth determination must meet the goals and policies of the
                                                                                             3-39

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
                 General Plan. The need for growth determination policy and the basis for the
                 determination selected is as follows:
              (a) Managed growth provides the City the ability to more reasonably anticipate
                  the public service and facility needs created by residential development.
                  Managed growth allows the City to more effectively program the timing and
                  funding of needed improvements.
              (b) Livermore is part of a critical air basin. In 1999, the San Francisco Air Basin
                  was designated a non-attainment area for ozone and PM10 (particulate matter)
                  under both State and federal air quality standards. However, additional
                  housing added in the range of 140 to 700 units annually is not anticipated to
                  create significant air quality problems. In addition, a range of between 140
                  and 700 units allows housing growth to more closely match job growth in the
                  area which would conceivably reduce vehicle miles traveled, and therefore, not
                  impact air quality as significantly as might be expected.
              (c) In considering what is the community’s “fair share” of all types of housing in
                  support of regional growth, it must be noted that population growth estimates
                  prepared by ABAG indicate that, between 2000 and 2020, the San Francisco
                  Bay Area population will increase by 18 percent, Alameda County by 16
                  percent and Livermore by 28 percent. The City and the Livermore Valley
                  have historically grown at higher percentages than other Bay Area locations.
              (d) In 2002, the City has a relatively close balance between the number of local
                  jobs and employed residents at one job per one and one-half (1:1.59) em-
                  ployed residents. The jobs/employed residents balance can be maintained
                  with a residential growth range between 140 and 700 residential units.
              (e) The in-fill of by-passed and some outlying areas of the City is necessary to
                  complete service systems and improve the overall quality of life in the areas.
              (f) The City has implemented a number of housing programs to support the de-
                  velopment and preservation of very-low and low-income housing consistent
                  with the goals of the Housing Element.
3-40

                                                                      C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
     (g) The City has implemented several fiscal programs to support housing pro-
         grams and other residential development, such as housing impact fees, Rede-
         velopment Agency set-aside funds, and other development impact fees.
     (h) The City has implemented several environmental programs to address the im-
         pacts of development including storm drainage and water quality require-
         ments, parkland dedication/in-lieu fees, transportation impact fees and envi-
         ronmental review requirements.
     In summary, taking into consideration all the factors for both higher and lower
     growth determinations, this stated policy satisfies all the goals and other policies
     of the General Plan.
P12.    All residential growth shall be consistent with the policy that a proposed devel-
        opment must be in the best interest of the community as a whole, considering
        that our goal is to achieve balance in our community, which shall be under-
        stood to mean:
     (a) A geographical balance of the physical population on the terrain.
     (b) That the adverse impact of the residential growth on air quality be balanced by
         factors such as reduced vehicle miles traveled (VMT) because of shopping fa-
         cility locations and local employment of the residents.
     (c) That the ratio of the industrial-commercial tax base versus that residential tax
         base will become more favorable.
     (d) The need to provide more very-low and low income housing.
     (e) Compliance with the goals and policies set forth in this plan.
P13. For purposes of growth management, congregate care (with mandatory meal
      plan), assisted living, and skilled nursing facilities are defined as health care facili-
      ties and are not subject to growth management policies. When a mixed-use sen-
      ior facilities project includes up to 30 percent of the project for independent living
      (residential), the project as a whole is defined as a health care facility. When a
      mixed-use senior facilities project includes more than 30 percent of the project for
                                                                                               3-41
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
               independent living, the residential portion of the project is subject to growth
               management policies.
        P14.     The City shall guarantee 100 housing allocations per year for six years (2004
                 through 2009) and 200 housing allocations per year for an additional seven
                 years (2010 through 2016) to projects that were approved to exceed baseline
                 density in compliance with the City's TDC Ordinance. In addition, these hous-
                 ing allocations shall be granted to applicants who acquire TDCs, or pay in-lieu
                 fees at the rates specified in the TDC Ordinance for projects that exceed the
                 baseline density regardless of whether baseline density is actually exceeded.
                 Unused allocations for TDC-retiring projects may be carried forward up to 13
                 years, or the end of 2016. Housing allocations for TDC-retiring projects are
                 reserved for development sites outside of the Downtown Area unless and until
                 all housing allocations reserved for the Downtown have been used. Develop-
                 ment in the Downtown Area is exempted from the TDC Program. (Reso.
                 2005-015)
Goal LU-3         Provide areas for high-density mixed-use development near transit.
Objective LU-3.1 Create neighborhoods near transit that include a mix of uses and
a range of housing types to meet the needs of all residents.
      Policies
      P1.     Prior to or concurrent with approval of any development applications, a specific
              plan shall be prepared and approved for the Greenville BART TOD (see Figure
              3-8). The specific plan shall provide detailed guidance for project-related land
              use, provision and financing of public services and facilities, open space preserva-
              tion (including appropriate setbacks and buffers from adjacent open space areas),
              visual resources, and recreational amenities, and shall include mitigation measures
              to reduce the impacts of individual projects on existing neighborhoods and envi-
              ronmental resources. The highest density shall be located nearest to the BART
              station and shall feather to lower densities as it approaches the existing, surround-
              ing single-family neighborhoods.
3-42
                                                                        C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                         L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
   P2.    Development of the BART TOD shall be contingent upon BART establishing a
          firm timeframe and funded extension of full BART rail services from Dub-
          lin/Pleasanton to the Greenville area. Until such a commitment is made for full
          BART rail service, land uses in the Greenville BART TOD shall be consistent
          with Agriculture/Viticulture (AGVT).
Goal LU-4     Ensure that new development mitigates significant environmental, de-
              sign, and infrastructure impacts.
Objective LU-4.1 Prevent development from occurring where the location or the
physical or biological characteristics of the site would make the land use inappropri-
ate.
   Policies
      P1.    Impacts to wetland and biological resources shall be calculated on a gross acre-
             age basis and shall include areas of steep slopes, streets, floodways, and parks
             dedications that could result in losses of wildlife and plant habitat on a parcel.
      P2.    The City shall encourage the clustering of development in order to minimize its
             overall footprint in areas of ecological sensitivity, such as hillsides, alkali
             springs, creek corridors, and watersheds.
Objective LU-4.2 Ensure that new development complements its local context and
minimizes impacts on the environment.
   Policies
   P1.    New development shall be designed to respect and enhance Livermore’s existing
          development and natural environment.
   P2.    The use of “green construction” and land development techniques shall be en-
          couraged as a means to reduce the environmental impacts of construction activity.
                                                                                                 3-43

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
      P3.     Encourage all additions and new development to follow green building practices
              for design, construction, and operation and to incorporate as many LEEDTM pre-
              requisites and credits as feasible.
      Action
      A1.     Use the Housing Implementation Program (HIP), design review process, and spe-
              cific plans to ensure that development meets community concerns for visual qual-
              ity and environmental sensitivity.
Objective LU-4.3 Designate appropriate areas for industrial uses in order to pre-
vent negative impacts on the health, safety, and welfare of residents.
      Policies
      P1.     Industrial development shall be subject to design principles and performance
              standards consistent with General Plan policies.
      P2.     The City shall reserve large tracts for exclusive industrial use to encourage devel-
              opment of an industrial “community” and prevent encroachment by incompatible
              uses.
      P3.     The City shall reserve sufficient space for industry, recognizing industry's greater
              land requirements due to new methods of operation.
      P4.     The City shall assign high priority for the extension of urban services particularly
              those where multiple modes of transportation are available.
      P5.     The City shall evaluate proposed industrial development in terms of its impact on
              local employment.
      P6.     The City shall encourage the formation of an Industrial Park Foundation for pur-
              poses of establishing an industrial park as an added inducement in attracting new
              industries.
3-44

                                                                       C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Objective LU-4.4      Protect the Municipal Airport from encroachment by incompati-
ble uses.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall encourage development of property within the immediate vicinity
          of the Airport for light industrial and transportation uses to the extent that noise
          standards and flight clearance requirements are maintained, and environmental
          impacts are adequately mitigated.
   P2.    Development in the Airport Influence Area, depicted in Figure 3-5.1, shall be in
          conformance with the Livermore Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
          (“ALUCP”), dated August 2012. Land uses shall be consistent with this General
          Plan, the Livermore Development Code, and the Land and Use and Safety Com-
          patibility Criteria contained in Table 2-3 and Table 3-2 of the ALUCP. Existing
          Land Uses, as defined in Section 2.4 of the ALUCP, are not subject to the policies
          of the ALUC. ALUCP Section 2.7.5.7 lists other special conditions where ALUC
          authority may be limited. (Reso. 2013-113)
   P3.    The following actions shall be reviewed by the ALUC for determination of con-
          sistency with the ALUCP prior to their approval by the City of Livermore.
          a. Adoption of any amendment to the General Plan or a specific plan that pro-
              poses new land uses, or increased intensity or density of Existing Land Uses in
              the Airport Influence Area, as such terms are defined in section 2.4 of the
              ALUCP. (Reso. 2013-113)
          b. The adoption or approval of a zoning ordinance which (1) introduces a new
              land use within the Airport Influence Area not contemplated by an Existing
              Land Use or increases the intensity or density of, or permitted by, an Existing
              Land Use, and (2) involves any of the airport-related concerns listed in Section
              1.4 of the ALUCP. (Reso. 2013-113)
          c. Proposed redevelopment of a property within the Airport Influence Area that
              increases the intensity or density of an Existing Use that is inconsistent with
                                                                                                3-45

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
                  the compatibility criteria set forth in the ALUCP (see Section 2.7.5.7 (a) of the
                  ALUCP for exceptions to this policy). (Reso. 2013-113)
              d. Per ALUCP section 2.6.2, the City has the discretion to refer development
                  proposals to the ALUC for advisory review if deemed appropriate to ensure
                  land use compatibility with the Airport. (Reso. 2013-113)
      P4.     If, after reviewing an action that requires ALUC review, the ALUC determines
              the action would be inconsistent with the ALUCP, the City Council may overrule
              the ALUC’s determination by a ⅔ vote, after first notifying the ALUC and Cal-
              trans Division of Aeronautics at least 45 days prior to the decision to overrule,
              and after a public hearing, by making the necessary findings and complying with
              the other requirements set forth in CPUC sections 21670, 21676, and 21675.6 as
              may be applicable to the action and determination. (Reso. 2013-113)
      P5.     New residential land use designations or the intensification of existing residential
              land use designations shall be prohibited within the Airport Protection Area
              (APA), which is shown on Figure 3-5. The APA includes the area located within
              7,100-feet west of the western end of runway 7L-25R, 5,000-feet north of the
              northern edge of runway 7L-25R, 5,000-feet east of the eastern end of runway 7L-
              25R, and 5,000-feet south of the southern edge of runway 7R-25L. (Reso. 2013-
              113)
      P6.     Development at the Airport shall be subject to Federal Aviation Administration,
              Airport Land Use Commission, and City building/structure height restrictions.
              (Reso. 2013-113)
      Action
      A1.     Pursue the feasibility of acquiring urban development rights or fee title to proper-
              ty within the Airport flight approach areas west of the runways to the City limits
              to assure the most positive control over development within the “off-airport”
              flight approach areas.
3-46

                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 5,000 feet
                                                   3
                                                                                                                                          3
                        4                            2             1                               5
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                            5,000 feet
                                        7,100 feet
                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                1                                 1                              2
                                                                                                  5
                                                                              3
                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                      5,000 feet
                                                                     6
A I R P O R T S A F E T Y C O M P ATIBILITY ZONES                                                LEGEND:                                                                             FIGURE 3-5
         PRIMARY SURFACE                           ZONE 4: OUTER APPROACH/DEPARTURE ZONE                    LIVERMORE URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY
                                                                                                                                                          AIRPORT PROTECTION AREA
         ZONE 1: RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE            ZONE 5: SIDELINE SAFETY ZONE                             LIVERMORE CITY BOUNDARY
                                                                                                                                                    AND SAFETY COMPATIBILITY ZONES
         ZONE 2: INNER APPROACH/DEPARTURE ZONE     ZONE 6: TRAFFIC PATTERN ZONE                             AIRPORT PROTECTION AREA
         ZONE 3: INNER TURNING ZONE
                                                                                                                                                               L I V E R MO R E GEN ERA L P LA N
                                                                                                                                                                  Revised September 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N Livermore Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              reeekk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PLANNING AREA                                                                                                                                                      Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tannoo C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CCaayyeeta
                                                                               Tassajara Rd
                          DUBLIN
       Hacienda Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6,000’
                                                                                                                        580                                        6,800’                                                                                                                                                                              6,800’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                   3,5                                                                                                                      00                                                                                                                                                           s Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3,5                                                                                                                                                     osita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Las P
                                                                                                                                                                                                  00
                                       TTa                                                                                                                                                           ’                                                                                                                               4,000’
                                         asss                                                                                                                                                 1,900’                                                                                                                      2,700’
                                            saaj
                                               jaarra
                                                    aC
         Ow
                     en
                                                      Crre
                                                         eeek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIVERMORE
                                                            k                                                                                                                                                                                           750’
                           sD
                                                                                                                                  1,000’                                        1,425’                             1,000’                                                                                  1,000’                             1,750’    1,500’              1,000’
                                   r                                                                                                       3,000’                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3,000’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7L                                                                  25R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1,200’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Murrieta Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7R                        500’   25L
                                            vd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Portola Ave
                                          Bl
                                  s                                                                                                                                  7R & 25L RPZ Dimensions
                               ita                                                                                                                                                                                                          0’                                             2,0
                            Pos                                                                                                                                          Length = 1,000’/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                  00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ’
                          s                                                                                                                                            W1 = 250’/W2 = 450’
                     La
       W                                                                                                                                                                     3,800’                                                                                                                                                3,800’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               84
                                                                                                                                                         EAST COUNTY                                                                                           5,500’
                                                                                                                                                        PLANNING AREA
                                                                S ant
                                                                  a Rit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                              El                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1s t
                                                                    a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     East Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Liv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oyoo M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AArrrroy     ocho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Moc ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St                                          SL                                                     er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
                                   Valley Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St                                                          or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Holmes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Blvd                                                                                                                                                                               College Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stanley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary Surface                                                                   APA: Airport Protection Area
      Ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Zone 1: Runway Protection Zone                                                    AIA: Airport Influence Area
            py
                     ar
                          d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Zone 2: Inner Approach/Departure Zone                                             Airport Property
                              Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone 3: Inner Turning Zone                                                        Jurisdictional Boundaries
                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                           Arr
                                                                                                                                             rroy
                                                                                                                                               oyoo de
                                                                                                                                                    dell V
                                                                                                                                                         Val
                                                                                                                                                           alle
                                                                                                                                                              le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone 4: Outer Approach/Departure Zone
                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Arroyo Rd
                                                                                                                         l Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zone 5: Sideline Safety Zone
                                                                           St                                                                                                   Vi
                                                                                                                        rna                                                        n     ey                                                                                                                                                                      Zone 6: Traffic Pattern Zone
  0                                            2400                                                      Vineyard Ave
                                                                        Main                                                                                                                  ar                             Arr
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                               tS                       Be                                                                                                       oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                od                                                                                                                 Zone 7: Area between Zone 6 and the AIA
                                                                                              1s                                                                                                       Av                              el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Va
                          Feet
                                                                                                       PLEASANTON                                                                                         e                                  lle                                                                                                       boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 3-5.1
SOURCE: Alameda County ALUC: ESA Airports, ESRI, California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook (Caltrans, 2002)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAFETY COMPATIBILITY ZONES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AND AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L I V ERM O RE G EN ERA L P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   September 2013

                                                                             C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                              L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
D. North Livermore Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
The Livermore City Council adopted the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative on
December 16, 2002, after this ordinance had qualified for placement on the ballot. The pro-
visions of this initiative are identified in the following section in italics. All text below in ital-
ics cannot be amended or repealed, unless approved by a majority of the Livermore elec-
torate prior to amendment/alteration of the policy. This section includes Goals, Objectives,
Policies, and Actions to implement the provisions of this initiative. Additional sections from
this initiative are incorporated through the General Plan, also shown in italics and cited either
as North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative or NLUGBI. Section 21 of the initiative,
which includes terms and definitions, is included in the Glossary in Chapter 12.
In policies where the initiative interjected a word or phrase into an existing General Plan pol-
icy, only the initiative language is shown in italics and is cited with (NLUGBI). Only areas
outside the Urban Growth Boundary, as identified in this initiative, are subject to the re-
quirements of the initiative. Appendix A includes the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary
Initiative in its entirety, as adopted by the Livermore City Council in December 2002. Ap-
pendix A also provides a policy citation cross reference to this section (Section D, North
Livermore Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions) of General Plan policies for each section
of the initiative required to be incorporated into the Livermore General Plan. These sec-
tions will implement the initiative.
                                                                                                      3-51
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-5         It is the goal of the City to establish a coherent and logical pattern of
                  urban uses that protects and enhances open space and agricultural uses
                  by providing a clear and permanent boundary for urban uses within the
                  City’s Planning Area. The provisions of GOAL LU-5, as readopted by
                  the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative shall be
                  amended only by a vote of the people.
 Objective LU-5.1 Maintain an Urban Growth Boundary to protect open space and
 agricultural uses in North Livermore.
      Policies
        P1.      An Urban Growth Boundary is completed for Livermore. This boundary is the existing
                 South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary (as adopted by the South Livermore Urban
                 Growth Boundary Initiative, approved in March 2000) beginning at Greenville Road, west
                 to its junction at Interstate Highway 580 with the Livermore City Boundary, along the City
                 boundary generally to the east, except where the boundary is south of I-580 the Urban
                 Growth Boundary shall be I-580, to Assessor's Designated Parcel 902-8-5-5, north along
                 the western boundary of that parcel and Designated Parcel 902-8-1 to the northwest corner of
                 Parcel 902-8-1, east along the northern boundary of Parcel 902-8-1 to the Livermore City
                 Boundary, north and generally east along that boundary to Assessor's Designated Parcel
                 99B-5500-1-10, east along the northern boundary of that parcel and south along the eastern
                 boundary of that parcel to Altamont Pass Road, southwest on that road to Greenville Road,
                 south on Greenville Road to the Livermore City Boundary, generally south along that bound-
                 ary to Greenville Road, and south to the South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary. The
                 Livermore City Boundary means the City boundary on June 30, 2002.
        P2.      The Urban Growth Boundary is depicted approximately in Figure 1-2 (and in Appendix
                 A). That map is for purpose of information only; it is not enacted by the NLUGBI. The
                 Boundary delineated by this section is the enacted Urban Growth Boundary.
3-52

                                                                               C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Objective LU-5.2      Carefully regulate land uses in North Livermore.
 Policies
    P1.    Subject to LU-5.2.P3, the provisions of the NLUGBI apply, unless stated otherwise, to ar-
           eas outside the Urban Growth Boundary north of a straight line extended due east from East
           Avenue north to the Alameda-Contra Costa County boundary and to North Livermore (as
           defined in the glossary in Chapter 12, Section C), if these areas are annexed to Livermore.
    P2.    Except as provided otherwise in the NLUGBI, creation of parcels, development and uses on
           lands outside the Urban Growth Boundary in the areas described in LU-5.2.P1, if annexed
           to Livermore, shall be governed by the provisions of the Alameda County East County Area
           Plan set forth in Appendix 2 of Appendix A that were applicable to the areas on June 30,
           2002. References to "the County" or "County" shall then be changed to “the City” or
           “City.”
    P3.    The NLUGBI does not apply to areas within the Alameda County South Livermore Val-
           ley Area Plan or areas to which that Plan is extended under Program 117 of the East
           County Area Plan (in Appendix 2 of Appendix A), nor does it apply to lands governed by
           the South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative. (Relevant provisions of that
           Initiative are in Appendix 3 of Appendix A.)
    P4.    Only the following uses, and their normal and appropriate accessory uses and structures, (as
           well as uses preemptively authorized by Federal and State law) may be permitted in North
           Livermore, provided that they comply with all the provisions of this Plan:
        (1) One single family residence per parcel, additional dwelling units to the extent that clustering
            is permitted on a single parcel under Objective LU-5.3, secondary units required by State
            law, and farm labor housing necessary for bona fide farm workers employed full-time on the
            parcel or on a farm or ranch of which the parcel is a part (which in no case may be used as
            housing for non-farm workers);
        (2) agriculture, including horticulture and grazing of ruminants, but not including large or medi-
            um size commercial feed lots and pig farms;
                                                                                                        3-53

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
              (3) packaging, processing, storage or sale of agricultural produce or of plants, a substantial por-
                  tion of which were grown in the Livermore area, but not canneries and freezing facilities;
              (4) rearing, custodianship, training, rental or care of animals, other than ruminants which are
                  not subject to this subsection but are agriculture covered by LU-5.2.P4(2), provided that the
                  use does not cause appreciable environmental harm;
              (5) additional commercial uses, limited to the following:
                  (i)      outdoor recreation and pastimes predominantly for active participants, not spectators;
                           this category of permitted uses does not include, among other things, amusement or
                           theme parks, stadia, and motorized vehicle tracks, courses or off-road facilities;
                  (ii)     nature observation, study or enjoyment;
                  (iii)    home occupations and offices, subordinate to residential uses and conducted primarily
                           by residents of a parcel, that will have no deleterious effects on the environment or
                           visual qualities or materially increase traffic in the local area;
                  (iv)     rental of rooms to lodgers, including with board, not exceeding two units in a resi-
                           dence;
                  (v)      uses in historic structures, incidental to preserving the structures and their historic
                           qualities and setting, that will have no deleterious effects on the environment or visu-
                           al qualities;
                  (vi)     physical and mental convalescence and rehabilitation, chemical dependency treatment,
                           and hospices;
                  (vii)    veterinary offices or facilities, and repair shops primarily for agriculture;
                  (viii)   cemeteries, not to exceed twenty acres, provided they are designed to minimize off-site
                           visual impacts from monuments or other structures;
                  (ix)     accommodations for short-term visitor occupancy and for provision of food and drink
                           (including low-intensity campgrounds and picnic facilities, not to exceed seven acres,
                           but not including recreational vehicle parks), that accord with a rural, agricultural
                           environment;
3-54
                                                                                  C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
         (6) institutional and other non-profit uses that primarily serve North Livermore residents, facili-
             ties for meetings and retreats, or to the extent that like uses by profit-making entities would
             be permitted under LU-5.2.P4;
         (7) City and other government facilities and infrastructure, and public utilities, that are limited
             to meeting the needs created by permitted uses in North Livermore, except if the City Coun-
             cil reasonably finds more extensive public need that cannot be met outside North Livermore;
             however, this exception shall not apply to waste disposal or treatment, commercial electrical
             power generation, or new airports. Publicly provided outdoor recreation and nature observa-
             tion and enjoyment facilities and ancillary accommodations are permitted whenever like pri-
             vate uses would be allowed.
Objective LU-5.3 Encourage clustered development that does not detract from the
rural character of North Livermore.
  Policies
     P1.    All buildings on a parcel shall be placed within a contiguous development envelope as compact
            as reasonably possible, not to exceed two acres, except for buildings for agricultural uses or se-
            curity needs that must be located outside the envelope, or for government facilities that the
            Council finds require a more extensive area.
     P2.    If appropriate under the provisions and objectives of the NLUGBI, the City Council may
            permit expansion of the development envelope by up to two acres, in aggregate, on parcels of
            forty acres or more if proven to be necessary for buildings for permitted outdoor recreation; ex-
            cept in North Livermore custodianship, training, care or rental of horses; short-term visitor
            lodging; farm labor housing; or processing, packaging, storage or sale of produce or plants, a
            substantial portion of which were grown in the Livermore area; and for ancillary uses includ-
            ing provision of food and drink and meeting facilities.
     P3.    Clustering may be allowed for permitted development on any two or more parcels, but only if it
            reduces, overall, visibility of development from public places. Clustered development may be on
            a single parcel or on newly created separate, contiguous parcels that do not exceed two acres
            each.
                                                                                                           3-55
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
        P4.      Subject to the exceptions provided in Policies LU-5.3.P1 and LU-5.4.P1, the following cu-
                 mulative limits apply for buildings on each parcel on which clustering occurs (for this purpose,
                 parcels created under Policy LU-5.3.P3 shall be regarded as part of the parcel from which
                 they were created):
              (1) if development from two parcels is clustered, a maximum development envelope of three acres
                  and a maximum floor area of 150% of the maximum under LU-5.4.P1;
              (2) if development from three parcels, three and one-half acres maximum development envelope
                  and 175% of the maximum floor area under LU-5.4.P1;
              (3) if four or more parcels, four acres maximum development envelope and 200% of the maxi-
                  mum floor area under LU-5.4.P1; and
              (4) if the parcels clustered contain, cumulatively, 400 acres or more, five acres maximum devel-
                  opment envelope and 300% of the maximum floor area under LU-5.4. P1.
              Any increase in the development envelope under Policy LU-5.3.P2 and the maximum floor area
              under LU-5.4.P2 may be added to the above maxima, but in no case may the total maximum
              development envelope exceed four acres except if the parcels clustered contain, cumulatively, more
              than 400 acres it may be six acres.
        P5.      If development is transferred from a parcel under this section, then only development for agri-
                 cultural use under LU-5.2.P4(2) (which does not include dwelling units), and for processing,
                 packaging, storing or sale of produce or plants under LU-5.2.P4(3) may be permitted on
                 that parcel. The development envelope and maximum floor area on the parcel shall be reduced
                 by the parcel's equal share with other parcels from which development is transferred or, if there
                 are no other parcels, by all of the increase in the development envelope and maximum floor ar-
                 ea on the parcel where the clustering occurs because of the transfer of development.
        P6.      Buildings on separate parcels not created under Policy LU-5.3.P3, above, may not be contig-
                 uous or in proximity unless (1) the buildings, in aggregate on the separate parcels, have no
                 larger development envelope or more floor area than would be permitted on a single parcel un-
                 der Policy LU-5.3. P4 or (2) there is no other suitable location on a parcel for the buildings
                 under the NLUGBI.
3-56
                                                                                    C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Objective LU-5.4         Establish maximum floor areas for North Livermore.
  Policies
  P1.     The maximum aggregate floor area for all floors (regardless of composition, including soil) in
          buildings on a parcel may not exceed 1% of the parcel's area or 20,000 square feet, whichever is
          less; however, for any parcel 10,000 square feet shall be permitted. Floor area does not include
          basement floors. Greenhouses are subject to a maximum aggregate floor area of 1% or 40,000
          square feet, whichever is less. Government facilities are not subject to the aggregate limit to the ex-
          tent that the City Council finds reasonably that they cannot practicably be located outside North
          Livermore and that they must exceed the floor area maximum.
   P2.    If appropriate under the provisions and objectives of the NLUGBI, the City Council may in-
          crease the maximum floor area by up to 20,000 square feet, in aggregate, on parcels of forty
          acres or more if proven to be necessary for permitted outdoor recreation; except in North Liver-
          more custodianship, training, care or rental of horses; short-term visitor lodging; processing, pack-
          aging, storage or sale of agricultural produce or plants, a substantial portion of which were grown
          in the Livermore area; farm worker housing or agricultural uses; and for ancillary uses including
          provision of food and drink and meeting facilities.
   P3.    Residential and residential accessory buildings on a parcel may have a maximum aggregate floor
          area (not including basements) of 8,000 square feet. Farm worker housing is not subject to this
          limitation. Buildings for short-term lodgings may not exceed 6,000 square feet floor space each
          and shall be located at least 30 feet apart.
Objective LU-5.5         Coordinate land use planning for the area north of I-580 between Liv-
ermore and Dublin with Alameda County and the City of Dublin so as to increase certainty
over future land uses, to reduce speculation, and to enhance preservation of open space.
  Policy
  P1.     Encourage the cooperation of Alameda County, Livermore, and Dublin in coor-
          dinating land uses adjacent to the Doolan Canyon-North Livermore area.
                                                                                                             3-57
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-6         Ensure that development minimizes potential visual impacts.
 Objective LU-6.1 Encourage development that does not detract from the scenic
 character of North Livermore.
      Policies
        P1.      New or reconfigured parcels, including those resulting from lot line adjustments, must be creat-
                 ed or drawn to limit, as much as possible, visibility of development from public roads, parks
                 and other public places. Parcels may not be created that have no building site other than a
                 ridgeline or hilltop or that would cause a building to project into the view of any ridgeline or
                 hilltop from public places, unless there is no other possible configuration.
        P2.      Structures may not be located on ridgelines or hilltops, or where they will project into the view
                 from public places of a ridgeline or hilltop, unless there is no less obtrusive site on the parcel or
                 a contiguous parcel in common ownership. To the extent practicable, including by deep set-
                 backs from parcel boundaries, structures shall be located on that part of a parcel that mini-
                 mizes visual impact from public roads and parks.
        P3.      Development shall be subordinate to and blend harmoniously with the natural and open space
                 qualities of the area where located, so as not to impair those qualities and to be as unobtrusive
                 as possible. In all cases, appropriate landscaping, screening, preservation of vegetation, and
                 building materials, covering, and paint shall be required by the City to reduce as much as
                 practicable the visibility of development. To the maximum extent possible, all exterior lighting
                 must be designed, placed, and shielded to confine rays to the parcel where the lighting is locat-
                 ed. Signs shall be no more numerous, larger, or noticeable than is strictly necessary to provide
                 essential information to visitors and shall be compatible with a rural agricultural environ-
                 ment.
        P4.      The height of buildings may not exceed thirty (30) feet, except if the City Council finds rea-
                 sonably that a greater height is necessary for agricultural buildings.
3-58
                                                                                    C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
      P5.    The City shall conduct a careful review of uses and of the amount, location, development enve-
             lope, floor area, visibility and topographical alteration of all development to ensure consistency
             with and implementation of the provisions and objectives of the NLUGBI.
Goal LU-7      Ensure that alterations to existing topography are minimized.
 Objective LU-7.1 To allow development that does not create impacts to the exist-
 ing topography in North Livermore.
   Policy
      P1.    Consistent with the other provisions of LU-6.1.P1 through P4; alteration of topography by
             grading, excavating, filling or any development activity shall be minimized. Where feasible,
             access roads shall be located, including by consolidation, where they are least visible from pub-
             lic places.
Goal LU-8      Encourage the use of easements to limit development to allowed uses.
 Objective LU-8.1 To develop easements as a mechanism for ensuring that devel-
 opment is limited to allowed uses.
   Policy
      P1.    The City shall require an easement, running with the land, which bars development that
             would not be permitted under the NLUGBI for each parcel on which development is permit-
             ted, or from which clustered development is transferred. The easement shall be conveyed to the
             City and, if available, jointly to an independent land trust (that complies with the Land
             Trust Standards and Practices of the Land Trust Alliance). For purposes of this section, de-
             velopment shall not include structures other than buildings or development permitted under
             LU-5.2.P4(2) for agriculture (which does not include development under LU-5.2. P4(1),
             (3) or (4)). The easement shall be negative only; it shall convey no possessory interest to the
             City or other designee, nor confer any right of public access. The owner retains exclusive occu-
             pancy and use. The City has no responsibility or liability because of the easement for acts or
             omissions on the parcel, except in good faith and effectually to prevent or remedy violations of
             the easement. Easements shall be duly recorded in the County land records.
                                                                                                             3-59
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-9          Establish a Transferable Development Credits Program.
Objective LU-9.1              To create a mechanism for transferring development credit from
North Livermore to other areas of the City.
      Policies
        P1.       The City shall have a Transferable Development Credits Program for North Livermore to
                  aid in accomplishing the purpose of the NLUGBI. Property owners may choose to partici-
                  pate in the Program, even though their property has not been annexed to Livermore. It allows
                  participating owners to share in development values in Livermore, given the special restrictions
                  on land use in North Livermore and the added development in Livermore permitted under the
                  Program.
        P2.       Transferable Development Credits shall be granted by the City to property owners in North
                  Livermore, by rule in accordance with this section, in number and manner to accomplish the
                  objectives of the NLUGBI. The City Council shall grant credits on the following bases:
              (1) acreage owned in North Livermore, but not less than one credit for each full five acres
              (2) not less than eleven credits for an owner forgoing the right to create an additional parcel un-
                   der the NLUGBI
              (3) not less than ten credits for an owner forgoing the right to any dwelling units on a parcel,
                   which forbearance shall also include the right to any dwelling units on one of the parcels re-
                   sulting directly or indirectly from any permitted subdivision of that parcel
              (4) not less than twelve credits for elimination of existing dwelling units and residential accessory
                   structures on a parcel and for the owner forgoing the right to any dwelling units on that par-
                   cel, which forbearance shall also include the right to any dwelling units on one of the parcels
                   resulting directly or indirectly from any permitted subdivision of that parcel.
      P3.     Duplicate credits may not be granted with respect to the same acreage or right forgone, regardless
              of changes in ownership. Credits given under the subparagraphs (2), (3), or (4) of LU-9.1.P2
              may be relinquished to the City prior to use or initial transfer and, if no gift is intended, the right
              to create a parcel, to build or rebuild as permitted by the NLUGBI regained and the corre-
              sponding easement conveyed under Policy LU-9.1.P7 reconveyed. The Council may differentiate
3-60
                                                                             C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                              L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
    in the number of credits granted, in excess of the minimums guaranteed by the paragraphs (1),
    (2), (3), and (4) of LU-9.1.P2 among areas of North Livermore to reflect development poten-
    tial, and among grantees according to their willingness to participate in the program at an earlier
    rather than later date.
P4. Development credits may be used, as the City Council approves in accordance with the NLUG-
    BI and other City regulations, in areas within the City boundary and the Urban Growth
    Boundary to build dwelling units and commercial and industrial space, including units and space
    that otherwise would not be permitted or not permitted until a later time. To accomplish the pur-
    pose of the NLUGBI, the Council shall provide for the efficacious use of credits, over a reasona-
    ble time period, equal in number to the credits granted. To create an adequate initial demand,
    the Council shall provide for use of an appropriate number of credits promptly after the effective
    date of the NLUGBI. With reasonable justification, the Council may permit more development
    per credit in some receiving areas and for certain types of uses. Credits also may be used in unin-
    corporated areas if approved by the County, in accordance with the East County Area Plan, or
    in the cities that provide for their use.
P5. Credits may be sold or purchased, or otherwise transferred or received, by any person including
    the City and other government entities. The City may use funds available for that purpose to buy
    credits, including a revolving fund replenished by the sale of credits. The City may buy and sell
    credits to establish and maintain an efficacious market for the credits, or to extinguish them.
    (Extinction of credits may be part of a more general City program to purchase development
    rights.)
P6. The City shall establish appropriate means to inform persons about the development credits pro-
    gram and to facilitate transfer of credits from transferors to transferees. The City shall have pro-
    cedures and requirements to ensure that it has accurate records of development credit grants,
    transfers, and use.
P7. As a precondition for the grant of development credits under LU-9.1.P2, the owner shall convey
    an easement, which runs with the land, to the City and, if available, jointly to an independent
    land trust that meets the standards of LU-8.1.P1. As provided in that policy, the easement
    shall be negative only. If the credits are granted under LU-9.1.P2(1), the easement shall bar any
                                                                                                      3-61
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
              future land division, development or use not permitted by the NLUGBI on the parcel where the
              acreage is located. If credits are granted for forgoing the right to create a parcel under LU-
              9.1.P2(2), the easement shall relinquish that right permanently. If the credits are granted under
              LU-9.1.P2(3) or LU-9.1.P2(4) for forgoing all dwelling units on a parcel, the easement shall
              relinquish the right to any dwelling units or any other development on the parcel, or on one of the
              parcels resulting directly or indirectly from any permitted subdivision of that parcel, except devel-
              opment under LU-5.2.P4(2) for agricultural use and under LU-5.2.P4(3) for packaging, pro-
              cessing, storage or sale of produce or plants. Easements shall be duly recorded in the County
              land records.
      P8.     Nothing in this section bars the City from granting development credits for areas other than
              North Livermore or on bases other than specified in LU-9.1.P2 including for acceptance of recy-
              cled water, and permitting their use.
      P9.     All land outside of specific plan areas will be classified as TDC receiving areas as
              identified and shall include subsequent general plan amendments that result in
              new residential land use designations or an increase in residential density. TDC
              receiving sites incorporate a baseline density achievable without the need to com-
              ply with the City's TDC Ordinance, by acquisition of transferable development
              credits (TDCs), or payment of an in-lieu fee, if one is adopted. Applicants who
              wish to exceed this baseline density must comply with the City's TDC Ordinance
              by purchasing TDCs or paying an in-lieu fee, if one is adopted. Under the TDC
              option, the General Plan maximum density still limits the maximum density al-
              lowed on the site under the TDC option. The TDC requirements in a specific
              plan area, if any, shall be set forth in the specific plan for that area.
              The TDC Ordinance may require different rates of TDC acquisition for different
              development products. It may require more TDCs per dwelling unit in excess of
              baseline density for detached dwelling units than for attached dwelling units.
              To promote awareness of these TDC provisions, the General Plan Land Use Map
              shall identify TDC receiving areas by means of a two-part classification. The first
              part of the classification indicates the baseline density or maximum density al-
3-62
                                                                  C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
     lowed when developers choose not to use the TDC option. The second part of
     the classification states the maximum density allowed when developers choose to
     exceed the baseline density and comply with the requirements of the City's TDC
     Ordinance.
P10. The City Council and/or agencies authorized by the City Council to implement
     the TDC Program may concentrate the use of funds under their control to priori-
     tize TDC acquisitions in selected portions of North Livermore in order to achieve
     the overall goals of the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative (NLUGBI).
P11. The City's TDC Ordinance may include a provision for applicants to comply with
     TDC requirements by paying an in-lieu fee instead of acquiring actual TDCs. If
     so, the City should review the TDC fee bi-annually and make needed adjustments
     based on estimates or appraisals of TDC value, recent TDC transactions, inflation
     indices, and other relevant information.
P12. The City shall seek to coordinate with the Tri-Valley Conservancy organization to
     help in implementing the TDC program. Such assistance could include authoriz-
     ing the non-profit organization, under City Council direction, to hold and enforce
     easements, acquire and sell TDCs, market the TDC program, facilitate transac-
     tions, seek funding for TDCs, create a registry of interested buyers/sellers, main-
     tain records of transactions, and advise the City of needed program refinements.
P13. Either directly or though an authorized agency, the City may acquire TDCs using
     funding from settlement agreements, mitigation agreements, grants, general fund,
     loans, grants, and other sources appropriate for the acquisition of open space.
P14. It is consistent with this General Plan that non-residential development also be
     required to acquire TDCs in the long-term future and thereby contribute to the
     preservation of North Livermore. Because a market for higher-density non-
     residential development did not exist in Livermore in 2003, the TDC Ordinance
     initially adopted by the City did not require developers to acquire TDCs so that
     non-residential structures can exceed a baseline floor-area ratio (FAR). However,
                                                                                           3-63
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
              a market may evolve over time for higher intensity non-residential development.
              If so, the City Council may impose such a requirement on non-residential devel-
              opment in all or part of the City by amending the TDC Ordinance.
Goal LU-10         Encourage the orderly subdivision of land.
 Objective LU-10.1 Carefully regulate the subdivision of land within the City limits
 or subsequently annexed, which is located outside the UGB.
      Policies
        P1.       The minimum parcel size in North Livermore shall be at least 100 full acres, except as pro-
                  vided in LU-10.1.P2 and LU-5.3.P3 through P6 with respect to clustering.
        P2.       Forty-acre or larger parcels may be permitted by the City for purposes of cultivated agriculture
                  in North Livermore in the area bounded on the north by May School Road extended by a
                  straight line due west to Collier Canyon Road, by Collier Canyon Road, Dagnino Road, and
                  Raymond Road east to the Urban Growth Boundary, if:
              (1)      the City Council does an environmental impact analysis and holds public hearings regard-
                       ing the creation in that area of the parcels and their use for cultivated agriculture;
              (2)      the Council finds that there is an adequate, sustainable, safe supply of water for projected
                       irrigated agriculture and other uses on proposed parcels (an adequate and sustainable wa-
                       ter supply shall be found if there is a valid contract for the period of agreed cultivation un-
                       der LU-10.1.P2(6) for necessary water with an irrigation district, water agency, or the
                       City of Livermore);
              (3)      cultivation and irrigation, as may be conditioned by the Council, will not cause harm to
                       groundwater, soil, biota or other environmental qualities in violation of Federal, State, or
                       City environmental protection standards;
              (4)      80% of the parcel has a slope of 20% or less;
              (5)      parcel boundaries are drawn to maximize productive use for agriculture;
3-64
                                                                              C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                               L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
    (6)      owners contract with the City, and provide a bond or other adequate and effective guaran-
             tee, that they will plant within two years of the creation of a parcel and maintain for eight
             years, or more if the Council deems appropriate, cultivated agriculture on the portion of
             the parcel that can be cultivated, except for a development envelope not to exceed two
             acres, or any larger area permitted under LU-5.3.P2, to the extent that there is no other
             developable land on the parcel; and
    (7)      owners convey an easement to the City and, if one is available, jointly to an independent
             land trust that meets the standards of LU-8.1.P1. The easement shall have the charac-
             teristics stated in LU-8.1.P1, and shall effectively and permanently bar any development
             not permitted by this measure. The City may also require a trail easement for purposes of
             a trail system.
P3.     Creation of a parcel or parcels under this subsection may not leave a remainder area which is
        smaller than the smallest parcel permitted under this section.
P4.     The City Council may create forty-acre or larger parcels within Doolan Canyon as part of an
        agreement with other jurisdictions or property owners for the purpose and with the effect of pre-
        serving generally open space in the Canyon.
P5.     The City shall not grant certificates of compliance except as required by State law. The City
        shall impose all restrictive conditions permissible under State law on conditional certificates of
        compliance, and shall hold the owner or subsequent transferee to strict compliance with these
        conditions. A certificate of compliance creates no right to develop, nor diminishes in any respect
        the City's authority to control development.
P6.     Apart from the regular subdivision process, the City may not permit lot line adjustments un-
        less the adjusted parcels would comply fully with the General Plan and all City zoning and
        building ordinances, including minimum parcel sizes, nor permit adjustments between more
        than four parcels, or as part of a plan or series of adjustments between more than four parcels,
        except as required by State law.
P7.     The acreage of contiguous parcels in common ownership at the time the NLUGBI becomes ef-
        fective or thereafter that are smaller than the minimum parcel size, although the parcels are
                                                                                                       3-65
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
                  not merged by the NLUGBI, shall be treated as though part of one parcel, up to the mini-
                  mum parcel size, for purposes of permissible development.
Goal LU-11         Provide adequate housing within the Urban Growth Boundary.
 Objective LU-11.1 Strive to provide all future housing within the Urban Growth
 Boundary.
      Policies
      P1.     Nothing in the NLUGBI, including in this section, shall be applied to preclude City compliance
              with obligations to provide for housing that are mandated by State law.
      P2.     To the maximum extent practicable, the City shall meet any State legal requirements within the
              City’s Urban Growth Boundary.
      P3.     If State requirements make it necessary to go beyond the Urban Growth Boundary to provide for
              housing, the voters of the City may approve an extension of the Boundary. If necessary, the City
              Council also may approve housing beyond the Boundary, provided:
              (1) There is no land within the Boundary to meet a State requirement through new development,
                   more intensive development, or redevelopment;
              (2) No more land is used outside the Boundary than is necessary for the housing required by
                   State law;
              (3) The area is adjacent to the Boundary, or as near thereto as possible;
              (4) There will be adequate public facilities and services for the housing; and
              (5) At least 35% of the housing provided shall be for moderate, low and very low income house-
                   holds as defined by State law and at least 20% shall be for low- and very low-income house-
                   holds.
      P4.     If the City must breach the Urban Growth Boundary, minimum parcel size, residential density
              limits, maximum development envelopes and floor areas, and height restrictions shall not apply to
              the extent necessary to confine the breach to the minimum area needed to comply with State legal
              requirements.
3-66

                                                                                   C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-12   Ensure that the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative is
             effectively applied and in compliance with the law.
 Objective LU-12.1 Protect the legal rights of individuals when implementing the
 North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative.
   Policies
      P1.   Notwithstanding their literal terms, the provisions of the NLUGBI do not apply to the ex-
            tent that courts determine that if they were applied they would deprive a person or persons of
            constitutional or statutory rights or privileges, or otherwise would be inconsistent with the
            United States or State constitutions or laws. This limitation is to ensure that the provisions
            do not infringe any person's constitutional or legal rights or violate the law in any way, or sub-
            ject the City to any legal liability.
      P2.   To the extent that a provision does not apply because of LU-12.1.P1, the City may permit
            only that minimum parcel creation, amount, extent, and visibility of development, and use
            which meets the requirements of law that is most consistent with the provisions and purposes
            of the NLUGBI and complies with other provisions of the NLUGBI.
 Objective LU-12.2 Apply the NLUGBI to parcels, development and uses subject to
 City authorizations and approval.
   Policies
      P1.   The NLUGBI does not affect the validity of parcels, development, and uses to the extent that
            they legally exist at the time the land where they are located is annexed to the City. However,
            the City may not permit parcels, development, and uses thereafter to be changed or expanded
            in ways that are inconsistent with the prohibitions, restrictions or requirements of the ordi-
            nance, except as required by State law.
      P2.   The City shall apply the prohibitions, restrictions and requirements imposed by the NLUG-
            BI to proposed parcels, development and uses that have not received all necessary discretionary
            City and other government authorizations and approvals prior to annexation to the City, ex-
            cept to the extent precluded by State law.
                                                                                                            3-67
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
 Objective LU-12.3 Avoid inconsistency with City Plans, Ordinances and Actions.
      Policies
        P1.      If there is any inconsistency between a provision of the NLUGBI and another provision of
                 the General Plan, that other provision to the extent that it is inconsistent is superseded and
                 the NLUGBI shall govern.
        P2.      Any provision of any existing or subsequently adopted specific, area or other plan, that is not
                 part of the General Plan, and of any zoning ordinance or any other ordinance, resolution or
                 policy of the City is nullified to the extent that the provision or its application is inconsistent
                 with the NLUGBI, except as State law mandates otherwise.
        P3.      No subdivision or parcel map, development agreement, development plan, use permit, variance
                 or other action inconsistent with the prohibitions, restrictions, conditions or requirements of the
                 NLUGBI may be permitted, approved or taken by the City or its officials (including ap-
                 proval or permission by operation of law because of inaction), except as required by State law.
        P4.      General Plan provisions are not to be deemed inconsistent with and are not superseded by the
                 NLUGBI to the extent that they impose prohibitions, restrictions, conditions or requirements
                 in addition to those imposed by the NLUGBI on the division, development or use of land. In
                 that respect, the NLUGBI shall be deemed to establish only minimum standards, which the
                 City may augment.
 Objective LU-12.4 Implement and enforce the provisions of the North Livermore
 Urban Growth Boundary Initiative.
      Policies
        P1.      The City Council and other agencies and officials of the City shall implement and enforce the
                 provisions of the NLUGBI diligently and effectually. They are hereby mandated by the voters
                 of Livermore to use the most effective means at their disposal to prevent, abate and remedy
                 violations.
3-68
                                                                               C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
        P2.     Residents of Livermore may enforce the NLUGBI by suits for injunctive relief against the
                City or any person in violation of the NLUGBI or to prevent imminent violations.
E. South Livermore Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
South Livermore was subject to major planning efforts in the 1990s. In 1993, Alameda
County, in cooperation with the cities of Livermore and Pleasanton, approved the South
Livermore Valley Area Plan. The County’s Area Plan covers land both inside and outside
the Livermore City limits, and provides land use policies aimed at preserving existing vine-
yards and wineries, enhancing the image of the area as an important wine-producing region,
and preserving the area’s unique rural, scenic, and historic qualities.
After the County’s Area Plan was adopted, the City amended its General Plan to incorporate
the relevant policies from the County’s Area Plan. The Livermore City Council also initiated
the development of the South Livermore Valley Specific Plan (SLVSP) in order to imple-
ment the City’s responsibilities under the County’s Area Plan. The City Council adopted the
SLVSP in November 1997. The SLVSP is an extension of this General Plan, and is used as
both a policy and a regulatory document to guide the quantity, location and character of de-
velopment in the South Livermore area. This General Plan contains goals, objectives, poli-
cies, actions, and designations that are both consistent with the Alameda County South Liv-
ermore Valley Area Plan and provides the regulatory foundation for the City’s South Liver-
more Valley Specific Plan (SLVSP). The land use designations and urban development per-
mitted for South Livermore are discussed in Land Use Element Section F (Allowed Develop-
ment in South Livermore Valley).
Integral to the preservation of South Livermore in the manner planned for in the County’s
Area Plan and in the SLVSP was the approval of the South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary
Initiative by the Livermore electorate on March 7, 2000. The provisions of this initiative are
identified in the following section in italics. All text shown in italics under Goal LU-18 cannot
be amended or repealed, unless approved by a majority of the Livermore electorate prior to
amendment or alteration.
                                                                                                        3-69

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
As of 2002, the majority of the goals, objectives, policies, and actions in this section (Section
E) and in Section F (Allowed Development in South Livermore) had been implemented. Sections
E and F are retained in the 2003 General Plan to provide the contextual framework for the
development and preservation of this unique and historically notable part of the community.
Goal LU-13        Promote the South Livermore Valley as a unique and historic wine re-
                  gion.
 Objective LU-13.1 Develop additional wineries with a range of sizes, and other wine-
 country uses that promote the area as a premier wine-producing area.
      Policy
      P1.     In order to support the development of wineries, the City shall encourage appro-
              priate design, landscaping and signage to establish Greenville Road, between I-
              580 and East Avenue, Isabel Avenue between I-580 and Vallecitos Road, and
              roadways between I-680 and Vallecitos Road, via Downtown Pleasanton and
              Vineyard Avenue, as important “wine region corridors” as development occurs.
              Retain existing land use designations and policies.
Goal LU-14        Take a proactive approach to protect, enhance, and increase viticulture
                  and other cultivated agriculture.
 Objective LU-14.1 Expand cultivated agricultural, particularly viticultural, use in
 the South Livermore Valley from the 1993 total of 2,100 acres to the maximum acre-
 age possible, under the Alameda County East County Area Plan (NLUGBI).
3-70

                                                                               C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Policies
P1.    Encourage the establishment and permanent protection of existing and new culti-
       vated agriculture through use of agricultural easements, density bonuses, or other
       means.
P2.    Establish a framework, consistent with other General Plan goals and objectives, for the consider-
       ation of development entitlements that will result in the planting of the maximum number of
       acres of new vineyards, under the Alameda County East County Area Plan, and fees necessary
       to achieve the overall goals and objectives of the General Plan in a timely and reasonable manner
       (NLUGBI).
P3.    Encourage the development of additional sources of irrigation water for vineyards
       and other cultivated agriculture by investigating wastewater reclamation and de-
       velopment of other supply and delivery resources. Encourage Zone 7 to consider
       developing a pump monitoring and cost allocation system to cover the cost of
       new water in the event that additional supplies are needed.
P4.    Encourage the annexation of lands within the South Livermore Valley where the
       following criteria are met:
       (a) An urban development project is proposed that would significantly contribute
           to the goal of maximizing the number of acres of permanently protected vine-
           yards or other cultivated agriculture in the South Livermore Valley and that
           meets the criteria in Objective LU-19.1, policies P1 through P7.
       (b) The project sponsor has entered a pre-annexation agreement with the City es-
           tablishing a cooperative annexation application process and specifying the de-
           velopment conditions applicable to the lands to be annexed.
       (c) To the extent that annexation is reasonably incidental to an annexation de-
           scribed in subparagraph LU-14.1.P4(a) above, properties may be annexed
           which are under agricultural easements.
       (d) Annexation of lands within the South Livermore Valley shall be actively dis-
           couraged where the foregoing criteria are not met.
                                                                                                        3-71
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-15        Preserve South Livermore’s unique rural and scenic qualities.
 Objective LU-15.1 Maintain a land trust to permanently protect productive and po-
 tentially productive cultivated agricultural lands in the South Livermore Valley.
      Policies
      P1. Standards and priorities for acquisition of land or easements by the Tri-Valley Con-
            servancy shall be based on the following considerations:
            (a) Development of a critical mass to sustain agricultural operation in the South
                Livermore Valley.
            (b) Preservation of lands best suited for agriculture and most threatened by devel-
                opment pressures.
            (c) Preservation of contiguous tracts of agricultural land of a size large enough to
                maintain commercial agricultural operations.
            (d) Minimization of conflicts with non-farm uses.
            (e) Maintain the permanent South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary.
            (f) Protection of critical habitat areas within the South Livermore Valley.
      P2. Maintain and enhance the visual quality of the South Livermore Valley by limiting
            inappropriate uses in viticultural areas and encouraging good design through estab-
            lishment of appropriate design guidelines.
      Action
      Consider adopting other policies and programs establishing other sources of funds for
      the Tri-Valley Conservancy.
3-72

                                                                      C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-16    Discourage and minimize development on lands with existing vine-
              yards and on lands suitable for viticulture.
 Objective LU-16.1 Limit further urbanization within the South Livermore Valley in
 areas under City jurisdiction to development that substantially enhances cultivated
 agriculture.
   Policies
   P1.    Prohibit additional development unless it will directly further the South Liver-
          more Valley’s purpose of expanding and enhancing cultivated agriculture.
   P2.    Strongly discourage the non-renewal or early termination of Williamson Act con-
          tracts. County and City agriculture preserve guidelines and individual contracts
          may be modified to specifically accomplish the objectives of preserving and pro-
          moting agriculture, in conformance with South Livermore Valley policies.
   P3.    Require that urban development within the South Livermore Valley mitigate im-
          pacts on and substantially enhance cultivated agriculture, by means of paying agri-
          cultural mitigation fees to the Tri-Valley Conservancy, by the direct planting of
          new vineyards, by dedicating agricultural easements on lands within the South
          Livermore Valley, and/or by including major wine-oriented attractions that would
          increase recognition of the South Livermore Valley as a premium wine-producing
          region.
                                                                                               3-73

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-17        Coordinate land use planning of the area between Alameda County and
                  the cities of Livermore and Pleasanton so as to increase certainty over
                  future land uses and to reduce speculation.
 Objective LU-17.1 Maintain the permanent South Livermore Growth Boundary and
 open space buffer between the cities of Pleasanton and Livermore in the South Liv-
 ermore Valley.
      Policy
      P1.     Encourage the cooperation of Alameda County, Livermore and Pleasanton in
              reaching the goals and objectives of the South Livermore Valley through coordi-
              nation of land use plans, use of pre-annexation, development, joint powers, tax-
              sharing, or other agreements, or other appropriate devices to coordinate future
              land uses and appropriate mitigation measures.
Goal LU-18        It is the goal of the City to establish a coherent and logical pattern of
                  urban uses that protects and enhances open space and agricultural uses
                  by providing a clear and permanent boundary for urban uses within the
                  City's planning area. The provisions of GOAL LU-18, as readopted by
                  the South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, shall be
                  amended only by a vote of the people.
 Objective LU-18.1 Maintain a permanent Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) on the
 City’s southern edge (as indicated Figure LU 3-6 and the City’s Land Use Map) be-
 yond which urban development shall not be permitted. Non-urban uses, such as
 agriculture, parks, and open space may be permitted within and beyond the South
 Livermore UGB. (Relevant provisions of that Initiative are found in Appendix 3 of
 Appendix A.)
3-74

                                                                                      C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Policies
       P1.      For the purposes of this section, “urban uses” and “urban development” include any use that is
                not permitted on lands with a general plan land use designation of Limited Agriculture; General
                Agriculture; Viticulture; Agriculture/Viticulture; Parks, Trailway and Recreation, Corridor,
                and Protected Areas; or Range and Grassland, as those designations existed on December
                6, 1999. (South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, 3-7-2000)
       P2.      For the purposes of this section, "urban services" refer to sewer and water service
       P3.      Permit only non-urban uses beyond the UGB within the City's municipal boundary. Beyond the
                City's municipal boundary, discourage and oppose any urban uses.
       P4.      Extend urban services only to areas within the UGB, except that the City may provide:
           (i)     sewage treatment and disposal services to the Veterans Administration Hospital for hospital
                   uses;
           (ii)    urban services for residences on parcels outside of the South Livermore UGB which parcels
                   were existing as of October 27, 1997, provided the property receiving such services shall record
                   a binding agreement between the property owner and the City disallowing further division of
                   the property and any provision of urban services to non-residential uses upon the property;
           (iii) urban services for commercial uses on parcels outside of the South Livermore UGB which
                   parcels were existing as of October 27, 1997, subject to the following:
                   (a)    the subject property is designated under the South Livermore Valley Area Plan for
                          agricultural uses, with associated allowable commercial uses;
                   (b)    the service(s) will be utilized for allowable commercial uses consistent with the provisions
                          of the South Livermore Valley Area Plan only;
                   (c)    the subject property is located adjacent to the Livermore municipal boundaries as of
                          the date of the adoption of the SLVSP and, is located adjacent to the Urban
                          Growth Boundary;
                                                                                                               3-75

N O RT H
                                           FIGURE 3 - 6
         SOUTH LIVERMORE URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY
                                LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                              C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                               L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
          (d)    if required by City or LAFCO policy, the property will annex to the City;
           (e)   the service(s) can be provided to the subject property without any potential growth
                 inducing impacts associated with potential provision of urban services to areas not
                 otherwise allowed to receive such services under the South Livermore Valley Specific
                 Plan or South Livermore Valley Area Plan;
          (f)    before receiving such service(s), the property owner will record a conservation easement
                 over the subject property in a form acceptable to the City which restricts use of the
                 subject property to agricultural and open space uses, except as to a delineated
                 commercial use area within which allowable commercial uses and intensity of such
                 uses shall be delineated; and
    (iv) for sewer service in unincorporated areas, the connections (residential and commercial) shall
          allow no more wastewater flow than the equivalent of ten residential units as required by
          the LAVWMA Joint Powers Agreement. This requirement shall apply cumulatively to
          all contiguous uses within the unincorporated geographic area. Larger scale sewer service to
          unincorporated areas requires the unanimous approval of the LAVWMA Board of
          Directors. If areas are annexed, this restriction will not apply.
P5.    Encourage compatible uses immediately inside the South Livermore UGB, as necessary to
       prevent potential land use conflicts with outlying non-urban uses.
P6.    The South Livermore UGB is indicated by a solid line in Figure 3-6 and the City’s Land
       Use Map.
P7.    The foregoing provisions of Objective LU 18.1 and Figure 3-6, as readopted by the South
       Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, shall be amended only by a vote of the people
       or otherwise in accordance with Section 3.D. of the South Livermore Urban Growth Bound-
       ary Initiative.
                                                                                                       3-77

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-19        Establish and maintain urban development criteria for the South Liv-
                  ermore Valley.
 Objective LU-19.1 Require any urban development proposal within the South Liv-
 ermore Valley to meet criteria intended to promote agriculture and discourage irre-
 sponsible development.
      Policies
        P1.      Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
                 less all necessary public utilities and services are available.
        P2.      Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
                 less the project will contribute funds for a recycled water treatment system.
                 Contributions should equal or exceed the cost of providing recycled water
                 equal in volume to 120 percent of anticipated water use of the development.
        P3.      Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
                 less the project protects public health and safety and the integrity of the unique
                 surrounding landscape within the South Livermore Valley by prohibiting grad-
                 ing or development on slopes of 25 percent or more and prohibiting mass
                 grading on slopes of between 10 and 25 percent. Development shall be locat-
                 ed, sited, and designed to fit and be subordinate to natural landforms.
        P4.      Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
                 less the project will not require cancellation of a Williamson Act contract, un-
                 less the development proponent can show, to the satisfaction of the City of
                 Livermore, that cancellation will result in a more compact development pattern
                 than development of proximate non-contracted lands. It is required that an ar-
                 ea within the South Livermore Valley equal or greater in area to the parcel(s) on
                 which cancellation would occur be cultivated and placed under permanent agri-
                 cultural easement and a long-term maintenance contract, prior to final approval
                 of any cancellation.
3-78
                                                                    C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
P5.     Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
        less the project site will not displace a significant amount of any actively farmed
        vineyards, defined as vineyards that produced and harvested wine grapes in
        1991. Any actively farmed vineyards that are displaced shall be mitigated by
        planting and maintenance of and dedication of agricultural conservation ease-
        ments over unplanted land equivalent to the displaced farmlands in addition to
        and in accordance with the agricultural protection policies set forth in P7, be-
        low.
P6.     Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
        less the project site is contiguous to the existing boundaries of the City of Liv-
        ermore. The City of Livermore has determined the exact location of urban de-
        velopment through the adoption of a specific plan and General Plan amend-
        ment.
P7.     Urban development in the South Livermore Valley shall not be approved un-
        less, at a minimum, the project protects and promotes viticulture or other culti-
        vated agriculture through the following means:
    (a)    Development is located and clustered, to the maximum extent feasible, adja-
           cent to existing City boundaries to minimize loss of better quality soils for
           wine grapes, and is sited and designed to create a logical, permanent urban
           edge to Livermore.
    (b) To mitigate the loss of cultivable soils, a minimum of one acre in the South
           Livermore Valley is planted in new vineyards or other appropriate cultivated
           agriculture, and permanently protected through dedication of agricultural
           easements for each acre developed. Mitigation acreage thus planted and
           protected should be contiguous to the extent possible to ensure mitigation
           acreage of sufficient size to form a viable agricultural unit.
    (c)    To enhance cultivated agriculture in the South Livermore Valley, a minimum
           of one acre within the South Livermore Valley, in addition to acreage re-
           quired in (b) above, is planted in vineyards or other appropriate cultivated
                                                                                             3-79
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
                     agriculture, and is permanently protected through dedication of agricultural
                     easements for each new dwelling unit permitted in the project. Mitigation
                     acreage thus planted and protected should be contiguous to the extent pos-
                     sible to ensure mitigation acreage of sufficient size to form a viable agricul-
                     tural unit.
              (d)    Mitigation acreage required under (b) and (c) above is not eligible for bonus
                     densities, as permitted under the Cultivated Agricultural Overlay District de-
                     scribed in the South Livermore Valley Area Plan (County Plan).
              (e)    Require mitigation acreage for urban development in the South Livermore
                     Valley to be dedicated and planted, and that evidence of a long-term mainte-
                     nance contract (eight years or more) be given, prior to approval of a final
                     map. This requirement can be phased, as long as phasing is consistent with
                     final map phasing.
              (f)    Require that new cultivated agriculture resulting from South Livermore Val-
                     ley policies use water conserving best management programs, including the
                     use of drip irrigation wherever feasible.
              (g)    Development includes at least one major draw or attraction that would in-
                     crease recognition of the South Livermore Valley as a premium wine-
                     producing region. Examples of appropriate attractions include a wine-
                     related institute, research center or conference center, wine museum, cultural
                     arts center or a resort hotel. Consideration should be given to creating a
                     “Wine Country Center” that would serve as a focal point for visitors to the
                     region by combining one or more major attractions with ancillary retail uses,
                     such as restaurants, art galleries or shops, bicycle rentals, delis, or other ap-
                     propriate small-scale uses that would complement the major attraction. An-
                     cillary retail uses would be limited, and should be carefully considered to
                     complement businesses in Downtown Livermore. Retail uses and for-profit
                     major attractions should be subject to an agricultural mitigation fee of $2.50
                     per square foot. Fee amounts should be adjusted annually to reflect changes
                     in the Consumer Price Index.
3-80

                                                                     C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
P8.    In lieu of providing the mitigation acreage required under P7, the project may
       mitigate the loss of the area’s unique rural scenic qualities and sensitive natural
       resources by dedicating land that has been identified by the City in the South
       Livermore Valley Specific Plan as Regional Open Space due to its significant
       contribution to the protection of the South Livermore Valley's natural envi-
       ronment. Such dedications shall, at a minimum, meet the following criteria:
    (a) A minimum of one acre of Regional Open Space shall be dedicated for each
        acre developed and, in addition, a minimum of one acre of environmental and
        open space land shall be dedicated for each new unit permitted in the project.
    (b) For environmental and open space land that the City determines is not suita-
        ble for agricultural, residential, or active recreational use, three acres shall be
        dedicated for each acre required by paragraph P8(a), above, although the City
        may allow a small percentage of environmental and open space land (ten per-
        cent) to be dedicated at a one-to-one (1:1) basis for mitigation instead of
        three-to-one (3:1).
    (c) Mitigation acreage should be contiguous to the extent necessary to form a via-
        ble open space resource or environmental protection zone.
    (d) Mitigation acreage required under this policy is not eligible for bonus densities
        permitted under the Cultivated Agricultural Overlay District described in the
        South Livermore Valley Area Plan (County Plan).
                                                                                              3-81

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
 Objective LU-19.2 Designate appropriate City areas within the South Livermore
 Valley as “Transitional Areas” due to physical isolation from the main part of the
 South Livermore planning area, adjacency and relationship to existing urbanized ar-
 eas, and/or locations within the existing City.
      Policies
        P1.      Encourage new urban development within Transitional Areas to provide a
                 graceful transition between existing urban areas and the Vineyard Area, and
                 promote recognition of the area as a premier wine-producing region through
                 structural design, appropriate landscaping and open space, and signage.
        P2.      Ensure that urban development within Transitional Areas compensates for loss
                 of cultivable or potentially cultivable soils through use of agricultural mitigation
                 fees to fund the Tri-Valley Conservancy. Fees should be calculated based on a
                 one-to-one ratio between the cost per acre for agricultural easements to the
                 Conservancy and the net acreage of potentially cultivable soils less than 25 per-
                 cent in slope lost to development. Agricultural easements are assumed to have
                 an average value of $10,000/acre (1992 value). Fee amounts should be adjust-
                 ed annually to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index. The City should
                 ensure collection and distribution of agricultural mitigation fees in Transitional
                 Areas through use of joint powers, pre-annexation, tax-sharing, and/or devel-
                 opment agreements, or other appropriate means.
      Action
      A1.     Continue to maintain a Transferred Development Overlay District that includes
              land that has been determined to be suitable for development at urban densities
              provided the impacts of such development are mitigated through preservation of
              agricultural, regional parkland, environmental, and scenic resources elsewhere is
              the South Livermore Valley.
3-82

                                                                         C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Goal LU-20    Maintain the rural qualities of the unincorporated part of the Livermore
              Planning Area.
 Objective LU-20.1 Preserve agricultural and natural resources in the unincorpo-
 rated area to provide the natural setting for Livermore’s identity.
    Policies
      P1.    The City shall request Alameda County to limit land uses in the unincorporated
             part of the Planning Area, including that designated Rural Residential, to agri-
             cultural and open space uses.
      P2.    The City shall encourage Alameda County, the State, non-profit organizations
             and interested individuals to preserve, acquire and enhance open space in the
             Planning Area.
      P3.    The City shall collaborate with Alameda County and with Alameda County
             LAFCO to protect existing land uses from development inappropriate for rural
             areas.
      P4.    The City shall advocate at the State level for expansion of incentives, such as
             Williamson Act contracts, that allow agricultural operations to remain econom-
             ically viable.
      P5.    The City shall encourage local property owners to place agricultural land under
             easement with the Tri-Valley Conservancy, or a similar entity working in other
             parts of Livermore, and/or to protect their farms with Williamson Act designa-
             tion.
      P6.    All new developments adjacent to agricultural land shall be subject to an ordi-
             nance that preserves the right to farm. Prior to property transfer, disclosure of
             the right to farm shall be provided to all purchasers and lessees.
      P7.    No proposed projects adjacent to agricultural areas shall be approved if they
             are found to substantially interfere with existing agricultural production.
                                                                                                  3-83

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
      Action
      A1.     Provide input to Alameda County on applications in the Planning Area for discre-
              tionary land use approvals, both through the environmental review process and
              by commenting on referrals from the County.
F. Allowed Development in the South Livermore Valley
As discussed in Section E, South Livermore Valley Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions, in Octo-
ber 1993, the City of Livermore amended its General Plan to incorporate relevant policies
from the County’s South Livermore Valley Area Plan. In addition to providing a policy
framework for the South Livermore Valley that was consistent with that adopted by the
County, the amended General Plan established City policy that development of up to 1,600
residential units was permitted in South Livermore Valley Area Plan – Vineyard Area as a
means of achieving expanded viticultural acreage south of the City (i.e. through implementa-
tion of an agricultural mitigation program). The amended General Plan also stated that the
City of Livermore would establish the exact location of urban development in South Liver-
more Valley Area Plan – Vineyard Area through the adoption of the South Livermore Valley
Specific Plan (SLVSP). (Reso. 2011-063)
As a means of implementing the policies incorporated into the General Plan, one over-
arching land use designation, the Agriculture/Viticulture (AGVT) designation, was established.
This designation was established such that it could be implemented through a variety of
means. The standard AGVT designation allows one residential unit per 100 acres. If im-
plemented in this manner, the land shall be used to preserve and promote agricultural and
viticultural uses as the primary uses of the land. The AGVT density allows one residential
unit per 100 acres; however, it is subject to, and property owners may utilize, the Rural Densi-
ty Program, described below. At this time, the Rural Density Bonus Program does not apply
to any other areas in the City’s Planning Area. In the future, however, the Rural Density
Bonus Program could be applied to additional areas in the City’s Planning Area provided
that those areas are rezoned to Planned Development/Agriculture (PD-A).
3-84

                                                                           C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Rural Density Program Requirements - The agriculture/viticulture density shall be subject to a
density bonus of up to four additional home sites per 100 acres (one dwelling unit per 20
acres maximum average density), if the following criteria are met:
    (1) The parcel is zoned PD/Agriculture;
    (2) Adequate water supplies are available for both domestic and irrigation needs, and all
        proposed uses can be served by individual septic systems;
    (3) Sensitive or unique environmental and land characteristics are protected;
    (4) Prior to final subdivision map approval (or through further surety that such planting
        will be completed within 39 months of filing the final map, unless an extension is
        granted), a minimum of 90 percent of the parcel is planted in wine grapes or other
        cultivated agriculture, with provisions that will ensure its continued cultivated agricul-
        tural use through a long-term (minimum of 8 years) agreement for operation and
        maintenance and is permanently protected through dedication of agricultural ease-
        ments;
    (5) Agricultural home sites, ancillary uses and parcel configurations are sited to maximize
        productive use of land for intensive cultivated agriculture. In order to ensure the
        protection and enhancement of the image and visual quality of the South Livermore
        Valley, tentative subdivision maps and site plan approvals for the bonus parcels creat-
        ed under the Agriculture/Viticulture designation shall include design guidelines which
        address: location of residential home sites; protection of scenic views, vistas, and
        ridgelines; architectural design, including but not limited to style, colors and materials
        which complement the area, building types and heights, building scale and massing of
        structures, and solar efficiency and innovation; fencing location and materials; and
        landscaping guidelines to encourage the use of native and/or low water use plan ma-
        terials.
The AGVT designation also allows the potential for urban development through two over-
lay districts; the Transferred Development Overlay (TDO) District and the Conditional Urban Overlay
(CUO) District.
                                                                                                    3-85
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
The TDO district, briefly described in Section E, South Livermore Goals, Objectives, Policies, and
Actions, includes land that has been determined to be suitable for development at urban den-
sities provided the impacts of such development are mitigated through preservation of agri-
cultural, regional parkland, environmental, and scenic resources elsewhere is the South Liv-
ermore Valley. Within the TDO District (i.e., the Alden Land Transitional Area, Figure 3-7),
a density bonus allowing development of up to a total of 350 new residential units and ancil-
lary supporting uses (i.e. schools, parks, and trails) may be granted for projects developed
pursuant to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) permit that include for every two units of
development authorized by the General Plan:
   Purchase of one transferable development right (TDR) authorized by the City for use
      within the Transferred Development Overlay (TDO) District; and,
   Dedication of land designated as Regional Open Space within Subarea 7 (discussed be-
      low) to the Livermore Area Recreation and Parks District (LARPD) in an amount equiv-
      alent to one acre of mitigation credit calculated in accordance with General Plan policy
      LU-19.1.P8; other lands may be dedicated if the City determines that all available lands or
      credits for lands in Subarea 7 have been dedicated or retired.
The Regional Open Space dedication requirement may be satisfied by payment of a fee
established by the City for acquisition and dedication of Regional Open Space or agricultural
land consistent with the dedication requirement. Development within the TDO District,
pursuant to a density bonus, shall also pay the agricultural mitigation fees referenced in
Section G, Alden Lane Transitional Area, below. Any Planned Unit Development permit for the
TDO District shall include conditions sufficient to ensure the development will have no
significant adverse effects on the environment. The TDO District has been applied to the
eastern portion of the Alden Lane Transitional Area, generally referred to as the South
Livermore Transferable Development Rights (TDR) site.
The other overlay district, the Conditional Urban Overlay (CUO) District, permits urban de-
velopment in seven specified geographical areas (Subareas 1 through 7) utilizing four land
use subdesignations. The four subdesignations are Residential Development Area, Vineyard
Commercial, Agriculture Preserve, and Regional Open Space. These land use subdesigna-
tions are described below.
3-86

                                                                           C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
AGVT Subdesignations
Residential Development Area - These areas primarily consist of residential development and
those ancillary uses that support it, such as schools, parks and trails.
Vineyard Commercial - Areas that permit the limited development of wine country commercial
uses that directly support the South Livermore Valley wine region. Specific commercial uses
are designated for each area.
Agriculture Preserve - Areas that are designated for intensive agriculture, particularly viticulture.
Other agricultural uses identified by the SLVSP may also be permitted, such as long-
established rural residences. In order to mitigate the loss of agricultural land to
development, these areas will be placed under permanent agricultural easements.
Regional Open Space - Areas set aside for the protection of environmental, visual and open
space resources. In order to mitigate the impacts of urban development, these areas will be
placed under permanent open space easements and dedicated to and accepted by LARPD as
regional parkland.
The seven, geographical subareas, identified as such on the General Plan Land Use Map, utilize
two or more of these land use subdesignations. Each subarea, and the subdesignations and
permitted densities contained therein, are described below.
Geographical Subareas and Corresponding Land Uses
Subarea 1 - Up to 133 new residential units may be constructed within a 57-acre designated
Residential Development Area in conformance with the SLVSP. The Residential
Development Area shall also include at least 6.2 acres of open space and trails. Four rural
residential compounds will remain in addition to Stivers Academy. The remaining lands
within the subarea shall be used for viticulture or other cultivated agriculture and designated
as Agricultural Preserve.
Subarea 2 - Up to 574 new residential units may be constructed within a 212-acre designated
Residential Development Area in conformance with the SLVSP. The Residential
Development Area shall also include 18 acres of trails and open space including a 12.5-acre
park. A total of 10.2 acres consisting of two separate sites are designated Vineyard
                                                                                                    3-87
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Commercial. A site located near East Avenue is 2.2 acres with development potential to
include a small winery and other wine related commercial uses. A site located near Tesla
Road is 8 acres with development potential to include a medium winery and other wine
related uses. One rural residential compound shall remain on an approximate 6 acres
adjacent to the Tesla Road for farm support operations that will continue to operate as such.
The remaining lands within the subarea shall be used for viticulture or other cultivated
agriculture and designated as Agricultural Preserve.
Subarea 3 - Up to 246 residential units may be constructed within a 96-acre designated
Residential Development Area in conformance with the SLVSP. The Residential
Development Area shall also include 1.8 acres of trails and open space. (Reso. 2011-063)
Subarea 4 - Up to 130 residential units may be constructed within a 76-acre designated
Residential Development Area in conformance with the SLVSP. The Residential
Development Area shall also include 6.7 acres of open space and trails. Twelve-acres are
designated Vineyard Commercial, with development potential for a 10,000 square-foot olive
mill and small winery on three-acres, two small wineries of three acres each, and a three-acre
small restaurant/winery may be developed in conformance with the SLVSP. Fifty-six acres
are designated Regional Open Space, and used for regional parkland. Four rural residential
compounds will remain. The remaining lands within the subarea are designated as
Agricultural Preserve and will be used for viticulture or other cultivated agriculture.
Subarea 5 - Up to 177 residential units may be constructed within a 90-acre designated
Residential Development Area in conformance with the SLVSP. In addition, 16-acres are
designated Vineyard Commercial, including development potential for a 20,000- to 25,000-
square foot wine country commercial center on up to three-acres, a 30-room inn and large
restaurant on three-acres, three small new wineries on three acres each, and a one-acre bed-
3-88
                                                                         C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
and-breakfast inn developed in conformance with the SLVSP. Five rural residential
compounds will remain. The remaining lands within the subarea shall be used for viticulture
or other cultivated agriculture and designated as Agricultural Preserve.
Subarea 6 - No residential development shall be permitted. Up to 12 acres are designated
Vineyard Commercial with potential for a medium-sized winery to be developed in
conformance with the SLVSP. The remaining lands within the subarea are designated as
Agricultural Preserve and shall be used for viticulture or other cultivated agriculture.
Subarea 7 - Up to twelve residential units may be constructed within Subarea 7. Up to five
one-acre home sites, and a home site and small winery on a three-acre site may be developed
within the 92-acre family compound at the eastern edge of the subarea, and up to six parcels
of approximately 20-acres, each but in no event less than 18 acres (with a residence and, sub-
ject to a conditional use permit, a boutique winery on each) may be developed on the lower
bench and clay pan area.
In addition, one of the 20-acre parcels may be developed with either:
    (1) A medium sized winery; or,
    (2) A winery together with a wine country inn (with 30 rooms) and a restaurant (with sit
        down seating for 100 people) in conformance with the SLVSP.
The 370-acres of Subarea 7 shall be designated as Regional Parkland and Open Space. Based
on the Regional Open Space mitigation criteria in General Plan policy LU 19.1 P8, the com-
bination of flat and sloped land within the Regional Open Space designation is equivalent to
305 total acres of mitigation credit. In addition, 25 acres of land designated as Agriculture
Preserve in the western portion of the family compound may be made available for mitiga-
tion in the future either as a result of being planted in accordance with the SLVSP or redes-
ignated as Regional Open Space and dedicated to the Livermore Area Recreation and Parks
District.
The Regional Open Space, family compound, and 20-acre parcels shall be subject to conser-
vation easements protecting agricultural, habitat, and open space resources on the site and
allowing the uses described above. Development of the six home sites on the 92-acre family
                                                                                                  3-89
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
compound shall be mitigated by planting 10-acres of the compound in vineyards or orchards
and permanently preserving the wooded slope on the northern edge of the compound. If
additional land in the family compound is planted in accordance with SLVSP requirements,
that land may be eligible for use as mitigation credit pursuant to General Plan policy LU 19.1
P7. Development of the six 20-acre parcels shall be mitigated in accordance with the Rural
Density Program requirements, above, except that in the event that a commercial site is es-
tablished in accordance with the TDO district, the mitigation requirement for this parcel
may be satisfied by planting and dedicating that portion of the parcel that lies outside the
designated commercial site area.
In addition to the uses described above, the western portion of Subarea 7 is entitled to 175
units of transferable development rights (23 of which have been transferred to the City pur-
suant to an agreement between the City and the Subarea 7 landowners) which may be used
for development with the TDO District discussed above in this section.
G. Transitional Areas
This section includes descriptions and requirements that apply to two transitional areas, as
mapped in Figures 3-7 and 3-8 and described below. These two transitional areas include
Alden Lane Transitional Area and the Vineyard Estates Transitional Area.
Alden Lane Transitional Area
The Alden Lane Transitional Area is roughly bounded by Alden Lane on the north, Holmes
Avenue on the east, East Vineyard Avenue on the south, and Isabel Avenue on the west.
This area was designated as a “Transitional Area” due to physical isolation from the main
part of the County Plan, its adjacency and relationship to existing urbanized areas, and/or
location within the existing City. This area was designated as the receiver site for the 350
residential units from South Livermore Valley Subarea 7. This area is generally referred to as
the South Livermore Valley Transfer of Development (TDR) site. While this area has al-
ready been developed, the following requirements, extracted from the County Plan, where
utilized to regulate the development of this transitional area:
3-90

                          FIGURE 3 - 7
ALDEN LANE AND VINEYARD ESTATES
             TRANSITIONAL AREAS
               LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                       FIGURE 3 - 8
Greenville BART TOD
                           GREENVILLE BART TOD AND EAST SIDE
Eastside Transitional Area               TRANSITIONAL AREAS
                                            LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
(a) Encourage new urban development within the Alden Lane Transitional Areas to pro-
      vide a graceful transition between existing urban areas and the South Livermore Valley,
      and promote recognition of the area as a premier wine-producing region through struc-
      tural design, appropriate landscaping and open space, and signage.
(b) Ensure that urban development within the Alden Lane Transitional Area compensates
      for loss of cultivable or potentially cultivable soils through use of agricultural mitigation
      fees to fund the Tri-Valley Conservancy. Fees should be calculated based on a one-to-
      one ratio between the cost per acre for agricultural easements to the Trust and the net
      acreage of potentially cultivable soils less than 25 percent in slope lost to development.
      The value of agricultural easements shall be periodically updated to reflect market value.
      Fee amounts should be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the Consumer Price In-
      dex. The City should ensure collection and distribution of agricultural mitigation fees
      in Transitional Areas through use of joint powers, pre-annexation, tax-sharing, and/or
      development agreements, or other appropriate means.
Vineyard Estates Transitional Area
The Vineyard Estates Transitional Area includes approximately thirty 20-acre parcels, total-
ing around 700 acres, located just west of SLVSP Subarea 7. However, this area is not a part
of the subareas planned for in the SLVSP. Each parcel in this area may include one house
and/or winery within a specified a two-acre building envelope. The remaining 18 acres of
each parcel must be put under a permanent conservation easement. This Transitional Area
is a key part of the City’s strategy of creating a very low density area between the vineyards
and open space to the south and west and the more intense urban development to the north.
The base designation in the Vineyard Estates Transitional Area is Agriculture/Viticulture
(AGVT).
                                                                                                    3-93

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
H. New Mixed-Use Neighborhoods
This section includes requirements that apply to two mixed-use neighborhood areas outside
of the Downtown, as discussed below and mapped in Figure 3-8. These areas include the
East Side Transitional Areas and the Greenville BART Transit Oriented Development Area.
East Side Transitional Areas
Before new mixed-use development is allowed in the East Side Transitional Area, a neigh-
borhood plan shall be developed for each such area showing circulation and land use in the
interest of safety, convenience, and maximum benefit for residents alike. The City should do
this in cooperation with the property owners of each area. The neighborhood plans will es-
tablish a basic framework for circulation, land use, building, signing and landscaping that will
permit orderly growth as the mixed-use neighborhood expands. In addition, neighborhood
plans will include locations for schools and parks, and will address compatibility with sur-
rounding uses.
Greenville BART Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Area
The purpose of the Greenville TOD is to provide land use appropriate to a future commuter
transit station. At such time that the City receives a commitment from BART to extend rail
service to Livermore, a specific plan for the area shall be developed. The plan would include
sufficient acreage for a station area, maintenance yard, and parking to be determined in co-
ordination with BART, with the remainder of the area to be designated mixed-use and resi-
dential uses. Densities in the specific plan should feather from the highest mixed-use density
closest to the BART station to single-family urban residential designations at the edges.
Preparation of a specific plan shall be coordinated with BART and other responsible agen-
cies (such as LVJUSD, LARPD, EBRPD, Zone 7, and California Department of Fish and
Game) to ensure that appropriate public services and facilities are provided and that poten-
tial environmental impacts are mitigated to the extent feasible.
3-94
9 NOISE ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Noise Element is to identify and appraise noise generation in the community in order to
  minimize problems from intrusive sound and to ensure that new development does not expose people to unac-
  ceptable noise levels.
  Noise can be defined as a sound or series of sounds that are intrusive, irritating, objectiona-
  ble and/or disruptive to daily life. Noise varies widely in its scope, source, and volume,
  ranging from individual occurrences, such as a lawn mower, to the intermittent disturbances
  of train whistles, to the fairly constant noise generated by traffic on freeways. Noise is pri-
  marily a concern when in the vicinity of noise-sensitive uses such as residences, schools,
  churches, and hospitals.
  State law requires a Noise Element as part of all city and county General Plans. Noise Ele-
  ments are required to identify noise problems in the community and include policies to work
  towards their resolution. This Noise Element provides baseline information on the existing
  noise environment, including noise measurements taken throughout the City, and 2003 noise
  contours for major roadway segments, railroad corridors, and the Airport. It also identifies
  noise-sensitive uses in Livermore. This Noise Element also contains goals, objectives, poli-
  cies, and actions for controlling noise for existing and future development.
  A. Background Information
  Measurement and Effects of Noise
  This section describes the main aspects of community noise, provides definitions for meas-
  uring noise, and identifies the effects of noise.
  The objectionable nature of sound is caused by its pitch or its loudness. Pitch is the height
  or depth of a tone or sound, depending on the relative rapidity (frequency) of the vibrations
  by which it is produced. Higher pitched signals sound louder to humans than sounds with a
  lower pitch. Loudness is caused by the intensity of sound waves combined with the recep-
  tion characteristics of the ear. Intensity may be compared with the height of an ocean wave:
  it is a measure of the amplitude of the sound wave.
                                                                                                        9-1
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
Beyond the concepts of pitch and loudness, there are several noise measurement scales
which are used to describe noise in a particular location. These are listed in Table 9-1. The
most basic noise measurement is the decibel (dB), which is a unit of measurement indicating
the relative amplitude of a sound. The zero on the decibel scale is based on the lowest
sound level that the healthy, unimpaired human ear can detect. Sound levels in decibels are
calculated on a logarithmic basis. An increase of 10 decibels represents a ten-fold increase in
acoustic energy, while 20 decibels is 100 times more intense, 30 decibels is 1,000 times more
intense, etc. Generally, the human ear cannot perceive a difference between two noises that
are less than 3 decibels different from one another.
There are several methods of refining decibel scales to make them reflect human perception.
Most commonly used in California is the A-weighted sound level or dBA. This scale gives
greater weight to the frequencies of sound to which the human ear is most sensitive. Repre-
sentative outdoor and indoor noise levels in units of dBA are shown in Table 9-2. For ex-
ample, light traffic heard from a distance of 100 feet would have a level of 50 dBA. A jet
taking off 200 feet away would create 120 dBA.
Because sound levels can vary markedly over a short period of time, a method for describing
either the average character of the sound or the statistical behavior of the variations must be
used. Most commonly, environmental sounds are described in terms of their level of acous-
tical energy averaged over a period of time. This energy-equivalent sound/noise descriptor
is called Leq.
The most common Leq averaging period is hourly, but Leq can describe noise events of any
specified time period.
9-2
                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                           N O I S E  E L E M E N T
TABLE 9-1 DEFINITIONS OF ACOUSTICAL TERMS
 Term           Definitions
                A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to
 Decibel,
                the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the refer-
 dB
                ence pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
 Frequency,     The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and below
 Hz             atmospheric pressure.
                Sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the
                A-weighting filter network, which de-emphasizes very low and very high fre-
 A-Weighted
                quency components of the sound in a manner similar to the frequency re-
 Sound Level,
                sponse of the human ear and correlates well with subjective reactions to
 dBA
                noise. All sound levels referenced in the General Plan are A-weighted, unless
                reported otherwise.
 L01, L10,      The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded 1%, 10%, 50%, and 90% (re-
 L50, L90       spectively) of the time during the measurement period.
 Equivalent
 Noise Level,   The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period.
 Leq
 Community
                The Average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained after add-
 Noise Equiva-
                ing 5 decibels to measurements taken in the evening (7 to 10 pm) and 10 dec-
 lent Level,
                ibels to measurements taken between 10 pm and 7 am.
 CNEL
 Day/Night      The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addi-
 Noise Level,   tion of 10 decibels to levels measured in the night between 10:00 pm and 7:00
 Ldn            am.
                The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the measurement
 Lmax, Lmin
                period.
 Ambient        The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or existing
 Noise Level    level of environmental noise at a given location.
                                                                                                9-3
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
 Term                    Definitions
                         That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a giv-
                         en location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its ampli-
 Intrusive
                         tude, duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or informational
                         content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
TABLE 9-2 TYPICAL SOUND LEVELS
 Noise Source                                 A-Weighted
                                              Sound Level           Noise           Subjective
                                              in Decibels       Environment        Evaluations
                                                                                    128 times as
 Near Jet Engine                                   140            Deafening
                                                                                        loud
                                                                                    64 times as
 Civil Defense Siren                               130        Threshold of Pain
                                                                                        loud
                                                              Threshold of Feel-    32 times as
 Hard Rock Band                                    120
                                                                      ing               loud
 Accelerating Motorcycle at a dis-
                                                   110            Very Loud       16 time as loud
 tance of several feet
 Pile Driver; Noisy Urban
                                                   100            Very Loud       8 times as loud
 Street/Heavy City Traffic
 Ambulance Siren; Food Blender                      95            Very Loud
 Garbage Disposal                                   90            Very Loud       4 times as loud
 Freight Cars; Living Room Music                    85               Loud
 Pneumatic Drill; Vacuum Cleaner                    80               Loud         2 times as loud
 Busy Restaurant                                    75        Moderately Loud
 Near Freeway Auto Traffic                          70        Moderately Loud
 Average Office                                    60             Moderate          1/2 as loud
 Suburban Street                                    55            Moderate
 Light Traffic; Soft Radio Music in
                                                    50               Quiet          1/4 as loud
 Apartment
9-4
                                                                       C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                               N O I S E  E L E M E N T
  Noise Source                            A-Weighted
                                          Sound Level          Noise                  Subjective
                                           in Decibels      Environment             Evaluations
  Large Transformer                             45              Quiet
  Average Residence Without Stereo
                                                40              Faint                1/8 as loud
  Playing
  Soft Whisper                                  30              Faint
  Rustling Leaves                               20            Very Faint
                                                                                    Threshold of
  Human Breathing                               10            Very Faint
                                                                                        Hearing
Since sensitivity to noise increases during the evening and at night – because excessive noise
interferes with the ability to sleep -- 24-hour descriptors have been developed that increase
the weighting for noise that occurs during quiet times of day. The increase is referred to as a
penalty. For example, the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) measures the cumu-
lative noise exposure in a place, with a 5 dB penalty added to evening (7:00 pm - 10:00 pm)
and a 10 dB penalty added to nocturnal (10:00 pm - 7:00 am) noise levels. The Day/Night
Average Sound Level, Ldn, is essentially the same as CNEL, with the exception that the even-
ing time period is dropped and all occurrences during this three-hour period are grouped in-
to the daytime period.
Effects of Noise According to Levels
The known effects of noise on humans include hearing loss, sleep and speech interference,
and annoyance. While physical damage to the ear from an intense noise impulse is rare, a
degradation of auditory acuity can occur within a community noise environment. Hearing
loss occurs mainly due to chronic exposure to excessive noise, but may be due to a single
event such as an explosion.
The thresholds for speech interference indoors are about 45 dBA if the noise is steady and
above 55 dBA if the noise is fluctuating. Outdoors the thresholds are about 15 dBA higher.
Steady noise of sufficient intensity (above 35 dBA) and fluctuating noise levels above 45
dBA have been shown to affect sleep. Interior residential standards for multiple-family
                                                                                                    9-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
dwellings are set by the State of California at 45 dBA CNEL. The standard is designed for
sleep and speech protection. The walls of an average home decrease outdoor noise by about
12 to 17 dBA with open windows. With closed windows in good condition, the noise atten-
uation factor is around 20 dBA for an older structure and 25 dBA for a newer dwelling.
Sleep and speech interference is therefore possible when exterior noise levels are about 57 to
62 dBA CNEL or higher with open windows and 65 to 70 dBA CNEL or higher if the win-
dows are closed.
Attitude surveys have been used for measuring the annoyance felt in a community for noises
intruding into homes or affecting outdoor activity areas. The Ldn as a measure of noise has
been found to provide a valid correlation of noise level and the percentage of people an-
noyed. Two common sources of noise, which cause annoyance, are ground transportation
and air-craft noise. When measuring the percentage of the population “highly annoyed,” the
thresh-old for ground vehicle noise is about 55 dBA Ldn. At an Ldn of about 60 dBA, ap-
proximately 2 percent of the population is “highly annoyed.” When the Ldn increases to 70
dBA, the percentage of the population “highly annoyed” increases to about 12 percent of
the population. There appears to be a correlation between an increase of about one percent
of population per dBA increase between an Ldn of 60 to 70 dBA.
Existing Noise Sources
Major noise sources within the City of Livermore include cars, trucks, buses, trains, aircraft,
industrial plant equipment, and activities associated with neighborhoods and schools (lawn
mowing and leaf blowing, children playing, etc.). The most important difference between
transportation and non-transportation noise sources is that the City can generally exercise
control on the level and duration of noise at the property line of a non-transportation source
of noise. Cities often adopt noise exposure standards for noise levels generated from mobile
sources, such as trucks, trains, or planes, and then make permitting decisions for land uses
regarding their sensitivity in areas with excessive noise. Cities can play a role in enforcing the
requirement in the State Vehicle Code regarding properly operating mufflers, and may also
set speed limits or weight restrictions on streets. In general terms, a City’s actions are pri-
marily proactive with respect to stationary noise sources and reactive for those mobile
sources beyond City control.
9-6

                                                                      C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                              N O I S E  E L E M E N T
In early 2003, ambient noise monitoring was conducted at 15 sites that are representative of
noise sensitive or noise-producing locations within the City of Livermore. The site locations
and the monitoring results are shown in Table 9-3.
                                                                                                   9-7
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
Table 9-3 NOISE MONITORING LOCATIONS AND RESULTS
               Location #              Date       Time       Duration     Leq
1. 1390 Arlington Rd.
Residential neighborhood at the               3:01-3:31      30
                                    3/18/2003                         62.4 dBA
intersection of York Way and Ar-              p.m.           minutes
lington Rd.
2. 249 Alden Lane
Residential neighborhood at the               2:02-2:17      15
                                    3/18/2003                         52.5 dBA
intersection of Old Oak Road and              p.m.           minutes
Alden Lane.
3. 4947 Candy Court
Residential neighborhood. In the
                                                             15
front yard near the intersection of 3/18/2003 8:41-8:56 a.m.          53.6 dBA
                                                             minutes
Patterson Pass Road and Candy
Court.
4. 3951 East Avenue
East Avenue Middle School on
                                                             15
East Avenue between Hill Crest      3/18/2003 9:22-9:37 a.m.          62.2 dBA
                                                             minutes
and Estate Street. Next to St.
Michaels Cemetery.
5. 1111 East Stanley Blvd.
Valley Memorial Hospi-                        1:26-1:41      15
                                    3/18/2003                         60.7 dBA
tal/Hacienda Convalescent Hospi-              p.m.           minutes
tal.
6. 298 Junction Avenue
Junction Avenue Middle School
                                              10:14-10:29    15
and Park near the intersection of   3/18/2003                         55.4 dBA
                                              a.m.           minutes
Junction Avenue and Ladd Ave-
nue.
7. 2253 Fifth Street
Del Valle High School. Near the               4:56-5:11      15
                                    3/18/2003                         53.8 dBA
intersection of I Street and Fifth            p.m.           minutes
Street.
9-8
                                                               C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       N O I S E  E L E M E N T
             Location #                 Date       Time       Duration                Leq
8. 600 Maple St.
Livermore High School near inter-              9:47-10:02     15
                                     3/18/2003                                  61.3 dBA
section of Maple Street and East               a.m.           minutes
Avenue.
9. 3594 Ridgecrest Center
                                               11:14-11:34    20
Near the intersection of First       3/18/2003                                  58.7 dBA
                                               a.m.           minutes
Street and Portola Avenue.
10. 5757 Haggin Oaks Avenue
Christensen School parking lot on
                                                              15
Haggin Oak Avenue between Pasa-      3/18/2003 8:02-8:17 a.m.                   57.3 dBA
                                                              minutes
tiempo Street and Briadmoor
Street.
11. 790 Holmes Street
Tiffany Gardens (Assisted Care
                                               4:30-4:45      15
Center for Seniors) at the intersec- 3/18/2003                                  65.2 dBA
                                               p.m.           minutes
tion of Holmes Street and Mocho
Street.
12. 401 E. Jack London Blvd.
Rancho Las Positas Elementary
                                               2:38-2:53      15
School and Nursery School. At        3/18/2003                                  63.5 dBA
                                               p.m.           minutes
the intersection of Jack London
Blvd. and Arlington Road.
13. 2451 Portola Avenue
Don Gasper De Portola Elemen-
                                               10:49-11:04    15
tary School near the intersection of 3/18/2003                                  59.3 dBA
                                               a.m.           minutes
N. Livermore Avenue and Portola
Avenue.
14. 458 Maple Street
St. Michaels Church next to Liv-
                                               12:04-12:19    15
ermore High School. Near the in-     3/18/2003                                  64.4 dBA
                                               p.m.           minutes
tersection of Maple Street and
Fifth Street.
                                                                                            9-9
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
               Location #                 Date            Time        Duration        Leq
15. 927 Aberdeen Avenue
In the front yard near the intersec-
                                                     1:13-2:13        15
tion of Holmes Street and Anza        3/18/2003                                   60.2 dBA
                                                     p.m.             minutes
Way. Down the street from Tiffa-
ny Gardens.
Traffic Noise
Traffic noise depends primarily on the speed of traffic and the percentage of truck traffic;
traffic volume also has a major influence on traffic noise levels. The primary source of noise
from automobiles is high frequency tire noise, which increases with speed. In addition,
trucks and older automobiles produce engine and exhaust noise, and trucks also generate
wind noise. While tire noise from autos is generally located at ground level, truck noise
sources can be located as high as 10 to 15 feet above the roadbed due to tall exhaust stacks
and higher engines; sound walls are not always effective for mitigating such noise unless they
are taller than the noise source. According to common practice, maximum exterior noise
levels of 60 dBA CNEL or Ldn are considered “normally acceptable” for unshielded residen-
tial development. “Normally acceptable” means that no noise evaluation is needed and any
buildings may be constructed using conventional techniques. Noise levels from 60 to 70
dBA CNEL or Ldn fall within the “conditionally unacceptable” range, which means that de-
tailed noise analysis and possibly mitigations are required, and those in the 70 to 75 dBA
CNEL or Ldn range are considered “normally unacceptable,” meaning that analysis and miti-
gations are required.
Major contributing roadway noise sources include Interstate 580 (I-580), State Route (SR)
84, Livermore Avenue, First Street, and other arterial and collector roadways throughout the
City. Figure 9-1 provides a noise contour map for the City that identifies 2003 noise con-
tours for major roadway segments. The noise contour map shows the 60 dBA CNEL con-
tour along major roadways, railroad tracks, and near the Airport. As shown on the map, are-
as within this contour line would be affected by noise associated with these noise sources.
9-10

                                                                         C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                 N O I S E  E L E M E N T
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) highway traffic noise prediction model
(FHWA RD-77-108) was used to evaluate I-580 traffic-related noise conditions along road-
way links within the City Planning Area. A typical vehicle mix for urban/suburban areas in
California was used in this modeling effort. The modeled 24-hour CNEL levels for the ex-
isting (year 2003) baseline conditions are shown in Figure 9-1.
Table 9-4 shows that traffic noise along the majority of the roadway links in the City is mod-
erate (i.e., the 70 dBA CNEL contour is confined within the roadway right-of-way). How-
ever, along some City streets (e.g., East Avenue, Holmes Street, Kitty Hawk Road, Murrieta
Boulevard, North Canyons Parkway, Springtown Boulevard, Livermore Avenue, Mines
Road, Vasco Road, Stanley Boulevard, and First Street), the 70 dBA CNEL extends up to 87
feet from the roadway centerline and toward existing development on fronting parcels. The
65 dBA CNEL extends up to 181 feet from the roadway centerline followed by the 60 dBA
CNEL which extends up to 386 feet from the roadway centerline.
To address local street issues, Livermore adopted a Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program
in March 2002. The purpose of the Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program is to improve
safety, livability and quality of life within residential neighborhoods through the deployment
of traffic calming devices. “Calming” or slowing traffic would also reduce high frequency
tire noise.
                                                                                                    9-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
TABLE 9-4          2003 TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS
                                                                         CNEL
                                                                          (dBA)
                                                 Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                         Aver- line to line to line to     from
                                          age      70      65       60   Outer-
                                         Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL              most
 Roadway Segmenta                        Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Airway Boulevard
 Between North Canyons Pkwy. and I-      28,500 < 50a      99      213     68.7
 580
 Between I-580 and Kitty Hawk Rd.        19,200   < 50     76      164     67.0
 East Airway Boulevard
 Between Kitty Hawk Rd. and Portola       6,700   < 50    < 50      81     62.5
 Ave.
 Altamont Pass Road
 East of Greenville Rd.                   9,000   < 50    < 50      99     63.7
 Arroyo Road
 Between College Ave. and Robertson      11,200   < 50     53      114     64.7
 Park Rd.
 Between Robertson Park Rd. and Van-     10,000   < 50    < 50     106     64.2
 couver Way
 Between Vancouver Way and Concan-        9,200   < 50    < 50     100     63.8
 non Blvd.
 Bluebell Road
 Between Springtown Blvd. and Heather     8,000   < 50    < 50      92     63.2
 Lane
 Chestnut Stree t
 Between P St. and N. Livermore Ave.      6,600   < 50    < 50      81     62.4
 Collier Canyon Road
 Between Las Positas College and North    6,000   < 50    < 50      76     62.0
9-12
                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                             CNEL
                                                                             (dBA)
                                             Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                     Aver- line to line to line to            from
                                      age      70      65        60          Outer-
                                     Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                     most
Roadway Segmenta                     Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Canyons Pkwy.
Concannon Boulevard
Between Isabel Ave. and Murdell Lane 12,700   < 50     90       189            66.4
Between Murdell Lane and Holmes St.  12,100   <50      88       183            66.2
Between Holmes St. and Arroyo Rd.    10,700   <50      81       169            65.7
Between Arroyo Rd. and Robertson      8,300   < 50    < 50       94            63.4
Park Rd.
Between Robertson Park Rd. and S.    10,300   < 50     51       108            64.3
Livermore Ave.
Dalton Avenue
Between Ames St. and Vasco Rd.        6,100   < 50    < 50       76            62.1
Dolores Avenue
Between East Ave. and Pacific Ave.    6,200   <50      59       119            63.3
East Avenue
Between S. Livermore Ave. and Hill-  21,000    61     124       263            68.6
crest Ave.
Between Hillcrest Ave. and Mines Rd. 19,400    59     118       250            68.3
Between Mines Rd. and Vasco Rd.      12,900   < 50     91       191            66.5
First Street
Between Holmes St. and P St.         20,000    60     120       255            68.4
Between P St. and L St.              21,000    61     124       263            68.6
Between L St. and S. Livermore Ave.  27,500    72     148       315            70.0
Between S. Livermore Ave. and Inman  37,000    86     179       383            71.1
St.
Between Inman St. and Mines Rd.      40,000    90     188       403            71.4
                                                                                        9-13
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                        CNEL
                                                                         (dBA)
                                                Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                        Aver- line to line to line to     from
                                         age      70      65       60   Outer-
                                        Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL              most
 Roadway Segmenta                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between Mines Rd. and I-580            49,000 106       217      462     71.6
 Fourth Street
 Between Holmes St. and P St.           13,300   < 50     93      195     66.6
 Between P St. and S. Livermore Ave.    15,000   < 50    100      211     67.1
 Between S. Livermore Ave. and Inman     7,200   < 50     64      131     64.0
 St.
 Greenville Road
 Between Northfront Rd. and South-      11,800   < 50     86      180     66.1
 front Rd.
 Between Southfront Rd. and National    10,000   < 50     78      162     65.4
 Dr.
 Between National Dr. and East Ave.      8,900   < 50     73      150     64.9
 Holmes Street
 Between Fourth St. and Concannon       35,900    84     176      375     70.9
 Blvd.
 Between Concannon Blvd. and            26,700   < 50     95      204     68.5
 Wetmore Rd.
 Isabel Avenue
 Between Jack London Blvd. and Stan-    14,500   < 50     63      136     65.8
 ley Blvd.
 Between Stanley Blvd. and Vallecitos   14,500   < 50     63      136     65.8
 Rd.
 Jack London Boulevard
 Between Isabel Ave. and Murrieta Blvd.  9,200   < 50     74      153     65.0
 Kitty Hawk Road
9-14
                                                              C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                              CNEL
                                                                              (dBA)
                                              Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                      Aver- line to line to line to            from
                                       age      70      65        60          Outer-
                                      Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                     most
Roadway Segmenta                      Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Between Airway Blvd. and E. Airway    10,100 < 50      < 50      107            64.2
Blvd.
Between E. Airway Blvd. and Jack      19,600    59     119       251            68.3
London Blvd.
North L Street
Between Portola Ave. and Chestnut St.  7,700   < 50     67       136            64.3
L Street
Between Chestnut St. and First St.     9,000   < 50    < 50       99            63.7
Between First St. and College Ave.     9,200   < 50    < 50      100            63.8
Las Positas Road
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First   11,100   < 50     53       114            64.7
St.
Between First St. and Vasco Rd.       10,800   < 50     52       112            64.5
Between Vasco Rd. and Greenville Rd.   6,800   < 50    < 50       82            62.5
North Livermore Avenue
Between I-580 and Las Positas Rd.     33,600    81     168       359            70.6
Between Las Positas Rd. and Portola   28,200    73     150       320            69.9
Ave.
Between Portola Ave. and First St.    17,500    56     110       233            67.8
South Livermore Road
Between First St. and East Ave.       12,000   < 50     56       120            65.0
Between East Ave. and Concannon        8,100   < 50    < 50       92            63.3
Blvd.
                                                                                         9-15
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                       CNEL
                                                                        (dBA)
                                               Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                       Aver- line to line to line to     from
                                        age      70      65       60   Outer-
                                       Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL              most
 Roadway Segmenta                      Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between Concannon Blvd. and Tesla     12,400 < 50       57      122     65.1
 Rd.
 Maple Street
 Between First St. and East Ave.        5,500   < 50    < 50      71     61.6
 Mines Road
 Between First St. and Patterson Pass  20,500    61     122      259     68.5
 Rd.
 Between Patterson Pass Rd. and East    7,800   < 50     67      138     64.3
 Ave.
 Murrieta Boulevard
 Between Portola Ave. and Jack London 15,000    < 50    100      211     67.1
 Blvd.
 Between Jack London Blvd. and Stan- 19,300      59     118      249     68.2
 ley Blvd.
 Between Stanley Blvd. and Holmes St. 16,200    < 50    105      222     67.5
 North Canyons Parkway
 Between Airway Blvd. and Collier Can- 26,900    71     146      310     69.7
 yon Rd.
 Northfront Road
 Between Vasco Rd. and Greenville Rd.   7,400   < 50    < 50      87     62.9
 Olivina Avenue
 Between Hagemann Dr. and Murrieta      6,000   < 50    < 50      76     62.0
 Blvd.
 North P Street
 Between Portola Ave. and First St.    12,200   < 50     88      184     66.2
9-16
                                                               C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                               CNEL
                                                                               (dBA)
                                               Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                       Aver- line to line to line to            from
                                        age      70      65        60          Outer-
                                       Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                     most
Roadway Segmenta                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Patterson Pass Road
Between Mines Rd. and Joyce St.        10,000   < 50     78       162            65.4
Between Joyce St. and Vasco Rd.         6,700   < 50     62       125            63.6
Portola Avenue
Between I-580 and Murrieta Blvd.       22,700   < 50     85       183            67.8
Between Murrieta Blvd. and N. Liver-   26,400   < 50     94       202            68.4
more Ave.
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First    11,300   < 50     84       175            65.9
St.
Railroad Avenue
Between Stanley Blvd. and N. Liver-    17,400   < 50    110       232            67.8
more Ave.
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First    13,800   < 50     61       131            65.6
St.
Robertson Park Road
Between Arroyo Rd. and Concannon       10,600   < 50     52       110            64.5
Blvd.
Springtown Boulevard
Between Bluebell Dr. and I-580         24,100    66     136       288            69.2
Stanley Boulevard
West of Isabel Ave.                    28,000    73     149       318            69.9
Between Isabel Ave. and Murrieta Blvd. 31,600    78     162       345            70.4
Between Murrieta Blvd. and Railroad    23,600    66     134       284            69.1
Ave.
Southfront Road
                                                                                          9-17
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                       CNEL
                                                                        (dBA)
                                               Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                       Aver- line to line to line to     from
                                        age      70      65       60   Outer-
                                       Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL              most
 Roadway Segmenta                      Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between First St. and Vasco Rd.        7,200 < 50      < 50      85     62.8
 Tesla Road
 East of Greenville Rd.                 6,000   < 50    < 50      76     62.0
 Vallecitos Road
 South of Isabel Ave.                  27,400   < 50     97      208     68.6
 Vasco Road
 North of Dalton Ave.                  23,100   < 50     86      185     67.8
 Between Dalton Ave. and Scenic Ave.   28,000    73     149      318     69.9
 Between Scenic Ave. and I-580         37,500    87     181      386     71.1
 Between I-580 and Las Positas Rd.     36,900    86     179      382     71.1
 Between Las Positas Rd. and Daphine   18,200    57     113      239     68.0
 Dr.
 Between Daphine Dr. and East Ave.     12,000   < 50     87      182     66.2
 Between East Ave. and Tesla Rd.        6,100   < 50    < 50      76     62.1
 Vineyard Avenue
 West of Isabel Ave.                    8,400   < 50    < 50      95     63.4
 Wall Street
 Between Stanley Blvd. and El Caminito  6,100   < 50    < 50      76     62.1
 I-580
 Between N. Flynn Rd. and Greenville   117,00   334     714      1534    78.8
 Rd.                                         0
 Between Greenville Rd. to Vasco Rd.   142,00   379     812      1746    79.7
                                             0
 Between Vasco Rd. and First St.       174,00   433     929      1999    80.5
                                             0
 Between First St. and N. Livermore    164,00   417     893      1921    80.3
9-18
                                                                                                                 C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                         N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                                                                                 CNEL
                                                                                                                                 (dBA)
                                                                                   Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                                                         Aver- line to line to line to                            from
                                                                           age         70             65             60          Outer-
                                                                         Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                                     most
 Roadway Segmenta                                                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)                      (Feet)         Laneb
 Ave.                                                                          0
 Between N. Livermore Ave. and Porto- 164,00 417                                                      893           1921           80.3
 la Ave.                                                                       0
 Between Portola Ave. and Airway Blvd. 183,00 448                                                     961           2067           80.8
                                                                               0
 Between Airway Blvd. And El Charro                                      184,00 450                   964           2074           80.8
 Rd.                                                                           0
 a This noise contour analysis was based on the average daily traffic projected to occur along individual roadway segments only. Receptors in
    the vicinity of a given roadway segment could also be affected by other noise sources (e.g. I-580 and train operations) not included in
    these noise levels.
 b  The noise analysis was programmed to provide noise levels beyond 50 feet of the roadway centerline, because areas within 50 feet of the
    centerline are usually assumed within the roadway right-of-way for major roadway segments. Traffic noise within 50 feet of the roadway
    centerline will be provided with site specific analysis, as necessary.
 Source: LSA Associates, Inc., May 2003.
Railroad Noise and Rail Transit
Activity on the Union Pacific rail lines represents a significant source of noise and ground
borne vibration in the City. Train whistles and engine noise from freight trains and the
Altamont Commuter Express, with six trips a day, are the primary noises associated with
trains. Freight trains generally emit higher noise levels than passenger or commuter trains.
Therefore, in areas where the tracks are used more frequently by freight trains, the single
event noise exposure levels and total train noise would be higher than in areas with less fre-
quent freight train use. In Livermore an estimated five freight trains per day with an average
of 60 to 80 cars per train traveling at 40 to 60 miles per hour use the Union Pacific rail lines.
Noise levels reaching 60 dBA at approximately 650 feet from the rail line exist along the
length of both rail lines. Residential neighborhoods are located north and south of the rail-
road tracks within Livermore’s central core. Factors that influence the overall impact of rail-
road noise on adjacent uses include the distance of the uses from the tracks, the intermittent
                                                                                                                                              9-19

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
nature of train events, and the lack of sound walls or other barriers between the tracks and
adjacent uses.
It has been assumed for the purposes of this Noise Element that BART will extend service
to Livermore via the I-580 centerline right-of-way. BART has established maximum pass-by
exterior noise levels for its transit operations. These noise levels are higher than typical
standards for noise sensitive uses because they are based on individual noise events rather
than average noise levels over a period of time. The impact of BART pass-by noise on am-
bient CNEL levels would depend on the location, frequency and duration of the train pass-
bys which will be determined during the planning process and environmental review for the
BART extension.
9-20
                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                        N O I S E  E L E M E N T
FIGURE 9-1: 2003 Noise Contours
11x17
                                                           9-21
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
back of Figure 9-1
9-22
                                                                          C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  N O I S E  E L E M E N T
Airport-Related Noise
The Livermore Municipal Airport is located in the northwest portion of the City and serves
the City and Alameda County. The City of Livermore, in participation with surrounding cit-
ies, established an Airport Protection Area to keep surrounding land uses compatible with
aviation activities. The City has adopted an Airport zoning district for aviation activities at
the Airport in order to address the area’s continuing population growth and demand for air
transportation facilities. Anticipated noise contours in the vicinity of the Airport in the year
2030 are shown in Figure 9-2. (Reso. 2010-061)
Stationary Noise Sources
Major stationary noise sources in and around the City of Livermore generally include indus-
trial facilities and mining operations. The City’s two major industrial areas are located east of
the Airport, and generally east of the Downtown area, south of I-580. The gravel quarries
are generally located along the western edge of the City. These stationary sources can gener-
ate relatively loud noises. However, unlike the transportation sources that affect a relatively
large area along the transportation facility, the stationary sources normally affect a smaller
area immediately adjacent to the source. Noise from stationary sources are subject to the
City’s Municipal Code Noise Ordinance Requirements.
Sensitive Receptors
Sensitive receptors are those uses for which noise can disrupt or jeopardize the purpose and
function of the use. Sensitive receptors are generally land uses such as residential areas, hos-
pitals, nursing homes, health care facilities, libraries, schools and wildlife preserves. Table 9-
5 provides a list of sensitive receptors within the City.
Projected Noise
Noise contours along major roadway segments and railroads were projected for 2025 condi-
tions based on development of the General Plan. Noise contours depicting the year 2025
noise exposure along the major roads in the City are shown in Figure 9-2. Table 9-6 identi-
fies projected noise levels for all modeled roadway segments.
                                                                                                     9-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal N-1           Minimize the exposure of community residents to excessive noise.
Objective N-1.1 Establish appropriate noise levels, design standards, and noise re-
duction techniques for all areas to minimize the adverse effects of noise.
      Policies
      P1.     The City shall emphasize noise considerations when making land use planning de-
              cisions.
      P2.     Noise analysis shall be measured in dBA CNEL or dBA Ldn as defined in this El-
              ement.
9-24
  NORTH
Legend:                                                                                                 2030 Airport CNEL Noise Contours                                                  F I GU R E 9 - 2
2025 Noise Contours           Source: City of Livermore, USGS, LSA Associates, Inc.
                                                                                                              65 dBA CNEL                Airport Influence Area  2025-2030 NOISE CONTOURS
         Preferred Alternative Traffic Noise 60dBA CNEL                                                       60 dBA CNEL                Airport Protection Area
         Railroad Train Noise 60dBA CNEL                                                                      55 dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                         LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
SOURCE: ESA Airports, 2009; ESRI, 2008; Brown-Buntin Associates; Inc., 2008; LSA Associates, Inc., 2009                                                                     Revised September 2013
                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     N O I S E  E L E M E N T
Table 9-5 SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
 Site                                  Location
 Schools
 Almond Avenue School                  1401 Almond Avenue
 Altamont Creek School                 6500 Garavanta Ranch Road
 Arroyo Mocho School                   1040 Florence Road
 Arroyo Seco School                    5280 Irene Way
 Christensen School                    5757 Haggin Oaks Ave.
 Croche School                         5650 Scenic Avenue
 Del Valle Continuation High School    2253 Fifth Street
 East Avenue School                    3951 East Avenue
 Granada High School                   400 Wall Street
 Jackson Avenue School                 554 Jackson Avenue
 Junction Avenue School                298 Junction Avenue
 Livermore High School                 600 Maple Street
 Marylin Avenue School                 800 Marylin Avenue
 Mendenhall School                     1701 El Padro Drive
 Michell School                        1001 Elaine Avenue
 Phoenix Continuation School           2253 Fifth Street
 Portola Avenue School                 2451 Portola Avenue
 Rancho Las Positas School             401 East Jack London Boulevard
 Emma C. Smith School                  391 Ontario Drive
 Sonoma Avenue School                  543 Sonoma Avenue
 St. Michael School                    372 Maple Street
 Sunset Elementary                     1671 Frankfurt Drive
 Vineyard School                       543 Sonoma Avenue
 Hospitals and Medical Facilities
 Hacienda Convalescent Hospital        76 Fenton Street
 Livermore Manor Convalescent Hospital 788 Holmes Street
 Valley Memorial                       1111 E. Stanley Blvd.
 Park
 Maitland Henry Park                   680 Alameda Drive
                                                                                        9-27
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
TABLE 9-6          PROJECTED TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS
                                                                        CNEL
                                                                         (dBA)
                                                Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                         Aver- line to line to line to    from
                                          age     70      65       60   Outer-
                                         Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL             most
 Roadway Segmenta                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Airway Boulevard
 Between North Canyons Pkwy. and I- 48,870        66     142      305     71.1
 580
 Between I-580 and Kitty Hawk Rd.       19,225   < 50a    76      164     67.0
 East Airway Boulevard
 Between Kitty Hawk Rd. and Portola 29,505       < 50    101      218     68.9
 Ave.
 Altamont Pass Road
 East of Greenville Rd.                 12,804   < 50     58      125     65.3
 Arroyo Road
 Between College Ave. and Robertson 11,725       < 50     55      118     64.9
 Park Rd.
 Between Robertson Park Rd. and Van- 10,447      < 50     51      109     64.4
 couver Wy.
 Between Vancouver Wy. and Concan- 9,272         < 50    < 50     101     63.9
 non Blvd.
 Bluebell Road
 Between Springtown Blvd. and Heather 14,465     < 50     63      136     65.8
 Ln.
 Chestnut Street
 Between P St. and N. Livermore Ave.    10,185   < 50    < 50     107     64.3
 Collier Canyon Road
 Between Las Positas College and North 21,965    < 50     83      179     67.6
9-28
                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                             CNEL
                                                                             (dBA)
                                             Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                      Aver- line to line to line to           from
                                       age     70      65        60          Outer-
                                      Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                    most
Roadway Segmenta                     Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Canyons Pkwy.
Concannon Boulevard
Between Isabel Ave. and Murdell Ln.  21,250    62     125       265            68.7
Between Murdell Ln. and Holmes St.   18,080    57     113       238            68.0
Between Holmes St. and Arroyo Rd.    16,390   < 50    106       223            67.5
Between Arroyo Rd. and Robertson     13,235   < 50     60       128            65.4
Park Rd.
Between Robertson Park Rd. and S.    13,100   < 50     59       127            65.4
Livermore Ave.
Dalton Avenue
Between Ames St. and Vasco Rd.        7,660   < 50    < 50       89            63.0
Dolores Avenue
Between East Ave. and Pacific Ave.    6,885   < 50     63       127            63.8
East Avenue
Between S. Livermore Ave. and Hill- 24,420     67     137       291            69.3
crest Ave.
Between Hillcrest Ave. and Mines Rd. 30,030    76     156       333            70.2
Between Mines Rd. and Vasco Rd.      24,810    68     138       294            69.3
First Street
Between Holmes St. and P St.         11,155   < 50     53       114            64.7
Between P St. and L St.               5,305   < 50    < 50       70            61.4
Between L St. and S. Livermore Ave.   6,890   < 50    < 50       83            62.6
Between S. Livermore Ave. and Inman   5,380   < 50    < 50      108            62.7
St.
                                                                                        9-29
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                      CNEL
                                                                       (dBA)
                                              Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                       Aver- line to line to line to    from
                                        age     70      65       60   Outer-
                                       Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL             most
 Roadway Segmenta                     Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between Inman St. and Mines Rd.      39,445    89     187      400     71.3
 Between Mines Rd. and I-580          57,350   116     240      513     72.3
 Fourth Street
 Between Holmes St. and P St.         30,210    76     157      335     70.2
 Between P St. and S. Livermore Ave.  29,875    75     156      332     70.1
 Between S. Livermore Ave. and Inman 27,015     71     146      311     69.7
 St.
 Greenville Road
 Between Northfront Rd. and South- 43,885       95      200     429     71.8
 front Rd.
 Between Southfront Rd. and National 35,690     84     175      374     70.9
 Dr.
 Between National Dr. and East Ave.   20,880    61     124      262     68.6
 Holmes Street
 Between Fourth St. and Concannon 41,194        92     192      411     71.5
 Blvd.
 Between Concannon Blvd. and 23,774             66     134      286     69.1
 Wetmore Rd.
 Isabel Avenue
 Between Jack London Blvd. and Stan- 56,475    112     237      507     72.9
 ley Blvd.
 Between Stanley Blvd. and Vallecitos 41,970    93     195      416     71.6
 Rd.
9-30
                                                               C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                               CNEL
                                                                               (dBA)
                                               Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                        Aver- line to line to line to           from
                                         age     70      65        60          Outer-
                                        Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                    most
Roadway Segmenta                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Jack London Boulevard
Between Isabel Ave. and Murrieta Blvd. 32,895    80     166       354            70.6
Kitty Hawk Road
Between Airway Blvd. and E. Airway 12,210       < 50     57       121            65.1
Blvd.
Between E. Airway Blvd. and Jack 71,275         130     276       592            73.9
London Blvd.
North L Street
Between Portola Ave. and Chestnut St. 14,820    < 50     99       209            67.1
L Street
Between Chestnut St. and First St.     11,285   < 50     54       115            64.7
Between First St. and College Ave.      9,815   < 50    < 50      105            64.1
Las Positas Road
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First 29,410       75     154       329            70.1
St.
Between First St. and Vasco Rd.        26,860   < 50     95       205            68.5
Between Vasco Rd. and Greenville Rd. 29,760      75     155       331            70.1
North Livermore Avenue
Between I-580 and Las Positas Rd.      34,840    83     172       368            70.8
Between Las Positas Rd. and Portola 35,600       84     175       373            70.9
Ave.
Between Portola Ave. and First St.     32,060    79     163       348            70.4
South Livermore Road
Between First St. and East Ave.        16,560   < 50     69       148            66.4
                                                                                          9-31
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                       CNEL
                                                                        (dBA)
                                               Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                        Aver- line to line to line to    from
                                         age     70      65       60   Outer-
                                        Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL             most
 Roadway Segmenta                      Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between East Ave. and Concannon 15,530 < 50             66      142     66.1
 Blvd.
 Between Concannon Blvd. and Tesla 17,240 < 50           71      152     66.6
 Rd.
 Maple Street
 Between First St. and East Ave.       14,205   < 50     62      134     65.7
 Mines Road
 Between First St. and Patterson Pass 40,635     91     190      408     71.5
 Rd.
 Between Patterson Pass Rd. and East 25,115      68     139      296     69.4
 Ave.
 Murrieta Boulevard
 Between Portola Ave. and Jack London 10,745    < 50     81      169     65.7
 Blvd.
 Between Jack London Blvd. and Stan- 31,225      77     160      342     70.3
 ley Blvd.
 Between Stanley Blvd. and Holmes St. 25,475     69     140      299     69.4
 North Canyons Parkway
 Between Airway Blvd. and Collier Can- 44,215    99     203      432     71.1
 yon Rd.
 Northfront Road
 Between Vasco Rd. and Greenville Rd. 22,740    < 50     85      183     67.8
 Olivina Avenue
 Between Hagemann Dr. and Murrieta      8,400   < 50    < 50      95     63.4
9-32
                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                             CNEL
                                                                             (dBA)
                                             Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                      Aver- line to line to line to           from
                                       age     70      65        60          Outer-
                                      Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                    most
Roadway Segmenta                     Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)         Laneb
Blvd.
North P Street
Between Portola Ave. and First St.   11,265   < 50     84       175            65.9
Patterson Pass Road
Between Mines Rd. and Joyce St.      19,490    59     118       251            68.3
Between Joyce St. and Vasco Rd.      18,725    58     115       244            68.1
Portola Avenue
Between I-580 and Murrieta Blvd.     39,860    58     124       266            70.2
Between Murrieta Blvd. and N. Liver- 38,525    88     184       393            71.2
more Ave.
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First 21,515     62     126       267            68.7
St.
Railroad Avenue
Between Stanley Blvd. and N. Liver- 30,590     76     158       338            70.2
more Ave.
Between N. Livermore Ave. and First 33,650     52     111       238            69.5
St.
Robertson Park Road
Between Arroyo Rd. and Concannon        300   < 50    < 50     < 50            49.0
Blvd.
Springtown Boulevard
Between Bluebell Dr. and I-580       30,325    76     157       336            70.2
Stanley Boulevard
West of Isabel Ave.                  39,495    89     187       400            71.4
                                                                                        9-33
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                                                                        CNEL
                                                                         (dBA)
                                                Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                         Aver- line to line to line to    from
                                          age     70      65       60   Outer-
                                         Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL             most
 Roadway Segmenta                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)    (Feet)  Laneb
 Between Isabel Ave. and Murrieta Blvd. 48,335   105     215      458     71.5
 Between Murrieta Blvd. and Railroad 31,370       78     161      343     70.4
 Ave.
 Southfront Road
 Between First St. and Vasco Rd.        16,300   < 50     68      147     66.3
 Tesla Road
 East of Greenville Rd.                 13,310   < 50     60      128     65.4
 Vallecitos Road
 South of Isabel Ave.                   34,880    53     113      244     69.6
 Vasco Road
 North of Dalton Ave.                   28,000   < 50     98      211     68.7
 Between Dalton Ave. and Scenic Ave.    29,460    75     154      329     70.1
 Between Scenic Ave. and I-580          38,510    92     186      394     70.5
 Between I-580 and Las Positas Rd.      70,645   132     275      589     73.2
 Between Las Positas Rd. and Daphine    47,755   101     212      454     72.2
 Dr.
 Between Daphine Dr. and East Ave.      21,700    63     127      269     68.8
 Between East Ave. and Tesla Rd.        12,745   < 50     58      125     65.3
 Vineyard Avenue
 West of Isabel Ave.                    14,805   < 50     64      138     65.9
 Wall Street
 Between Stanley Blvd. and El Caminito   8,725   < 50    < 50      97     63.6
 I-580
 Between N. Flynn Rd. and Greenville    177,223  438     940     2,023    80.7
9-34
                                                                                                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                        N O I S E  E L E M E N T
                                                                                                                                CNEL
                                                                                                                                (dBA)
                                                                                  Center- Center- Center- 50 Feet
                                                                        Aver- line to line to line to                            from
                                                                          age         70             65             60          Outer-
                                                                        Daily CNEL CNEL CNEL                                     most
Roadway Segmenta                                                       Traffic (Feet) (Feet)                      (Feet)         Laneb
Rd.
Between Greenville Rd. to Vasco Rd.                                    200,491       476           1,021          2,197           81.3
Between Vasco Rd. and First St.                                        241,766       538           1,156          2,489           82.1
Between First St. and N. Livermore                                     226,795       516           1,108          2,385           81.8
Ave.
Between N. Livermore Ave. and Porto-                                   250,347       551           1,183          2,547           82.2
la Ave.
Between Portola Ave. and Airway Blvd.                                  254,569       557           1,197          2,576           82.3
Between Airway Blvd. And El Charro                                     307,822       632           1,358          2,923           83.1
Rd.
a This noise contour analysis was based on the average daily traffic projected to occur along individual roadway segments only. Receptors in
   the vicinity of a given roadway segment could also be affected by other noise sources (e.g. I-580 and train operations) not included in
   these noise levels.
b  The noise analysis was programmed to provide noise levels beyond 50 feet of the roadway centerline, because areas within 50 feet of the
   centerline are usually assumed within the roadway right-of-way for major roadway segments. Traffic noise within 50 feet of the roadway
   centerline will be provided with site specific analysis, as necessary.
Source: LSA Associates, Inc., May 2003.
     P3.         The City shall maintain a pattern of land uses that separates noise-sensitive land
                 uses from major noise sources to the extent possible.
     P4.         The City shall use the Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for Exterior Noise
                 (measured in dBA CNEL or Ldn) contained in Table 9-7 in this Element to direct
                 the siting, design, and insulation of new development to reduce exposure to ex-
                 cessive noise. Within the 2030 Airport CNEL Noise Contours illustrated in Fig-
                 ure 9-2, the Noise Compatibility policies contained in section 3.3.1 et. Seq. of the
                 Livermore Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (“ALUCP”), dated August 2012,
                 shall apply in conjunction with citywide General Plan Noise Element policies.
                                                                                                                                             9-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
              Where warranted, the City shall employ discretionary review of new development
              to ensure that the community will be protected from excessive noise levels. The
              City shall evaluate potential noise impacts and recommend mitigation measures
              through discretionary review procedures such as environmental review, design re-
              view, and evaluation of use permits. (Reso. 2013-113)
9-36
                                                                                                                 C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                         N O I S E    E L E M E N T
Table 9-7 LAND USE COMPATIBILITY GUIDELINES FOR EXTERIOR NOISE
                                           Normally               Conditionally                      Normally                       Clearly
                                         Acceptablea                Acceptablea Unacceptablea Unacceptablea
          Land Use                             (dBA)                       (dBA)                          (dBA)                       (dBA)
Residential-Low Densi-
ty, Single-Family, Du-                          ≤60                       55-70                          70-75                         >75
plex, Mobile Homes
Residential Multi-
                                                ≤65                       60-70                          70-75                         >75
Family
Transient Lodging, Ho-
                                                ≤65                       60-70                          70-80                         >80
tels, Motels
School, Library,
Church, Hospital,                               ≤70                       60-70                          70-80                         >80
Nursing Home
Auditorium, Concert
                                                  Χ                        <70                              Χ                          >65
Hall, Amphitheater
Sports Arena, Outdoor
                                                  Χ                        <75                              Χ                          >70
Spectator Sports
Playground, Neighbor-
                                                ≤70                           Χ                          70-75                         >75
hood Park
Golf Course, Water
                                                ≤75                           Χ                          70-80                         >80
Recreation, Cemetery
Office Building, Busi-
ness Commercial, Pro-                           ≤70                       70-75                           >75                            Χ
fessional, Retail
Industrial, Manufactur-
ing, Utilities, Agricul-                        ≤75                       70-80                           >75                            Χ
tural
a Where dBA levels overlap between these categories, determination of noise level acceptability will be made on a project-by-project basis. dBA is
measured in CNEL or Ldn (see N-1.1.P4)
                                                                                                                                                9-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
      P5.     Review development proposals with respect to the Land Use Compatibility
              Guidelines for Exterior Noise in Table 9-7 as follows:
              (a) Normally Acceptable: If the noise level is within the “normally acceptable”
                   level, noise exposure would be acceptable for the intended land use. Devel-
                   opment may occur without requiring an evaluation of the noise environment
                   unless the use could generate noise impacts on adjacent uses.
              (b) Conditionally Acceptable: If the noise level is within the “conditionally ac-
                   ceptable” level, noise exposure would be conditionally acceptable; a specified
                   land use may be permitted only after detailed analysis of the noise environ-
                   ment and the project characteristics to determine whether noise insulation or
                   protection features are required. Such noise insulation features may include
                   measures to protect noise-sensitive outdoor activity areas (e.g., at residences,
                   schools, or parks) or may include building sound insulation treatments such as
                   sound-rated windows to protect interior spaces in sensitive receptors.
              (c) Normally Unacceptable: If the noise level is within the “normally unaccepta-
                   ble” level, analysis and mitigation are required. Development should generally
                   not be undertaken unless adequate noise mitigation options have been ana-
                   lyzed and appropriate mitigations incorporated into the project to reduce the
                   exposure of people to unacceptable noise levels.
              (d) Clearly Unacceptable: If the noise level is within the “clearly unacceptable”
                   level, new construction or development should not be undertaken unless all
                   feasible noise mitigation options have been analyzed and appropriate mitiga-
                   tions incorporated into the project to adequately reduce exposure of people to
                   unacceptable noise levels.
      P6.     In an effort to support active uses in the Downtown Area, the Downtown Area
              shall be subject to a different noise standard than the rest of the City, as follows:
              • Downtown Core District: Between 7 a.m. and 12 a.m., exterior noise levels of up
                   to 75 dBA would be considered Normally Acceptable for all uses; and, be-
                   tween 12 a.m. and 7 a.m., exterior noise levels up to 65 dBA would be consid-
                   ered Normally Acceptable for all uses.
9-38

                                                                       C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                               N O I S E  E L E M E N T
          • Boulevard and Transit Gateway Districts: Between 7 a.m. and 12 a.m., exterior
              noise levels up to 70 dBA would be considered Normally Acceptable for all
              uses; and, between 12 a.m. and 7 a.m., exterior noise levels up to 60 dBA
              would be considered Normally Acceptable for all uses.
          • North and South Side Neighborhood Districts: Between 7 a.m. and 12 a.m., exterior
              noise levels of up to 65 dBA would be considered Normally Acceptable for all
              uses; and between 12 a.m. and 7 a.m., exterior noise levels up to 60 dBA
              would be considered Normally Acceptable for all uses.
          For all residential development in the Downtown Area, interior noise levels of up
          to 45 dBA with windows closed would be considered Normally Acceptable.
   P7.    The City shall work with LARPD to locate new neighborhood parks such that the
          existing and anticipated future noise environment is conducive to passive and ac-
          tive outdoor recreational activities, whenever possible.
Objective N-1.2 Adopt design standards and identify effective noise attenuation pro-
grams to prevent noise or reduce noise to acceptable levels.
   Policies
   P1.    When crafting mitigation programs for adverse noise exposure from new devel-
          opment, the City shall encourage the use of noise attenuation programs that avoid
          constructing sound walls.
   P2.    The City shall require applicants for new noise-sensitive development, such as
          private schools, residences, and private hospitals, in areas subject to noise levels
          greater than 65 dBA CNEL to obtain the services of a professional acoustical en-
          gineer to provide a technical analysis and to design mitigation measures to attenu-
          ate noise to acceptable levels.
   P3.    The City shall require the control of noise at the source for new development
          deemed to be noise generators through site design, building design, landscaping,
          hours of operation, and other techniques.
                                                                                                  9-39

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
      P4.     The City shall require operational limitations and feasible noise buffering for new
              uses that generate significant noise impacts near sensitive uses.
      P5.     During all phases of construction, the City shall take measures to minimize the
              exposure of neighboring properties to excessive noise levels from construction-
              related activity.
      P6.     The City shall require mitigation measures to minimize noise impacts on sur-
              rounding areas as part of the permit review process for land uses of a temporary
              nature, such as fairs or exhibits. The noise level from the temporary use should
              be in conformance with the noise level guidelines for nearby land uses.
      P7.     The City shall seek to reduce impacts from ground borne vibrations associated
              with rail operations by requiring that habitable buildings are sited at least 100-feet
              from the centerline of the tracks, whenever feasible. An interior noise level of up
              to 45 dBA, with windows closed, must not be exceeded.
      P8.     It shall be the responsibility of new development or new land uses to be con-
              sistent with noise standards appropriate and sensitive to adjacent land uses.
      Actions
      A1.     Promote use of noise insulation materials in new construction and major rehabili-
              tation.
      A2.     Identify noise attenuation programs for mitigation of noise adjacent to existing
              residential areas, including such measures as wider setbacks, intense landscaping,
              double-pane windows, and building orientation away from the noise source.
      A3.     For habitable buildings located within 100-feet from the centerline of railroad
              tracks, developments shall provide a study demonstrating that ground borne vi-
              bration issues associated with rail operations have been adequately addressed (i.e.,
              by building siting or construction techniques). This study must demonstrate that
              an interior noise level of up to 45 dBA will not be exceeded with windows closed.
9-40
                                                                        C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                N O I S E  E L E M E N T
Objective N-1.3 Increase public awareness of the negative effects of noise through
public education and the enforcement of existing noise control measures.
   Actions
   A1.    Enforce City, State, and federal noise level standards.
   A2.    Continue to enforce the City’s Noise Ordinance to reduce noise impacts.
   A3.    Revise the Noise Ordinance, as necessary, to improve the City’s ability to reduce
          noise impacts.
   A4.    Promote increased public awareness concerning the adverse effects of excessive
          noise on humans.
   A5.    Enforce muffler laws.
   A6.    Coordinate with the California Occupational Safety and Health Administration
          (Cal-OSHA) to provide information on and enforcement of occupational noise
          requirements within the City of Livermore.
   A7.    Work with other public agencies to address both existing and potential noise im-
          pacts resulting from public agency activities. Cooperate with other public agen-
          cies in determining the appropriate mitigation measures necessary to meet City
          noise guidelines.
Objective N-1.4 Reduce noise levels from traffic, which is the single largest continual
source of unacceptable noise in the City.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall support federal and State legislation to attain lower operating noise
          levels on motor vehicles.
   P2.    The City shall minimize potential transportation noise through proper design of
          street circulation, coordination of routing, and other traffic control measures.
                                                                                                   9-41

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
      P3.     The City shall provide planned industrial areas with truck access routes separated
              from residential areas to the maximum feasible extent. Consider methods to re-
              strict truck travel times in sensitive areas.
      P4.     The City shall require exterior noise in backyards to be Normally Acceptable at a
              maximum of 60 dBA CNEL for single-family development and a maximum of 65
              dBA CNEL for multi-family development.
      P5.     The City will consider sound walls as a means of noise mitigation along proposed
              and existing roadway segments and railroad right-of-ways only after other noise
              attenuation programs such as building construction, larger landscaped berms, and
              distances have been considered to reduce noise to appropriate levels in residential
              areas.
      Actions
      A1.     Promote and encourage new vehicle technologies to reduce transportation noise
              levels.
      A2.     Work with the Livermore Amador Transit Authority (LAVTA) to reduce bus
              noise.
      A3.     Work with local and regional agencies to reduce local and regional traffic.
      A4.     Implement the Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program to encourage motorists
              to slow down thereby decreasing noise levels in all residential areas.
      A5.     Prior to the construction or implementation of future transit systems, quantify
              noise levels and assess impacts generated by vehicle noise. Identify noise impacts
              of transit vehicles (such as BART) on existing development and evaluate the
              transit project’s compatibility with existing land use. In coordination with transit
              service providers, identify mitigation measures to ensure that existing developed
              areas are not subject to excessive noise levels from proposed transit improve-
              ments.
9-42

                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    N O I S E  E L E M E N T
Objective N-1.5 Reduce the level of noise generated by mechanical and other noise-
generating equipment by means of public education, regulation, and/or political ac-
tion.
    Policies
    P1.    The City shall require that industrial and commercial uses be designed and operat-
           ed so as to avoid the generation of noise effects on surrounding sensitive land us-
           es (e.g., residential, churches, schools, hospitals) from exceeding the following
           noise levels for exterior environments:
           (a) 55 dBA L50 (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.)
           (b) 45 dBA L50 (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.)
    P2.    In order to allow for temporary construction, demolition or maintenance noise
           and other necessary short-term noise events, the stationary source noise standards
           in Policy N-1.5.P1, above, may be exceeded within the receiving land use by:
           (a) 5 dBA for a cumulative period of no more than fifteen (15) minutes in any
               hour.
           (b) 10 dBA for a cumulative period of no more than five (5) minutes in any hour.
           (c) 15 dBA for a cumulative period of no more than one (1) minute in any hour.
    P3.    In order to allow for temporary construction, demolition or maintenance noise
           and other necessary short-term noise events, the stationary noise standards in Pol-
           icy N-1.5.P1, above, shall not be exceeded within the receiving land use by more
           than 15 dBA for any period of time.
    P4.    The following sources of noise are exempt from the standard in N-1.5.P1: motor vehi-
           cles on public streets; trains; emergency equipment, vehicles, devices, and activities; tem-
           porary construction, maintenance, or demolition activities conducted between the hours
           of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
                                                                                                       9-43
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
                              This page intentionally left blank.
9-44
10 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
   The Public Safety Element provides information about risks in Livermore due to natural and created haz-
   ards. Its policies are designed to protect the community as much as possible from seismic, flood, geologic and
   wildfire hazards.
   As required by State law, the Public Safety Element addresses the protection of the commu-
   nity from any unreasonable risks associated with the effects of:
      Geologic hazards, including earthquakes, ground failure and subsidence and slope insta-
       bility.
      Flooding, dam failure, tsunami and seiche.
      Wildland fires.
      Hazardous materials.
   This element also contains information and policies regarding airport safety and general
   emergency preparedness.
   The Public Safety Element establishes mechanisms to reduce death, injuries, damage to
   property and to address the negative results from public safety hazards like flooding, fires
   and seismic events. Hazards are an unavoidable aspect of life, and the Public Safety Element
   cannot eliminate risk completely. Instead, the Element contains policies to create an ac-
   ceptable level of risk.
   I.       GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
   A. Background Information
   Setting
   The Livermore Valley is located at the northern end of the Diablo Range, which is a part of
   the northwest trending coastal range. The Valley is a structural depression formed by an
   east-to-west downfold, or syncline, along the Calaveras Fault. The Valley is bounded on the
   east by the Greenville fault.
                                                                                                             10-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Livermore consists of two general topographic areas: the lowland area and the upland area.
The lowland area is generally located in central Livermore, including the Downtown. The
lowland area of Livermore is underlain by alluvium that is younger than two million years
old, and consists mainly of unconsolidated gravel, sand, silt, and clay deposits subject to re-
distribution by fluvial (stream) processes. The upland areas include the hills to the north-
west, northeast and the south of Livermore. The upland area consists primarily of tilted sed-
imentary rocks of Tertiary age, between 2 million and 65 million years old. The Green Val-
ley and Tassajara formations and the nonmarine sedimentary rock form the prominent por-
tions of the uplands. Recent alluvial deposits mantle the canyon bottoms and fringes of the
uplands.
Seismic Activity and Faulting
As is the case for most of California, people and property in Livermore are subject to risks
from seismic activity. The Planning Area is located in the San Andreas Fault Zone, one of
the most seismically-active regions in the United States. The San Andreas Fault Zone has
generated numerous moderate to strong historic earthquakes in northern California and in
the San Francisco Bay Area. Earthquakes have the potential to threaten humans, wildlife
and infrastructure. As a result, it is crucial to identify the risks associated with seismic activi-
ty and related phenomena.
Earthquakes can give rise to various seismic hazards including ground shaking, liquefaction,
ground rupture and the generation of large waves in bodies of water. These seismic hazards
can cause damage to structures and risk the health and safety of citizens, particularly in unre-
inforced masonry buildings. Seismic hazards vary widely from area to area, and the level of
hazard depends on both geologic conditions and the extent and type of land use. There are
two common measurements of earthquakes:
   The strength of an earthquake is measured using the Richter Scale, a numerical scale for
      quantifying earthquake magnitude. The Richter Scale is a logarithmic scale that measures
      the amount of energy released during an earthquake based on the amplitude of the high-
      est peak recorded on a seismogram.
10-2

                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
   The force of an earthquake at a particular place is measured on the Modified Mercalli
    Scale, which is a subjective ranking of earthquakes’ effects on persons and structures.
    Lower numbers on the scale indicate less severe shaking.
Table 10-1 summarizes the Modified Mercalli Scale in relation to the Richter Scale.
The Greenville Fault, an active fault that is the easternmost strand of the San Andreas fault
system in the San Francisco Bay region, is located approximately four miles to the east of the
Downtown, and crosses the eastern part of the Planning Area, as shown in Figure 10-1.
Each of the three segments of the Greenville fault is considered capable of generating earth-
quakes in the range of Richter magnitude 6.6 to 6.9. If all segments were to rupture in a sin-
gle seismic event, a 7.2 magnitude earthquake would be expected. The United States Geo-
logic Survey (USGS) estimates a six percent probability of a 6.7 magnitude or greater earth-
quake on the Greenville fault during the period 2000 to 2030.
The Las Positas Fault, which is considered to be active, trends northeast to southwest ap-
proximately 2.5 miles to the southeast of the Downtown, and is located almost completely
within the Planning Area. The Las Positas fault could potentially generate an earthquake of
Richter magnitude 6.3. The probability of an earthquake on the fault has not been deter-
mined. In addition, several other major active faults are located in the vicinity of Livermore,
including the Calaveras and Hayward faults. Because of the high level of seismic activity in
and around Livermore, the area has been classified as seismic risk Zone 4 (the highest risk
category) by the California Building Code.
In addition to these faults, the Livermore fault is also located within the urbanized Planning
Area. The Livermore fault is considered to be potentially active. It is approximately five
miles in length and is considered capable of generating an earthquake with a moment magni-
tude of 6.2.
                                                                                                    10-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
TABLE 10-1 MODIFIED MERCALLI AND RICHTER SCALES
                                     Modified
                     Richter                       Expected Modified Mercalli
                                      Mercalli
                  Magnitude                     Maximum Intensity at Epicenter
                                     Category
                  2                 I-II       Usually detected only by instruments
                  3                 III        Felt indoors
                  4                 IV-V       Felt by most people; slight damage
                                               Felt by all; many frightened and run
                  5                 VI-VII
                                               outdoors; Damage minor to moderate
                                               Everybody runs outdoors;
                  6                 VII-VIII
                                               Damage moderate to major
                  7                 IX-X       Major damage
                  8+                X-XII      Total and major damages
Major earthquakes have occurred in the vicinity of Livermore in the past, and can be ex-
pected to occur again in the near future. The 1999 Working Group on California Earth-
quake Probabilities estimated that there is a 70 percent probability of at least one earthquake
with a magnitude of 6.7 or greater to occur on one of the major faults within the San Fran-
cisco Bay region before 2030. Furthermore, they determined that there is a 30 percent
chance of one or more earthquakes with a magnitude of 6.7 or greater occurring somewhere
along the Calaveras, Concord-Green Valley, Mount Diablo Thrust, and Greenville faults be-
fore 2030.
In accordance with the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard Zone Act of 1972, the State Geolo-
gist is required to delineate wide special study zones to encompass all active and potentially
active traces of the San Andreas, Calaveras, Hayward and San Jacinto Faults, and such other
faults or segments of faults as he deems necessary. The hazard zones will be a minimum of
one-quarter mile wide, but somewhat wider where multiple traces occur. The hazard zones
10-4
                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
for active faults in Livermore’s vicinity are shown in Figure 10-1. The State Board of Mines
and Geology is charged with establishing policies and criteria for future land use in those
zones.
In addition to the known active faults in the Planning Area, recent research regarding the
structural geology and tectonics of the Mount Diablo-Livermore region indicate that there is
another potential source of large magnitude earthquakes in the region. A structural trend of
folds and thrust faults has been mapped in the hills north of the Livermore Valley. The larg-
est of these features is the Mount Diablo anticline. Recent research has interpreted this fea-
ture to be a large fold developed above a buried, or “blind,” thrust fault. The accumulation
of strain on the blind Mount Diablo Thrust presents the potential for an earthquake along
this structure. The USGS considers the fault capable of generating a magnitude 6.7 earth-
quake with a 4 percent probability of occurring during the period 2000 to 2030. An earth-
quake on the fault would not be expected to cause fault rupture at the surface. However,
strong groundshaking would be expected within the Livermore area during such an earth-
quake. Recent earthquakes on similar faults have occurred in California at Coalinga in 1983
and Northridge in 1994.
Earthquakes can cause a series of specific hazards, each of which is described below:
Ground Rupture
Ground rupture due to earthquakes occurs along fault lines. Based on the location of the
City and the proximity to nearby active faults, the only ground rupture in the Planning Area
would be expected to occur in the northeast portion of the Planning Area during a major
earthquake on the Greenville Fault.
Ground Shaking
Earthquake ground shaking is the source of the most widespread earthquake damage. The
intensity of ground shaking can be several times greater on sites underlain by thick deposits
                                                                                                    10-5

 N O RT H
          0       1.5     3 miles
Shaded Zones Are Within 2 Kilometers (1.15 miles)          Contours of Closest Horizontal Distance
                                                                                                                   FIGURE 10 - 1
Of Known Seismic Source                                    To Known Seismic Sources
            A Fault                                                5 Kilometers (3.1 miles)
            B Fault                                                10 Kilometers (6.2 miles)
                                                                                                   VICINITY ACTIVE FAULTS
                                                                   15 Kilometers (9.3 miles)
Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1998.                      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
of saturated sediments than on bedrock. The amount of ground shaking at a particular site
depends on:
   Characteristics of the earthquake source (magnitude, location, and area of causative fault
    surface).
   Distance from the fault.
   Amplification effects of local geologic deposits.
As a rule, the greater the earthquake magnitude and the closer the fault rupture to the site,
the greater the intensity of ground shaking. Based on the location of the City and the prox-
imity to nearby active faults, the entire City could experience ground shaking during an
earthquake on one of several faults. The USGS and the Association of Bay Area Govern-
ments project that a large earthquake on the Greenville fault would produce the maximum
ground shaking intensities in Livermore, with Modified Mercalli (MM) intensity ranging
from strong (MM VII) to very violent (MM X). MM IX is associated with damage to buried
pipelines and partial collapse of poorly-built structures.
Ground shaking intensity is highly variable from one site to another. In addition, the effect
of ground shaking on structures is related to their form, structural design, materials, con-
struction quality, and location. Since the 1970s, the Uniform Building Code in California has
incorporated data on the response of structures to earthquakes as a basis for structural de-
sign. The objective of the Uniform Building Code is to protect the life and safety of building
occupants and the public.
Significant seismic design enhancements were incorporated into the California Building
Code in the mid-1970’s. Additional moderate enhancements were incorporated in 1998.
Buildings constructed prior to these dates, particularly those constructed prior to the mid-
1970’s, generally would not meet current design provisions for earthquake forces identified
in the California Building Code. Of these older buildings, unreinforced masonry buildings
constructed of brick or concrete block would experience the most extensive damage in the
event of a seismic event. Light wood frame structures (i.e., most residential structures)
would experience moderate damage, while steel-frame structures designed to resist earth-
quake vibrations would generally withstand most earthquakes.
                                                                                                   10-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Liquefaction
Liquefaction is the rapid transformation of saturated, loose, fine-grained sediment to a fluid-
like state because of earthquake ground shaking. Liquefaction can result in substantial loss
of life, injury, and damage to property. In addition, liquefaction increases the hazard of fires
because of explosions induced when underground gas lines break, and because the breakage
of water mains substantially reduces fire suppression capability.
As shown on Figure 10-2, most of the planning area is underlain by materials that have very
low to moderate liquefaction potential. Upland areas have a very low potential for liquefac-
tion. Liquefaction potential increases in the vicinity of major drainage channels where loose
granular sediments have accumulated as a result of stream processes. Specifically, the lique-
faction potential for sediments in the vicinity of Arroyo las Positas, Arroyo Mocho, and Ar-
royo del Valle increases from high to very high. The potential for liquefaction also depends
on soil conditions and groundwater levels, which may fluctuate.
Building Collapse
Ground shaking presents the most widespread hazard to structures and infrastructure within
the Planning Area. The effect of ground shaking on structures is related to the form, struc-
tural design, materials, construction quality, and location. Since the 1970s, the Uniform
Building Code in California has incorporated minimum standards to protect the life and
safety of building occupants and the public. However, buildings constructed prior to code
revisions in the 1970s generally would not meet current design provisions for earthquake
forces identified in the Uniform Building Code.
10-8
 N O RT H   0       .75      1.5 mile
                                                                   FIGURE 10 - 2
          water liquefaction
          very high
          high                            LIQUEFACTION SUSCEPTIBILITY MAP
          moderate
          low
          very low
Source: ABAG (2002), LSA Associates, Inc.                LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Expected damage to different types of buildings is described below:
   The most severe hazards are presented by unreinforced masonry (URM) buildings con-
      structed of brick or concrete block. Under strong intensity ground shaking, many of
      these structures may be expected to collapse or require demolition.
   Other types of buildings that may also be severely damaged are older buildings of steel
      and concrete framing that were not designed to resist earthquake vibrations and older re-
      inforced brick and masonry structures.
   Light wood-frame, such as most residential structures, and sheet metal buildings would
      be expected to have moderate damage in most conditions.
   Steel-frame structures designed to resist earthquake vibrations have an excellent record in
      earthquakes.
New construction in Livermore is required to meet the requirements of the California Build-
ing Code. Special occupancy buildings, including hospitals, schools, and other structures
important to protecting health and safety in the community, are required by the State to
meet more stringent design requirements contained in the Code.
Landslides
Landsliding is a natural process of relatively rapid downslope movement of soil, rock and
rock debris as a mass. The rate of landsliding is affected by the type and extent of vegeta-
tion, the slope angle, the degree of water saturation, the strength of the rocks, and the mass
and thickness of the deposit. Some of the natural causes of this instability are earthquakes,
weak materials, stream and coastal erosion, and heavy rainfall. In addition, certain human
activities tend to make the earth materials less stable and increase the chance of ground fail-
ure. Activities contributing to instability include extensive irrigation, poor drainage or
ground-water withdrawal, removal of stabilizing vegetation and over-steepening of slopes by
undercutting them or overloading them with artificial fill. These causes of failure, which
normally produce landslides and differential settlement, are augmented during earthquakes
by strong ground motion.
10-10

                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
The California Geological Survey prepared a landslide hazard identification map for the Liv-
ermore Valley to be used, at least in part, as a planning tool for new development. As shown
on Figure 10-3, the mapping indicates those areas that are considered “least susceptible,”
“marginally susceptible,” “generally susceptible,” and “most susceptible” to slope failure.
The criteria used to delineate the relative hazard areas included the nature of the geologic
materials underlying the surface, the steepness of slopes, the presence or absence of visible
slope failures, and the presence or absence of active forces that could cause failures, such as
stream processes or shrink-swell potential soils.
Most of the northwest corner of the Planning Area is susceptible to landslides, with the ma-
jority of slopes considered “marginally susceptible” to “most susceptible” to slope failure.
In addition, isolated upland areas in the northeast, central, and southeast portions of the
Planning Area are considered prone to slope failure.
Most of the lowland area, with its relatively gentle slopes, is not prone to landslides. This
general overview of slope stability and landslide potential in the City of Livermore is not in-
tended as a substitute for detailed site investigations, which should precede any final plan-
ning decisions and/or specific development proposals.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-1       Reduce risk to the community from earthquakes and other geologic
                hazards.
Objective PS-1.1        Regulate new land development to prevent the creation of new
geologic hazards.
    Policies
    P1.     Urban development within earthquake fault zones and areas of high landslide sus-
            ceptibility, shown in Figure 10-3, shall be conditioned upon the preparation of
            site-specific geotechnical investigations.
                                                                                                   10-11

 N O RT H
          0   1/2    1mile
            Planning Area Boundary            Relative Landslide Susceptibility Areas                             FIGURE 10 - 3
            Unmapped Area                           1           2           3
                                                 Least      Marginally   Generally
                                                                                          LANDSLIDE HAZARD SUSCEPTIBILITY
                                                      Increasing Landslide Susceptibility       MAP OF THE PLANNING AREA
                                                                                                            CITY OF LIVERMORE
Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1991.                     LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
P2. The City shall rely on the most current and comprehensive geologic hazard map-
    ping available to assist in the evaluation of potential seismic hazards associated
    with proposed new development. Projects proposed in areas identified as being
    subject to moderate or high geologic hazard shall be required to conduct site-
    specific geotechnical investigation.
P3. No structure proposed for human occupancy shall be placed across the trace of
    any active or potentially active fault within the Planning Area. The Greenville
    fault and Las Positas fault shall be assumed active, and the Livermore fault shall
    be assumed potentially active, unless and until proven otherwise.
P4. Geologic and engineering studies shall be required for all proposed building pro-
    jects, per State law, and all critical facilities (schools, hospitals, fire and police sta-
    tions) within the City so that these facilities can be constructed in a manner that
    mitigates site-specific geotechnical challenges and will minimize the risk to the
    public from seismic hazards.
P5. Construction shall be prohibited in areas with severe erosion (slopes over 10 per-
    cent), as mapped by the USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service, unless
    it can be clearly demonstrated through geotechnical engineering analysis that the
    project will not contribute to increased erosion, sedimentation or runoff.
P6. Development shall be prohibited in areas susceptible to slope failure (defined as
    landslide susceptibility areas 3 and 4 on Figure 10-3 or current hazard mapping),
    per State law, unless site-specific geotechnical investigation indicates that landslide
    hazards can be effectively mitigated.
P7. Prohibit development on expansive soils which are subject to a high probability of
    sliding; developments proposed below areas of expansive soils in foothill areas
    shall be conditioned to avoid damage from potential slide areas.
P8. No building site or greenhouse, in whole or in part, may be located on a pre-development slope of
    more than 20 percent. No building may be located on a site that requires an access road over a
                                                                                                   10-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
              natural slope of more than 25 percent. Cultivated agriculture may not be conducted on a slope,
              prior to topographical alteration, of more than 20 percent. (NLUGBI)
      Actions
      A1.     Retain a geologist registered in the State of California to evaluate the geologic re-
              ports required under Policies P2 and P3 (above) and advise the City regarding
              them.
      A2.     Adopt appropriate setbacks for development or perform detailed fault shear zone
              studies to define building setback requirements within earthquake fault zones.
              The ultimate setback required will be determined as geologic studies are made as a
              condition of processing development proposals.
Objective PS-1.2            Enforce measures related to site preparation and building con-
struction that protect life and property from seismic hazards.
      Policies
      P1.     Major utility lines shall be carefully planned where they cross a fault. They shall
              cross at right angles, or nearly so, be accessible for rapid repair, and be provided
              with safety features such as automatic shutoff valves, switches and expansion
              joints. Other equipment shall be provided to ensure minimal adverse impact on
              adjacent and surrounding areas and to facilitate restoration of service in the event
              of fault displacement.
      P2.     Areas of high shrink-swell potential soils shall incorporate suitable mitigation
              measures. If development is allowed in areas of high shrink-swell potential, spe-
              cial measures must be undertaken in site grading, foundation design and construc-
              tion to alleviate potential movements.
      P3.     The City shall control site preparation procedures and construction phasing to re-
              duce erosion and exposure of soils to the maximum extent possible.
10-14
                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
    Actions
    A1.    Promote programs that identify unreinforced masonry buildings and other build-
           ings that would be at risk during seismic events and continue to promote
           strengthening of these buildings.
    A2.    Promote programs that encourage residents to make their homes more seismically
           resistant and resilient.
II.     FLOODING AND INUNDATION
A. Background Information
Most flooding within the City of Livermore is caused by heavy rainfall and subsequent run-
off volumes that cannot be adequately conveyed by the existing storm drainage system com-
bined with surface water bodies. Flooding could also result from the catastrophic failure of
nearby Del Valle Dam which would result in the release of a large volume of water in a rela-
tively short period of time. The Planning Area is not susceptible to inundation by coastal
hazards, such as tsunamis, extreme high tides, or sea level rise, due to the elevation of the
area and the distance from the margin of the San Francisco Bay and Pacific Ocean.
Climate
Although Livermore generally experiences a Mediterranean climate with moderate rainfall
(an average of 14.5 inches of rain per year), analysis of long-term precipitation records indi-
cates that wetter and drier cycles lasting several years are common in the region. Potentially
damaging rainfalls occur at a frequency of about once every 3 years. Hazards often result
when the City experiences above-normal rainfalls over a short duration, resulting in in-
creased runoff and flooding along area creeks, such as the Arroyo Las Positas, Arroyo Mo-
cho, and Altamont Creek, and in areas with poor drainage.
                                                                                                  10-15
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Flood Hazard Zones
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps flood hazards throughout the
country, including Livermore. These flood hazard maps, known as Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, or FIRMS, are used to identify flood-prone areas, with the most susceptible areas des-
ignated as special flood hazard zones.
A number of specialized terms are used to describe flood hazards. The “base flood eleva-
tion” is the water surface level of a water course or waterbody that corresponds to a flood
event that has a 1.0 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (i.e., the
100-year flood). The “floodway” is the channel of a river or other watercourse that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot. The “flood zone” is the designated area where flooding could occur
during the “base flood” or 100-year flood. “Floodproofing” means any combination of
structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage.
According to the FIRMs, the majority of Livermore is designated as subject to minimal
flooding, as shown in Figure 10-4. However, 100-year flood zones are located along Arroyo
Del Valle in the extreme southwestern portion of Livermore, along Altamont Creek between
Broadmoor to Springtown Road, along Las Positas Creek from I-580 to El Charro Road,
along Arroyo Mocho from Wente Street to Stanly Boulevard, and from 0.5 miles west of Is-
abel Parkway to El Charro Road. Areas of minimum flooding also occur along Arroyo Seco
and within a triangular area that is generally bounded by Arroyo Seco to the east, Highway
84 to the north, and a line extending approximately 0.5 mile to the north of East Avenue on
the south.
10-16

 N O RT H
           0       2     4 mile
          100 Year Flood                                                FIGURE 10 - 4
          500 Year Flood
          Water Bodies                                       FLOODING HAZARDS
Source: ESRI/FEMA (www.esri.com/hazards/makemap.html), 2003.  LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Flood Control Efforts
In 2002, the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, Zone 7 em-
barked on a watershed-wide Stream Management Master Plan. Zone 7 owns and maintains
approximately 40 miles of flood control channels, including creeks and concrete-lined chan-
nels, in the watershed area. Most of these channels are in the Pleasanton area. However,
Zone 7 owns portions of Arroyo Las Positas, Arroyo Seco, and Altamont Creek in the Liv-
ermore Planning Area. Zone 7 maintains an ongoing program of channel acquisition funded
by developer fees. Under this program, the agency enters into an agreement with a develop-
er or another agency to take ownership, including maintenance responsibilities, of facilities
that are constructed to Zone 7 standards. The developer or agency is reimbursed a prede-
termined amount for channel improvements and right-of-way. When the flood control sys-
tem is completed, Zone 7 will own and maintain approximately 120 miles of creeks and
channels, including the primary drainage features, in the City of Livermore.
Dam Failure Inundation
As shown in Figures 10-5 and 10-6, portions of the City are located within the dam failure
inundation hazard areas for Lake Del Valle and Patterson Reservoir. Patterson Dam is lo-
cated east of Greenville Road and north of Patterson Pass Road, and impounds the 100-acre
foot Patterson Reservoir. The Del Valle Dam is located at the northern end of Lake Del
Valle, and impounds an average of 44,000 acre-feet in the reservoir. The depth of inunda-
tion would vary from near zero at topographic highs or uplands to many feet in low-lying
areas and in creek channels. Both of these dams are under the jurisdiction of the California
Department of Water Resources (DWR), Division of Safety of Dams. Existing dams under
DWR jurisdiction are periodically inspected to ensure adequate maintenance and to direct
the owner to correct any deficiencies found. Regular inspections and required maintenance
of the dams substantially reduce the potential for catastrophic failure.
10-18
  N O RT H 0         2500         5000 feet
Note: Map does not imply that failure of the dam or resulting flooding is a probable occurrence.
                                                                                                                        FIGURE 10 - 5
The inundation limits shown are approximate. They are based on the face topography and a
severe, hypothetical dam failure mode. The limits include all potential flooded areas.
                                                                                                 DAM FAILURE INUNDATION AREAS
                                                                                                                   DEL VALLE DAM
 Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1996.                          LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
           0                      5000
           FEET
                                                                                               FIGURE 10 - 6
  N O RT H
Note:
Map does not imply that failure of the dam or resulting flooding is a
probable occurrence. The inundation limits shown are approximate.        DAM FAILURE INUNDATION AREA
They are based on the face topography and a severe, hypothetical dam                    PATTERSON DAM
failure mode. The limits include all potential flooded areas.
Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1996.  LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
There are no State or local restrictions for development within dam failure inundation areas.
The Emergency Services Act requires that cities and counties prepare emergency evacuation
plans for areas that could be inundated in the event of a dam failure. In 2002, the City
adopted an evacuation plan for the Del Valle and Patterson dam failure inundation areas as
an annex to the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-2      Reduce hazards related to flooding or inundation.
Objective PS-2.1      Minimize flood risks to development.
    Policies
    P1.    Modification to the floodway will not be permitted in order to accommodate new
           adjacent development but will be permitted to restore creek capacity, stabilize
           creek banks, and restore habitat or water quality. However, modification of the
           land within the 100-year flood zone, but located outside of the floodway, will be
           permitted to protect the health and safety of existing development.
    P2.    When feasible, arroyos and creeks shall be preserved in their natural state, and
           shall not be channelized or otherwise altered. Floodways should remain undevel-
           oped and be allowed to function as natural flood protection features where flood
           waters are temporarily stored and conveyed during intense storms.
    P3.    The City shall require new development and significant redevelopment projects to
           prepare drainage studies to assess storm runoff impacts on the local and regional
           storm drain and flood control system, and to develop recommended detention
           and drainage facilities to ensure that increased risks of flooding do not result from
           development. The drainage study shall include an analysis and recommended
           mitigations for projects that would increase peak runoff flows and increase runoff
           volume and for all projects where such increased flow and/or volume is likely to
                                                                                                   10-21
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
              cause increased erosion of creek beds and banks, silt pollutant generation, or oth-
              er impacts to beneficial uses.
      P4.     Only uses which have low flood damage potential and do not threaten other lands
              during times of flooding shall be permitted in the 100-year flood zone.
      P5.     Subject to the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, the City shall permit devel-
              opment in a flood-prone area when it is demonstrated that such development will not (NLUG-
              BI):
              (a) Interfere with the existing waterflow capacity of the floodway or substantially
                   increase the erosion, siltation or chemical nutrients.
              (b) Contribute to the deterioration of any watercourse or the quality of water in
                   any body of water.
              (c) Require storage of material, construction of any substantial grading or place-
                   ment of fill.
      P6.     Development shall only be allowed on lands within the 100-year flood zone, if it
              will not:
              (a) Create danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
                   caused by excavation, fill, roads and intended use.
              (b) Create difficult emergency vehicle access in times of flood.
              (c) Create a safety hazard due to the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
                   rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
              (d) Create excessive costs in providing governmental services during and after
                   flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facil-
                   ities.
              (e) Interfere with the existing waterflow capacity of the floodway.
              (f) Substantially increase erosion and/or sedimentation.
              (g) Contribute to the deterioration of any watercourse or the quality of water in
                   any body of water.
10-22
                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
          (h) Require storage of material, or any substantial grading or placement of fill.
   P7.    Both public and private service facilities and utilities in existing 100-year flood
          zones shall be floodproofed to a point at or above the base flood elevation.
   P8.    The City shall prevent the construction of flood barriers within the 100-year flood
          zone which will divert flood water or increase flooding in other areas.
   P9.    Coordinate with Zone 7 and other appropriate agencies to construct creek im-
          provements to protect public health and safety and to de-silt existing creeks while
          maintaining creeks in their natural state, whenever possible.
Objective PS-2.2      Minimize risks associated with potential failure of Del Valle and
Patterson Dams.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall, in cooperation with the County of Alameda, prepare and maintain
          a disaster relief plan that addresses potential flood inundation in the areas below
          the Del Valle Reservoir and the Patterson Dam, as a result of dam failure (shown
          on Figure 10-6 and 10-7).
   Actions
   A1.    Review the evacuation plan in the City’s emergency management plan, as periodi-
          cally amended, for the inundation areas regularly to ensure it is accurate and up-
          to-date.
   A2.    Work with the California Department of Water Resources to ensure that adequate
          funding is being allocated for inspections of Del Valle and Patterson Dams, and
          that inspections and required maintenance are being carried out.
                                                                                                  10-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
III.      WILDLAND FIRES
A. Background Information
Livermore and its Planning Area experience long, dry summers with high wildland fire haz-
ards. The risk of wildfire hazard is related to a combination of factors including winds, tem-
peratures, humidity levels, and fuel moisture content. Of these four factors, wind is the
most critical. Steep slopes also contribute to fire hazard by intensifying the effects of wind,
and making fire suppression difficult. Features in some parts of the Planning Area, including
highly flammable vegetation, warm and dry summers, rugged topography and occasional
human presence create a situation that results in potential wildland fires.
To quantify this potential risk, the California Department of Forestry (CDF) has developed a
Fire Hazard Severity Scale which utilizes three criteria in order to evaluate and designate po-
tential fire hazards in wildland areas. The criteria are fuel loading (vegetation), fire weather
(winds, temperatures, humidity levels and fuel moisture contents) and topography (degree of
slope). According to CDF maps, wildland fire hazard is moderate throughout the Planning
Area.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-3          Protect lives and property from wildland fire hazard.
Objective PS-3.1            Plan new development with wildland fire hazards in mind.
      Policies
      P1.     Areas in which the elimination of fire hazard would require the following
              measures shall not be developed:
              (a) major modification of existing land forms.
10-24
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
            (b) significant removal of, or potential damage to, established trees and other veg-
                 etation.
            (c) exposure of slopes which cannot be suitably re-vegetated.
    P2.     In order to ensure fire safety, development shall be restricted in areas with steep
            terrain.
    Action
    A1.     Review all proposed development in wildland-urban interface areas for conformi-
            ty with the Wildland-Urban Interface Code (WUIC), as periodically amended, uti-
            lizing specialists in WUIC review and implementation. All development in
            wildland-urban interface areas shall utilize the best development and site design
            practices identified by the Fire Department, as required in the WIUC, as periodi-
            cally amended.
IV.     HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
A. Background Information
Products as diverse as gasoline, paint, solvents, film processing chemicals, household clean-
ing products, refrigerants and radioactive substances are categorized as hazardous materials.
What remains of a hazardous material after use, or processing, is considered to be a hazard-
ous waste. The handling, transportation, and disposal of such wastes is of concern to all
communities. Improper handling of hazardous materials or wastes may result in significant
effects to human health and the environment.
Nearly all businesses and residences in Livermore generate some amount of hazardous
wastes. The most common industrial hazardous wastes in Livermore are generated from
gasoline service stations, dry cleaners, automotive mechanics, auto body repair shops, ma-
chine shops, printers and photo processors. Most of these wastes are petroleum based or
hydrocarbon hazardous waste and include cleaning and paint solvents, lubricants, and oils.
                                                                                                   10-25
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
However, medical wastes, defined as potentially infectious waste from sources such as labor-
atories, clinics and hospitals, are also included among the hazardous wastes found in Liver-
more.
Regulatory Agencies
Hazardous materials in Livermore are heavily regulated by a range of federal, State, and local
agencies. One of the primary hazardous materials regulatory agencies is the California Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). DTSC is
authorized by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to enforce and implement
Federal hazardous materials laws and regulations, which are equally stringent or less stringent
then State hazardous materials laws and regulations. DTSC has responsibility for oversight
of Annual Work Plan sites (commonly known as State Superfund sites), sites designated as
having the greatest potential to affect human health and the environment. Six sites in Liv-
ermore have been evaluated by DTSC. However, only one site, the Lawrence National La-
boratory, is listed on the Annual Work Plan database.
The Hazardous Materials Division of the Livermore-Pleasanton Fire Department (LPFD)
has primary responsibility for enforcing most regulations pertaining to hazardous materials
in the City of Livermore. The LPFD also acts as first responder to hazardous materials inci-
dents within the City.
Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
Hazardous waste programs in Livermore are also governed by the Alameda County Hazard-
ous Waste Management Plan. The purpose of the Alameda County Hazardous Waste Man-
agement Plan is to forecast the potential future waste generation in the County, to encourage
an aggressive waste reduction strategy, and to establish acceptable siting criteria.
10-26
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-4     Protect the community from the harmful effects of hazardous materials.
Objective PS-4.1       Minimize Livermore residents’ exposure to the harmful effects of
hazardous materials and waste.
   Policies
   P1.    Residual repositories shall be prohibited within the City limits.
   P2.    Areas with a land use designation of High Intensity Industrial are appropriate for
          hazardous waste management facilities if other siting criteria can be met and po-
          tential environmental impacts are mitigated as part of conditional approval.
   P3.    The City shall promote the safe transport of hazardous materials through Liver-
          more through implementation of the following measures:
          (a) Maintain formally-designated hazardous material carrier routes to direct haz-
              ardous materials away from populated and other sensitive areas;
          (b) Prohibit the parking of vehicles transporting hazardous materials on City
              streets;
          (c) Require that new pipelines and other channels carrying hazardous materials
              avoid residential areas and other immobile populations to the greatest extent
              possible.
   P4.    Require emergency response plans for all large generators of hazardous waste to
          be submitted as part of use applications.
   P5.    When reviewing applications for new development in areas historically used for
          commercial or industrial uses, the City shall require environmental investigation as
          necessary to ensure that soils, groundwater, and buildings affected by hazardous
          material releases from prior land uses, and lead and asbestos potentially present in
                                                                                                 10-27

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
              building materials, would not have the potential to affect the environment or the
              health and safety of future property owners or users.
      P6.     Continue to encourage the reduction of solid and hazardous wastes generated
              within the City, in accordance with Countywide plans.
      P7.     The City shall ensure that new development and redevelopment shall protect the
              public health and safety through environmental investigations, as required by
              State and Alameda County regulations, relating to potential hazardous material re-
              leases from prior uses and lead and asbestos present in building materials.
      P8.     The City shall encourage the reuse and/or recycling of debris following a disaster,
              in accordance with all applicable regulations.
      Actions
      A1.     Continue to implement processing procedures and local siting criteria in order to
              implement relevant and applicable provisions consistent with the hazardous mate-
              rials and waste management plans for Alameda County.
      A2.     Ensure convenient access for Livermore citizens for the disposal of household
              hazardous wastes.
V.        AIRPORT SAFETY
A. Background Information
Airport operators recognize that uses that encroach upon and conflict with airports can re-
duce the ability of an airport to serve its function and can, over time, reduce the safety of
aircraft operations, as well as the airport’s viability to the region’s economy. Land use safety
compatibility in the vicinity of the airport is regulated by the City of Livermore, Alameda
County, and the State of California. These regulations protect the public health, safety , and
welfare by promoting the orderly expansion of airports and adoption of land use measures
10-28

                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
by local public agencies to minimize exposure to excessive noise and safety hazards near air-
ports.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulates uses at the airport, via an approved
Airport Layout Plan (ALP), and airspace protection via guidelines that are implemented by
the State and County. FAA guidelines establish ground clearances for take-off and landing
safety based on the type of aircraft that use airports. The California Department of Trans-
portation (Caltrans), Division of Aeronautics, implements the federal airspace protection
regulations and establishes land use compatibility guidelines through the California Airport
Land Use Planning Handbook.
The Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) implements the Federal regu-
lations and State guidelines, contained in the California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook,
through an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP). The ALUC is an appointed
body that operates pursuant to the State ALUC law (Public Utilities Code Article 3.5, State
of Aeronautics Act, Section 21661.5, Section 21670 et seq., and Government Code Section
65302.3 et seq.). The ALUC has the authority to coordinate planning at the state, regional,
and local levels to provide for the orderly development of air transportation, while at the
same time protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. In July 2012, the ALUC adopted
a comprehensive update to its ALUCP, replacing the Alameda County Airport Land Use Policy
Plan, which the ALUC adopted in 1986.
The ALUCP incorporates the land use planning guidelines set forth in the 2002 Division of
Aeronautics Airport Land Use Planning Handbook. The ALUCP is the primary document used
by the Alameda County ALUC to help promote compatibility between the Livermore Mu-
nicipal Airport and its environs. The ALUCP is to be used when reviewing land use plans
and development proposals within the Airport Influence Area (AIA). The AIA is a geo-
graphic area in which current or future airport-related noise, overflight, safety, and/or air-
space protection factors may significantly affect land uses or necessitate restrictions on those
uses. Figure 3-5.1 (Chapter 3, Land Use Element) illustrates the boundaries of the AIA.
The ALUCP establishes basic land use compatibility criteria (see ALUCP Table 2-3) that the
City shall use in assessing whether a land use plan, ordinance, or development proposal is
                                                                                                  10-29
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
compatible with airport operations. The ALUCP also establishes seven geographic safety
zones (see Figure 3-2, Chapter 3, Land Use Element) that assess the compatibility of a varie-
ty of land uses based their proximity to the airport and typical flight patterns. In 1991, the
City of Livermore established an Airport Protection Area (APA) as an additional protection
area beyond the minimum required by the FAA and Caltrans.
The APA, shown in Figure 3-5 (Chapter 3, Land Use Element), extends 5,000-feet beyond
the runways to the north, south, and east, and 7,100-feet to the west (the typical take-off di-
rection). The APA prohibits the construction of new, or expansion of existing, residential
areas within its boundaries. (Reso. 2013-113)
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-5          Minimize risks associated with aircraft operations at the Livermore
                   Municipal Airport.
Objective PS-5.1            Regulate land use within the vicinity of the Livermore Municipal
Airport.
      Policy
      P1.     All construction in Livermore shall be consistent with the required setbacks and
              height restrictions for the Airport Protection Area, General Plan Policy LU-4.4,
              the ALUCP, and the requirements of an Airport zoning district adopted to plan
              for future Airport operations. (Reso. 2013-113)
10-30
                                                                        C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                P U B L I C  S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
VI.     EMERGENCY AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
A. Background Information
As required by State law, Livermore has established emergency preparedness procedures to
respond to a variety of natural and man-made disasters that could confront the community.
These procedures are outlined in the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan adopted
in 2002. The Emergency Plan establishes the Standardized Emergency Management System
(SEMS) required by State law, and includes information on mutual aid agreements, hierar-
chies of command, and different levels of response in emergency situation. The Emergency
Plan also explains the function of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC), which is a des-
ignated location for centralized management of coordinated emergency response.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal PS-6      Prepare Livermore for emergencies.
Objective PS-6.1      Prepare and keep current City emergency procedures in the event
of potential natural or man-made disaster.
    Policy
    P1.    The City shall complete regularly-scheduled reviews and updates of its emergency
           management plans.
    Action
    A1.    Conduct periodic mock exercises using emergency response systems to test the
           effectiveness of City procedures included in the emergency management plans.
                                                                                                10-31
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Objective PS-6.2            Promote public safety through public education programs.
      Action
      A1.     Support earthquake preparedness activities such as strapping water heaters, pro-
              moting seismic retrofit, organizing periodic Citywide earthquake drills, providing
              first aid training and disaster preparedness classes to neighborhood groups, en-
              couraging residents and businesses to stockpile emergency food, water and medi-
              cal supplies.
10-32
11 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND FISCAL ELEMENT
   The Economic Development and Fiscal Element reflects Livermore’s desire to maintain a balanced mix of
   economic activities and opportunities, as well as fiscal vitality and stability for residents, employers, employees,
   and visitors.
   The Economic Development and Fiscal Element contains goals, objectives, policies, and ac-
   tions to encourage economic vitality and attraction of new businesses that contribute to Liv-
   ermore’s quality-of-life, sustainability, and fiscal vitality. This element, which is not required
   by State law, is intended to provide broad policy guidance for economic development and
   fiscal policy.
   A. Background Information
   Overview of Livermore Economy
   Livermore’s economy has grown moderately between 1990 and 2000. According to esti-
   mates from the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), Livermore’s job base grew
   from 37,366 in 1990 to 41,500 in 2000, an increase of eleven percent. The mix of jobs in
   Livermore has shifted somewhat during that time, with declining agriculture and transporta-
   tion sectors, and service and retail sectors experiencing strong growth.
   Key Sectors
   National Laboratories
   The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories are im-
   portant economic generators in Livermore, employing large numbers of people and creating
   innovative technological advances that offer opportunities for local economic expansion.
   The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) is a Department of Energy (DOE)
   national laboratory that conducts innovative science and technology research. LLNL was
   established in 1952 to design, develop, and provide stewardship of nuclear weapons. In
   2002, the Laboratory employed approximately 8,100 people with an annual budget of $1.5
   billion. LLNL is the largest employer in Livermore, and significantly impacts the local and
   regional economy. Part of LLNL’s defined mission is to enhance community welfare, quali-
                                                                                                                 11-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
ty-of-life, and educational excellence. Its scientific and government-funded work generally
buffers the Laboratory from business cycles, providing a steady employment base to Liver-
more residents.
Sandia National Laboratories has operated in Livermore since 1956. As a U.S. Department
of Energy national laboratory, Sandia’s main mission is national security. This role has ex-
panded to include nonproliferation, assuring energy and critical infrastructures, and counter-
ing terrorism. In 2002, Sandia employed approximately 900 people at the Livermore site,
including more than 400 professional staff with advanced degrees. Sandia is a major con-
tributor to the economic base in the Tri-Valley area, with an annual payroll at the Livermore
site of close to $67 million in 2002.
Agriculture, Wine, and Tourism
The Livermore Valley is one of California’s oldest wine regions and played a pivotal role in
shaping California’s wine industry; vineyards, wineries, and ranches continue to exist and ex-
pand in the area surrounding the City today. Innovations developed in the Livermore Valley
include overhead irrigation, mechanical harvesting, and roller crushing in the vineyard. The
Livermore Valley Wine Appellation status, granted in 1983, gives Livermore Valley vintners
greater access to the premium/varietal wine market. Attracted to the rich winemaking tradi-
tion, climate, soil and geography, new winemakers and vineyardists are working alongside
fifth generation winegrowers to create a Livermore wine renaissance. In 2002, the region
had over 5,000 acres of vineyards and 24 wineries, with several more about to open. Winer-
ies vary in size from limited release, 100-case output from craft wineries to 400,000-case in-
dustry leaders, and grapes range from familiar Merlot and Chardonnay to Italian, Rhone, and
Spanish varietals.
The agricultural heritage of Livermore is an anchor of the tourism industry in the region.
Events such as the Livermore Rodeo, Livermore Days of Wine and Honey, Harvest Wine
Celebration, and the Farmer’s Market attract visitors interested in Livermore's history, cul-
ture, and agricultural heritage.
11-2

                                                                                   C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
Retail Sales
Retail sales are an important economic sector in Livermore, and have performed strongly
during the 1990’s. From 1990 through 2000, Livermore experienced a 135 percent increase
in taxable retail sales (inflation-adjusted), rising from $366 million in 1990 to over $858 mil-
lion in 2000. This is attributable to both an increase in retail opportunities, as well as an in-
crease in total population growth in Livermore. Among specific store categories, taxable
sales fell for apparel and home furnishings, but sales for general merchandisers rose 310 per-
cent, due to the opening of several new value-priced stores.
In 2000, Livermore’s $11,706 per capita taxable sales from retail outlets was slightly above
the per capita average for Alameda, Contra Costa, and Santa Clara Counties. However, per
capita sales for the Tri-Valley as a whole were even higher, at $15,423 per capita, suggesting
that additional retail sales could be attracted to Livermore, particularly in apparel, home fur-
nishings, and automobiles.
Real Estate Market
Office and Industrial/Warehouse Market
Although Livermore’s economy diversified in the 1990’s, its mix of office and industrial
space is still predominately in light industrial and warehouse functions. In 2002, Livermore
had 1.86 million square feet of office space, primarily in newer business parks, accounting
for approximately eight percent of Tri-Valley’s office space total. Office space vacancies re-
flected the economic downturn of the region, registering a rate of 36 percent vacant in 2002.
Livermore’s substantial industrial and warehouse space inventory of 12 million square feet,
had an 11 percent vacancy rate at the end of 2002.
The presence of substantial office and warehouse vacancies, coupled with approved devel-
opment and additional vacant land available for business park development, suggests that
Livermore may experience a future over-supply of this type of job-generating land use. Liv-
ermore also faces the challenge of providing a market-driven mix of land uses that promotes
economic development while allowing for balance and diversity.
                                                                                                             11-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
Residential Market
The residential real estate market in Livermore has experienced strong demand, accommo-
dating population and economic growth in the Tri-Valley area. Development has focused
on single-family homes, which represented 92 percent of residential building permits issued
in the 1990s. In 2000, 73 percent of Livermore’s housing stock was single-family detached
homes (compared to 69 percent for the Tri-Valley overall). As reported in the Housing El-
ement, in 1999-2000 the median sale price for single-family homes in Livermore was
$293,500. More recent sales data indicates Livermore’s continued strength in single-family
homes - data from early 2002 indicated a median sale price for single-family homes in Liv-
ermore of $368,000, compared to a Tri-Valley overall median price of $550,000. Other sales
data indicated that Livermore’s single-family homes were typically smaller and priced some-
what below the average per square foot of Tri-Valley home sales.
For multi-family for-sale units, Livermore has experienced a limited amount of market-rate
development. As reported in the Housing Element, condominiums had a median price of
$140,000 in 1999-2000. More recent data show a median price for condominiums of
$226,500 in 2002, and an average price per square foot of $253. Despite the small invento-
ry, it is interesting to note that average prices per square foot for condominiums are similar
to single-family homes in Livermore, indicating strong potential demand for this product
type.
The rental market in Livermore is also relatively small, but shows signs of market strength.
As reported in the Housing Element average Livermore rents were $1,100 in 2001. In
March 2002, Livermore had an inventory of 2,268 units in large multi-unit buildings, with an
average rent of $1,169 and an occupancy rate of 94.5 percent. Livermore’s average apart-
ment rents were slightly lower than the Tri-Valley average of $1,323. Livermore’s occupancy
rate in March 2002, at 94.5 percent, was slightly higher than the Tri-Valley. Average rents in
Livermore have also declined more slowly than Tri-Valley since year-end 2001, with Liver-
more average rents declining 7.6 percent compared to Tri-Valley’s 10.4 percent drop. Liv-
ermore will need to provide additional market rate rental housing opportunities to maintain a
diverse array of housing types for future residents and assist employers in meeting their
housing needs.
11-4

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
Jobs/Housing Balance and Match
ABAG has estimated a total of 41,500 jobs in Livermore in 2000, compared to 26,123 occu-
pied housing units and 38,525 employed residents. This translates to a jobs/housing ratio of
1.59, and a jobs/employed residents ratio of 1.08. A jobs/housing ratio of 1.5 (to accom-
modate residents that are not working), and a jobs/employed residents ratio of 1 are consid-
ered ideal for a balanced community, since these goals translate into sufficient jobs to em-
ploy the community’s working residents and the potential to minimize in-and out-
commuting. According to both measures, Livermore’s ratios in 2002 were close to the ideal.
However, a closer look at the ratio of jobs in Livermore and the number of residents who
actually work in the local jobs offers a more refined picture. Despite the ratio of more jobs
than employed residents, detailed data on who actually worked in Livermore in 1990 (last
year for complete available data), indicated that just over 22 percent of local jobs were held
by Livermore residents. This finding means that Livermore’s economy has mismatches be-
tween jobs and residents, and the City likely continues to “import” workers living elsewhere,
while many residents of Livermore continue to commute out to other employment centers
offering higher wage jobs.
With the import/export mismatch between local jobs and local residents, and the relatively
high cost of housing, it is important to assess the jobs/housing “match,” which involves
comparing wages earned in local jobs, resulting household incomes created, and how well
those earnings do or do not equate with the cost of Livermore’s housing. This analysis,
conducted in 2002 for the General Plan Update, estimated that while low income jobs are
roughly balanced with housing affordable to low income households, there are 3,000 very
low income households and 1,200 moderate income households (with a member working in
Livermore) that cannot find housing affordable at their income level in Livermore. Addi-
tionally, there are almost 4,000 more housing units affordable only to above moderate in-
come households than there are Livermore jobs in this income category. Moreover, the
jobs/housing match analysis considered only people working in Livermore jobs, and did not
account for needed affordable housing for the non-working residents of Livermore. Ac-
cording to the 2000 Census, Livermore was home to approximately 1,350 unemployed per-
sons, 2,300 nonworking disabled persons and 4,000 households with residents over 65.
                                                                                                           11-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
These populations represent non-working Livermore residents, many of whom cannot likely
afford current housing costs in the City.
These findings underscore the need for a better match between the economic base and
housing market in Livermore.
City General Fund Fiscal Conditions
The City of Livermore General Fund provides most of the funding for public safety, librar-
ies and other public services that are essential for the quality of life for Livermore residents.
A somewhat typical profile of municipal revenues and expenditures is represented in the City
of Livermore’s fiscal year 2002-2003 General Fund budget, totaling $63.8 million, that antic-
ipated $27.8 million of expenditures, or 44 percent, for public safety uses including the Po-
lice and Fire Departments. Community Development accounted for 20 percent of the total
uses of funds, Library and General Services accounted for 13 percent, Administration ac-
counted for 9 percent, and 8 percent was allocated for Public Services, such as the Mainte-
nance Services. Funding for the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) and transfers to other City
funds account for the final 6 percent of budgeted expenditures.
The source of City General Fund revenue is primarily from traditional local taxes. In 2002,
sales and use tax revenues from local retail and industrial businesses accounted for $18.3 mil-
lion, or 28 percent, of General Fund revenue. Property taxes generated $14 million, or 22
percent, of revenues. City permits and fees accounted for $9.5 million, or 15 percent of total
funds, and the remaining 35 percent came from other taxes, intergovernmental transfers, and
inter-budgetary transfers.
The maintenance and enhancement of the City’s fiscal vitality is a key factor in continued
ability to provide municipal services at high quality levels. With substantial vacancies in in-
dustrial projects, and a renewed focus on Downtown retailing and tourism, the linkages be-
tween fiscal vitality and economic development are growing increasingly important. The fol-
lowing goals, objectives, policies, and actions seek to guide City investments to ensure Liv-
ermore’s high quality of life into the future.
11-6

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
Goal ED-1       Maintain and expand a diverse economy to ensure economic vitality.
Objective ED-1.1           Implement policies and actions that will encourage existing
businesses to remain and grow in Livermore, and attract a range of new businesses
to locate in Livermore.
    Policies
    P1.    To strengthen the economic base and to develop a central focus for the City, the
           Downtown Area (DA) shall be the exclusive location within the City for the de-
           velopment of all retail and commercial stores and services except those specifical-
           ly allowed in neighborhood shopping centers, industrial, highway, service com-
           mercial, and community commercial areas.
    P2.    To strengthen the economic base and to avoid the duplication of cost in delivery
           of urban services, the City shall unconditionally support the fundamental principle
           of sound urban management that “What is urban should be municipal.” All fu-
           ture urbanization within the City’s Planning Area shall be within the municipal
           control of the City of Livermore.
    P3.    Initiate and implement an economic development strategy, utilizing stakeholders
           such as the laboratories, business community, developers, and educational institu-
           tions to create attraction and retention strategies for all of Livermore’s economic
           centers.
    P4.    Participate in local and regional economic development efforts including those in-
           itiated by the Livermore Chamber of Commerce, Main Street, Tri-Valley Business
           Council, Bay Area Council, and the Economic Development Alliance for Busi-
           nesses.
                                                                                                           11-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
      Actions
      A1.       Monitor land use to ensure a balanced inventory of commercial and residential
                land.
      A2.       If appropriate, assemble land to provide sites that meet the needs of desirable
                businesses.
      A3.       Develop an economic development strategy that identifies a desirable mix of
                businesses that will attract high wage jobs and enhance tax revenues on a continu-
                ing basis.
      A4.       Work with businesses and employment recruiters to establish a process to employ
                Livermore and other local residents for Livermore-based employment opportuni-
                ties.
      A5.       Encourage and actively attract businesses in key industries that build upon Liver-
                more’s competitive advantages and offer high wage jobs.
      A6.       Enhance the City permitting process to assist local businesses to expand, pursue
                adaptive re-use, and to attract new businesses to locate in Livermore without un-
                necessary delay or cost, ensuring a customer- and business-friendly program.
      A7.       Develop a business retention and relocation program to facilitate and support im-
                plementation of the Downtown Specific Plan.
Objective ED-1.2                 Expand agriculture and tourism as important economic sectors
in the Livermore Valley.
      Policies
      P1.       Support visitor attraction services and amenities in the wine country and Down-
                town, including full service hotels and restaurants.
      P2.       Support development of conference and meeting centers within Livermore.
11-8

                                                                                   C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
   P3.    Support the restoration of natural habitat and the revitalization of Downtown, in-
          cluding cultural arts facilities, to serve as significant visitor attractions.
   P4.    Support expanded special events, particularly multiple day events, which draw up-
          on the rich diversity of Livermore’s history and physical landscape.
   P5.    Support the efforts of other agencies and organizations to improve the viability of
          agriculture in the area.
Objective ED-1.3       Capitalize on the presence of the national laboratories in devel-
oping high technology and other related uses in Livermore.
   Policies
   P1.    Work with the Laboratories to develop training programs which will create the
          next generation of technologically-advanced workers.
   P2.    Work with the Laboratories to locate private companies associated with the re-
          search at the Laboratories in Livermore.
   P3.    Work with the Laboratories to locate new, spin-off companies and technologies
          in Livermore.
                                                                                                             11-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
Goal ED-2            Balance the supply of job and housing opportunities in Livermore, and
                     match jobs and wages to housing prices.
Objective ED-2.1                 Initiate strategies to attract additional higher wage jobs, leading
to decreased out-commuting and a better jobs/housing match.
      Policies
      P1.       The City shall work toward achieving a more “balanced” economy by attracting
                greater diversification of employment opportunities, particularly those which can
                use the local labor force.
      P2.       Support and encourage businesses that provide jobs that would have a positive ef-
                fect on Livermore’s job/housing match.
      P3.       Maintain a range of quality housing options serving different lifestyle needs, in-
                come levels, and household composition, with increased opportunities for all in-
                come levels to achieve homeownership.
Objective ED-2.2                 Facilitate educational and economic opportunities for young
adults.
      Policy
      P1.       Collaborate with key stakeholders such as the national laboratories and Las Posi-
                tas Community College to develop educational and training programs targeting
                the needs of technologically advanced companies, creating future opportunities
                for the school-aged and young adult population in Livermore.
11-10

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
Goal ED-3     Develop and maintain a stable fiscal base that is not overly dependent
              on any land use, major taxpayer, or revenue type.
Objective ED-3.1      Diversify the City’s revenue base by implementing policies and
actions that will encourage a range of businesses to locate and expand in Livermore.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall minimize earmarking or limiting the use of General Fund tax reve-
          nue for specific purposes, whenever possible, to preserve financial flexibility so
          that the City can effectively respond to changing fiscal conditions.
   P2.    The City shall strive to maintain taxes and fees at a level adequate to provide nec-
          essary services.
   P3.    The City shall maintain an economic development program with City staff dedi-
          cated to administer the program and the policies contained within the Economic
          Development and Fiscal Element.
   Actions
   A1.    Develop economic development strategies which promote a diverse economic
          base.
   A2.    Seek mechanisms to capture Laboratory spin-off technologies locally in Liver-
          more, including homeland security services and suppliers associated with Labora-
          tory programs.
                                                                                                         11-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
Objective ED-3.2                 Ensure that development pays its fair share of public services,
equipment, and facilities necessary to serve the development.
      Policies
      P1.       New development will provide the necessary monies (or equivalent facilities) to
                reflect the project's share of new or expanded buildings, facilities and services re-
                quired to serve the development.
      P2.       The City will coordinate with other public agencies to identify those public facili-
                ties and services these agencies provide to new development in Livermore. As
                appropriate, the City will ensure "fair share" fees (or other equivalents) are as-
                sessed against new development to fund such facilities consistent with each agen-
                cy's policies and State law.
      P3.       New development will contribute its fair financial share to develop and maintain
                an adequate level of public services in the following areas:
                (a)      Sewage transmission, treatment and export/disposal facilities.
                (b)      Water development, treatment, storage, distribution, and conservation
                         facilities.
                (c)      Storm drainage and flood control facilities.
                (d)      Solid waste facilities and programs, including recycling and source
                         reduction.
                (e)      Street, highway, pedestrian, bicycle, and related transportation facilities.
                (f)      Public transportation facilities, equipment, and programs.
                (g)      Public safety facilities and equipment including police administration
                         building, fire stations, vehicles, and equipment.
                (h)      Public works maintenance facilities, equipment, and vehicles.
                (i)      Library facilities and equipment.
                (j)      General government administration buildings and equipment.
                (k)      Parks, recreational and cultural facilities and equipment including
                         administration and support buildings.
11-12
                                                                              C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                      E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T A N D   F I S C A L  E L E M E N T
      (l)    Educational facilities and equipment including administration and support
             buildings.
      (m)    Public health facilities and equipment.
P4.   Recover the direct and indirect costs of providing services and facilities support-
      ing development through a combination of fees, exactions, and dedications.
P5.   In order to achieve explicit economic development goals (as outlined in this ele-
      ment or a subsequently adopted strategy by the City Council for economic devel-
      opment), the City may provide economic incentives for projects that make a sig-
      nificant contribution to the economic base of the community when the City
      Council finds, based upon substantial evidence that the benefit to the community
      is greater than the economic incentive provided. Economic Incentives may be for
      all or part of new and expanding commercial or industrial development’s share of
      public infrastructure improvements or City development impact fees or for all or
      part of an existing business’s cost for on-site improvements that increase sales tax
      generation and property tax value, and contribute to the permanence of the busi-
      ness at its existing location. (Reso. 2013-072)
Actions
A1.   Conduct research and studies to determine the fair share financial contributions
      of new development necessary to develop and maintain adequate level of all pub-
      lic services.
A2.   Review and update ordinances and/or policy procedures to establish the mecha-
      nisms for collecting financial contributions from new development.
A3.   Modify the City's Capital Improvement Program to specifically identify the facili-
      ties/equipment necessary to respond to projected new development, as necessary.
A4.   Coordinate and assist other government agencies (e.g. park and school districts) in
      identifying future physical growth and the public facilities necessary to support
      such growth.
                                                                                                      11-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T A N D F I S C A L E L E M E N T
      A5.       Investigate techniques and alternative funding sources for funding selected private
                development projects that further significant public goals, (e.g. lower cost hous-
                ing, quasi-public uses).
      A6.       Review and revise public facility programs at least every five years to respond to
                new land use policies and development projects, changed facility needs, and
                changed facility/equipment cost estimates.
      A7.       As part of General Plan Land Use Amendment considerations, identify the gen-
                eral type of additional public facilities necessary to support the proposed land use.
      A8.       Continue to implement necessary procedures and programs to ensure public facil-
                ity impact fees are used to provide the necessary facility enhancements in a timely
                and economical manner.
Goal ED-4            Provide the most efficient and financially sound system of public ser-
                     vices commensurate with the highest standards required to protect the
                     health, safety, and general welfare of all persons living and working in
                     the Planning Area.
Objective ED-4.1                 Provide public services through a phased program, ensuring the
orderly implementation of policies and proposals of the General Plan, including the
annexation of areas to be served and provisions for meeting the cost of such services.
      Policies
      P1.       Phased programs for the systematic provision of all public facilities and services
                shall be in accordance with short-, medium-, and long-range financial plans.
      P2.       The financial plan for the City shall consist of the capital improvements program,
                the public services program and the revenue program necessary to support ade-
                quate public services.
11-14
12 CLIMATE CHANGE ELEMENT
   A. Background Information
   The Earth’s climate has always evolved—the extremes of the 100,000-year ice-age cycles in
   both climate and climate change emissions over the last half million years are well
   documented. The period of the last 10,000 years has been warm and stable, and the last
   millennium, over which current societies have developed, has been one of the most stable
   climates observed.
   Yet, during the late 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century, we have observed a
   rapid change in the climate and climate change pollutants that is attributable to human
   activities. These recent changes in greenhouse gases (GHGs) exceed the extremes of the ice
   ages, and the global mean temperature is warming at a rate that cannot be explained by
   natural causes alone.
   Today there is broad scientific consensus that humans are changing the chemical
   composition of our atmosphere through the buildup of GHGs 1 . Activities such as fossil
   fuel combustion, deforestation, and other changes in land use result in the accumulation of
   GHGs such as carbon dioxide (CO2) in our atmosphere.
   The principle GHGs are listed below. The potency of a given gas in heating the atmosphere
   is defined as its global warming potential (GWP). The GWP for certain GHGs other than
   carbon dioxide (CO2) are commonly converted into carbon dioxide equivalents to allow for
   the summation of different greenhouse gas emissions into a single total. This takes into
   account the differing GWP of different gases. For example, the Intergovernmental Panel on
   Climate Change (IPCC) finds that methane has a GWP of 21 over a 100-year time horizon.
   Thus emission of one ton of methane is represented as the emission of 21 tons of CO2.
   When available, the GWP for the non-CO2 GHGs described below is included.
   1 The best broad summary of the current scientific understanding of Climate Change is the 2007 Fourth Assessment
   Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. See:
   Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Summary for Policy Makers. (Working Group 1 Fourth Assessment Report).
   Available: http://www.ipcc.ch/ SPM2feb07.pdf.
                                                                                                                           12-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
           Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
           In the atmosphere, carbon generally exists in its oxidized form, as CO2. Increased
           CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere have been primarily linked to increased
           combustion of fossil fuels from both transportation and energy generation and
           consumption.
           Methane (CH4)
           Methane is produced during anaerobic decomposition of organic matter in biological
           systems. Decomposition occurring in landfills accounts for the majority of
           anthropogenic CH4 emissions in California and in the United States as a whole.
           Agricultural processes such as enteric fermentation (fermentation that takes place in
           the digestive systems of some types of animals such as cows), manure management,
           and rice cultivation are also significant sources of CH4 in California. Methane has a
           GWP equivalent to 21 tons of CO2 over a 100-year time horizon.
           Nitrous Oxide (N2O)
           The primary sources of anthropogenic N2O emissions in California are agricultural
           soil management and fossil fuel combustion in mobile sources. Nitrous oxide is a
           product of the reaction that occurs between nitrogen and oxygen during fuel
           combustion. Both mobile and stationary combustion emit N2O, and the quantity
           emitted varies according to the type of fuel, technology, and pollution control device
           used, as well as maintenance and operating practices. Nitrous oxide has a GWP
           equivalent to 310 tons of CO2 over a 100-year time horizon.
            Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), Perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and Sulfur
            Hexafluoride (SF6)
           HFCs are primarily used as substitutes for ozone-depleting substances regulated
           under the Montreal Protocol. PFCs and SF6 are generally emitted from various
           industrial processes including aluminum smelting, semiconductor manufacturing,
           electric power transmission and distribution, and magnesium casting. The GWP
12-2
                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
       equivalency to CO2 for these gasses varies greatly between 140 and 23,900 tons over a
       100-year time horizon.
       Other Radiatively Important Gases
       In addition, there are a number of man-made pollutants, emitted primarily as by-
       products of combustion (both of fossil fuels and of biomass), that have indirect
       effects on terrestrial or solar radiation absorption by influencing the formation or
       destruction of other climate change emissions. These include carbon monoxide
       (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOX), nonmethane volatile organic compounds, and sulfur
       dioxide (SO2).
       Aerosols
       Aerosols are extremely small particles or liquid droplets found in the atmosphere.
       Various categories of aerosols include naturally produced aerosols (e.g., soil dust, sea
       salt, biogenic aerosols, and volcanic aerosols), and anthropogenic aerosols (e.g.,
       sulfates, ammonium nitrate, industrial dust, and carbonaceous aerosols including
       black carbon and organic carbon). Anthropogenic aerosols are derived directly or
       indirectly from transportation, coal combustion, cement manufacturing, waste
       incineration, and biomass burning.
       Water Vapor
       Water vapor is the most important contributor to the natural greenhouse effect;
       however, human activities do not seem to be appreciably changing the atmospheric
       concentration of water vapor in any direct way on the global average.
An increase in GHG emissions results in an increase in the Earth’s average surface
temperature, which is commonly referred to as global warming. Global warming is
expected, in turn, to affect weather patterns, average sea level, ocean acidification, chemical
reaction rates, precipitation rates, etc., in a manner commonly referred to as climate
change.
                                                                                                      12-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
Climate change may impact the natural and human environment in California in the
following ways, among others:
      • Rising sea levels along the California coastline may increase the risk of inundation;
      • Extreme-heat conditions, such as heat waves and very high temperatures, which
           could last longer and become more frequent would increase the potential for ozone
           production, increase summer energy demand, stress water supplies, and increase
           health risks;
      • An increase in heat-related human deaths, infectious diseases and a higher risk of
           respiratory problems caused by deteriorating air quality;
      • Reduced snow pack and stream flow in the Sierra Nevada mountains, affecting winter
           recreation and water supplies;
      • Potential increase in the severity of winter storms, affecting peak stream flows that
           may increase the risk of flooding;
      • Changes in growing season conditions that could affect California agriculture, causing
           variations in crop quality and yield; and
      • Changes in distribution of plant and wildlife species due to changes in temperature,
           competition from colonizing species, changes in hydrologic cycles, changes in sea
           levels, and other climate-related effects.
These changes in California’s climate and ecosystems are occurring at a time when
California’s population is expected to increase from 34 million to 59 million by the year 2040
(California Energy Commission [CEC] 2005). As such, the number of people potentially
affected by climate change as well as the amount of anthropogenic (human produced) GHG
emissions are expected to increase unless steps are taken to reduce emissions. Similar
changes as those noted above for California would also occur in other parts of the world
with regional variations in resources affected and vulnerability to adverse effects.
12-4

                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
California Assembly Bill 32
As of January 2009, there have been no significant environmental regulations enacted in the
United States at the national level specifically designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
In April 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court determined that the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency has the regulatory authority to list GHGs as pollutants under the federal Clean Air
Act, but the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has not yet proposed nor adopted any
regulations of GHGs to date. Numerous proposals are being considered in the U.S.
Congress to regulate GHGs, but no legislation has been adopted. Although GHG emissions
reductions are currently not addressed in federal regulation, state and local governments are
passing legislation and adopting action plans to reduce GHG emissions.
The State of California passed into law the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006,
commonly referred to as Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32), which is designed to significantly reduce
GHG emissions generated by California in the short- and long-term. Other states and cities
are also adopting action plans to reduce GHG emissions within their jurisdictions.
AB 32 recognizes that GHG reduction in California will require similar reductions by other
states and countries in order to be meaningful. As such, California’s prospective emission
reductions specified in AB 32 are an attempt to establish a global leadership role on climate
change abatement and to act as a blueprint for other states and nations to reduce their
respective GHG emissions. The heart of the bill is the requirement that statewide GHG
emissions must be reduced to 1990 levels by the year 2020. The bill requires the California
Air Resources Board (CARB) to adopt rules and regulations in an open public process to
achieve the maximum technologically feasible and cost-effective GHG reductions, as
specified.
The following are the key milestones of AB 32.
    • June 30, 2007—Identification of “discrete early action greenhouse gas emissions
        reduction measures.” This has been completed.
                                                                                                     12-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
      • January 1, 2008—Identification of the 1990 baseline GHG emissions level and
           approval of a statewide limit equivalent to that level. Adoption of reporting and
           verification requirements concerning GHG emissions. This has been completed.
      • January 1, 2009—Adoption of a scoping plan for achieving GHG emission
           reductions. A draft scoping plan was released in June 2008. The final scoping plan was
           adopted by CARB in December 2008.
      • January 1, 2010—Adoption and enforcement of regulations to implement the
           “discrete” actions.
      • January 1, 2011—Adoption of GHG emission limits and reduction measures by
           regulation.
      • January 1, 2012—GHG emission limits and reduction measures adopted in 2011
           become enforceable.
The bill authorizes the use of market-based compliance mechanisms, including a cap and
trade program. Market-based approaches to GHG emission reduction are currently in use in
Europe and have been used in the United States to address acid rain precursors. A GHG
cap and trade program is also being implemented in the Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic
states as part of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and has been recently proposed by
the Western Climate Initiative for the western U.S. and Canada, including California. There
is also specific language to support the use of AB 32 to abate other air quality issues, such as
ozone, particulate matter, and toxic air contaminant exposures “to the extent feasible and in
furtherance of achieving the statewide GHG emissions limit.”
Statewide Emissions
CARB estimates that the 1990 statewide emissions level was 427 million metric tons of
carbon dioxide equivalents 2 (MMTCO2e) and the 2004 emissions level was 480 MMTCO2e.
The total reductions needed to achieve a level of 427 MMTCO2e by 2020 are determined
2 As described in the Background Information section, GHG emissions other than CO2 are commonly converted into
carbon dioxide equivalents which take into account the differing GWP of different gases.
12-6

                                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
from the difference between the projected 2020 business-as-usual (BAU)3 emissions level
and the proposed 2020 limit of 427 MMTCO2e. CARB developed a preliminary estimate of
approximately 600 MMTCO2e for the 2020 business-as-usual projection. This 2020
business-as-usual estimate is being assessed further by CARB during 2008. Based on current
estimates, California emissions overall will need to be reduced approximately 28% by 2020
compared to a business-as-usual scenario to meet the requirements of AB 32 or about 15%
less than current (2008) emissions.
FIGURE 12-1 2004 CALIFORNIA GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS BY SECTOR
(480 MMTCO2E NET EMISSIONS)
3 “Business as usual” (BAU) conditions are defined as year 2005 building energy efficiency, average vehicle emissions,
and electricity energy conditions. BAU condition forecasts presume no improvements in energy efficiency, fuel
efficiency, or renewable energy generation beyond that existing today. Specifically, BAU conditions do not include
current or proposed General Plan policies and currently adopted (AB 1493, SB 1078/SB107) mandates nor do they
include GHG reduction measures included in the CARB Draft Scoping Plan (June 2008) which are not yet enacted in
statute. This is consistent with the way in which CARB estimated BAU emissions for 2020.
                                                                                                                        12-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
B. Inventory for the City of Livermore
The International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) assisted the City of
Livermore in the preparation of a GHG inventory for the 2005 year for the City of
Livermore using ICLEI’s Clean Air and Climate Protection (CACP) Software. The
emissions coefficients and quantification method employed by the CACP software are
consistent with national and international inventory standards established by the IPCC (1996
revised IPPC Guidelines for the Preparation of National Inventories) and the U.S. Voluntary
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Guidelines (EIA form 1605).
The GHG inventory consists of two distinct components: one for the Livermore
community as a whole defined by its geographical borders, and the second for emissions
resulting from the City of Livermore’s municipal operations. The municipal inventory is
effectively a subset of the community-scale inventory (the two are not mutually exclusive).
The methodology for preparation of the 2005 GHG inventory is presented in greater detail
in ICLEI’s report on the City of Livermore’s 2005 emissions inventory (ICLEI 2008). The
City of Livermore’s 2005 inventory is based on the best available information. As discussed
above, CARB’s most recent statewide GHG inventory was completed in 2004 and is
continuing to assess the State’s 2020 GHG business-as-usual projection. As more GHG
inventory information is made available, the City can incorporate this information into the
preparation of its Climate Action Plan.
Livermore Community Emissions Inventory
The 2005 community GHG inventory for the City of Livermore includes GHG emissions
from fuel burned for mobile transportation; residential, commercial, and industrial use of
electricity and natural gas; and from the landfilling of solid waste.
12-8

                                                                        C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
FIGURE 12-2 COMMUNITY GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS BY SECTOR (2005)
                                                        Waste
                                                         4.7%
                                                                  Residential
                                                                      17.6%
                    Transportation
                       62.6%
                                                                       Commercial/
                                                                        Industrial
                                                                          15.1%
The community of Livermore emitted approximately 692,000 metric tons of CO2e in the
year 2005. As shown below, vehicles on roads and state highways in Livermore are by far
the largest source of Livermore’s community emissions (63%). Emissions from the built
environment (residential, commercial, and industrial sectors) collectively account for around
one-third (33%) of community emissions. The rest of Livermore’s emissions are from waste
sent to landfills (5%) by Livermore residents and businesses (ICLEI 2008).
Comparing the City of Livermore to California, the 2005 emissions related to the City
represent approximately 0.12 % of 2004 California emissions (CARB has not yet released a
2006 emissions estimate).
                                                                                                    12-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
TABLE 12-1 INVENTORY OF 2005 LIVERMORE COMMUNITY GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS BY SECTOR (METRIC TONS OF CO2E)
                              Source                        GHG Emissions               Percent of Total
                Residential                                        121,572                     18%
                Commercial/Industrial                              104,183                     15%
                Transportation 4                                   433,051                     63%
                Waste                                               32,783                      5%
                Total                                              691,589                    100%
Government Operations Emissions Inventory
Government operations in the City of Livermore emitted approximately 6,300 metric tons of
CO2e in the year 2005. The 2005 government GHG inventory for the City of Livermore
includes emissions resulting from electricity and natural gas used for government buildings
and public lighting; fuel consumption of the vehicle fleet; electricity used in water pumping
and irrigation; and the landfilling of solid waste.
The largest source of emissions from government operations is the City building facilities,
emitting 54% of greenhouse gases. The City fleet is the second largest source of emissions,
emitting about one-fifth (18%) of all emissions. Indirect GHG emissions from electricity
generation due to public lighting electricity consumption is also a significant source of
emissions (14%); electricity used for water pumps and irrigation controls makes up 5% of
4
  This inventory includes the emissions of traffic along roadways within the City boundaries, which includes the through
traffic using I-580 and SR-84. Thus, the transportation emissions noted above are not all related to the residential,
commercial, industrial, and institutional traffic originating or ending in the City of Livermore. In subsequent inventory
development, the City intends to examine the separate transportation emission related to through traffic versus locally
derived traffic to understand better the GHG emissions that can be influenced through City action. Given that the City
cannot control the traffic along state highways, reduction of through traffic emissions is not included in the reduction
commitment included in this Element. As described below, the City intends to work with regional transit providers,
Caltrans, and neighboring jurisdictions to promote regional alternatives to vehicle travel, but the responsibility for
reduction of through traffic GHG emissions is beyond the jurisdiction of the City.
12-10
                                                                                 C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                         C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
the total, and waste created through government operations makes up the remaining 10% of
the total emissions (ICLEI 2008).
TABLE 12-2 INVENTORY OF 2005 CITY OF LIVERMORE GOVERNMENT GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS BY SECTOR (METRIC TONS OF CO2E)
                       Source                    GHG Emissions            Percent of Total
            Buildings                                3,378                         54%
            Vehicle Fleet                            1,111                         18%
            Public Lighting                           844                          14%
            Water                                     297                           5%
            Waste                                     642                          10%
            Total                                   6,272                         100%
FIGURE 12-3 GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS GHG EMISSIONS BY SECTOR (2005)
                                    Buildings 53.9%
                                                                             Vehicle Fleet
                                                                                 17.7%
                                                                           Public Lighting
                                                                                13.5%
                                                        Water/ Irrigation
                            Waste 10.2%
                                                            4.7%
                                                                                                           12-11
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
C. City of Livermore Existing Policies and Programs
The City of Livermore has previously adopted many General Plan policies and programs
that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with current and future
development. This Climate Change Element, one of the first of its kind in California at a
municipal level, provides additional policies to support AB 32 and the City’s on-going efforts
to reduce GHG emissions. The City’s existing policies and programs that reduce potential
GHGs associated with current and future development are presented in the tables below.
D. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
  Goal CLI-1: By 2020, the City of Livermore shall seek to reduce greenhouse gas
  emissions under the control of the City to a level 15% less than 2008 levels 5 in order to
  support State implementation of the Global Warming Solution Act of 2006 (AB 32).
Objective CLI-1.1 Adopt a Climate Action Plan by 2010 that will help the City address
climate change.
      Policies
      P1.       CLIMATE ACTION PLAN - The City will prepare and adopt a Climate Action
                Plan (CAP) by 2011. The CAP shall include an inventory of the 2008 level of
                GHG emissions within the City. The CAP shall set out specific policies and
                actions to be undertaken by the City to reduce GHG emissions under the control
5 The California Air Resource Board adopted the Climate Change Proposed Scoping Plan in December 2008, which is
the state’s policy document for implementing AB-32. In the Scoping Plan, CARB calls for reducing California
greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, which means cutting approximately 30 percent from business-as-usual
emission levels projected for 2020, or about 15 percent from today’s levels (p. ES-1). CARB specifically “encourages
local governments to adopt a reduction goal for municipal operations emissions and move toward establishing similar
goals for community emissions that parallel the State commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by approximately
15 percent from current levels by 2020” (p. 27). The goal for the City of Livermore matches CARB’s recommendation
for local communities.
12-12

                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
            of the City to a level 15% less than 2008 conditions in order to support State
            implementation of AB 32. The policies and actions will include incentives,
            actions, and requirements to reduce the City’s GHG emissions, the GHG
            emissions of the private sector, and actions that the City will take in concert with
            public agencies, the private sector, and other stakeholders to reduce GHG
            emissions. Development of the CAP will include a public and stakeholder
            process.
    P2.      CLIMATE ACTION PLAN - Include mechanisms to ensure regular review of
            progress toward the GHG emission reduction targets established by the CAP,
            report progress to the public and responsible officials, and revise the plan as
            appropriate, using principles of adaptive management.
   P3.       CLIMATE ACTION PLAN - Work with other local and regional governments
            to assess federal and state programs and their impact on GHG emissions and
            mitigation efforts.
    P4.      DEVELOPMENT PROJECT FRAMEWORK - Evaluate the GHG emissions
            impacts of proposed developments through the CEQA process. Require
            preparation of project level GHG emissions inventories. Establish requirements
            for tiered significance thresholds for the evaluation of projects and identification
            and application of mitigation.
The interim threshold shall be residential projects of 50 units or more and
commercial/industrial projects of 50,000 square feet or more. Based on review of recent
projects, projects of this size constitute a large percentage of new development in the City of
Livermore.
The following are the initial best management practices (BMPs) to be implemented for all
new developments of 50 residential units or greater and/or 50,000 square feet of
commercial/industrial use until completion of the Climate Action Plan, which may alter or
amend these BMPs:
                                                                                                     12-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
      • Climate BMP No. 1 – Energy-efficient buildings in compliance with the Livermore
           Green Building Ordinance.
      • Climate BMP No. 2 – Use of energy-efficient appliances that meet Energy Star
           standards.
      • Climate BMP No. 3 – Incorporate solar roofs into commercial development.
           Residential development to be “solar-ready” including proper solar orientation (south
           facing roof area sloped at 20° to 55° from the horizontal),clear access on the south
           sloped roof (no chimneys, heating vents, plumbing vents, etc.), electrical conduit
           installed for solar electric system wiring, plumbing installed for solar hot water
           system, and space provided for a solar hot water storage tank.
      • Climate BMP No. 4 – Incorporate transit and bicycle/pedestrian connections into
           development.
      • Climate BMP No. 5 - For Commercial/Industrial projects, prepare and implement a
           voluntary Trip Reduction Plan (TRP) consisting of, at a minimum, marketing of
           commute alternatives, ride-matching assistance, and transit information. Suggest
           TRP targets to reduce vehicle trips per employee that are a reduction of 15% within 5
           years and 25% within 10 years compared to business as usual.
      • Climate BMP No. 6 – Incorporate priority facilities for alternative-fueled and carpool
           vehicles, such as priority parking and recharging facilities.
      • Climate BMP No. 7 – In compliance with the Construction and Demolition
           Ordinance, recycle construction materials and divert construction waste from
           disposal as feasible.
      • Climate BMP No. 8 – Include recycling facilities to provide for commercial and/or
           community recycling of plastic, paper, green waste, and food waste.
12-14

                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
    • Climate BMP No. 9 –Incorporate “heat island” treatments including cool roofs, cool
       pavements, and strategically placed shade trees.
    • Climate BMP No. 10 –Use landscaping that meets the City’s Water Efficient Landscape
       Ordinance.
The tiered thresholds and best management practices will be established and revised,
respectively, during the preparation of the Climate Action Plan and may differ from these
interim requirements.
The project review process relative to GHGs shall include the following:
    • Assessment of the project’s estimated GHG emissions without mitigation;
    • Formulation of any project-level proposed measures necessary for the project to meet
       any applicable GHG reduction targets;
    • Assessment of the project’s VMT and formulation of proposed measures that would
       reduce the project’s VMT;
    • Assessment of the transit needs of the project and identification of the project’s
       proposed fair share of the cost of meeting such needs;
    • Assessment of the project’s estimated energy consumption, and identification of
       proposed measures to ensure that the project conserves energy and uses energy
       efficiently;
    • Formulation of proposed measures to ensure that the project is configured to allow
       the entire development to be internally accessible by all modes of transportation.
                                                                                                   12-15

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
The City Council shall consider the feasibility of imposing conditions of approval, including
mitigation measures pursuant to CEQA, based on the studies and recommendations of City
staff described above.
The City Council shall consider including in any development approvals, or development
agreements, that the City grants or enters into during the time the City is developing the
Climate Action Plan, a requirement that all such approvals and development agreements
shall be subject to ordinances and enactments adopted after the effective date of any
approvals of such projects or corresponding development agreements, where such
ordinances and enactments are part of the Climate Action Plan.
      P5.      EDUCATION/AWARENESS - The City will launch a climate protection
               action-awareness campaign as well as support and coordinate other similar efforts
               in order to make residents, public institutions and businesses aware of the link
               between their everyday energy use and GHG emissions. The campaign, which
               will employ a variety of media, will use that awareness to stimulate positive
               actions by individuals and organizations that reduce GHG emissions.
TABLE A. EXISTING CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN POLICIES AND CITY
PROGRAMS RELATED TO ADOPTING A CLIMATE ACTION PLAN THAT WILL HELP THE
CITY ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE
          GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR                          BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                   CITY PROGRAM                              POLICY/PROGRAM
      Green Resource Center                          Since 2005, the Green Resource Center
                                                     within the City Hall Permit Center has
                                                     offered comprehensive public resources
                                                     and staff assistance regarding green
                                                     planning/building, recycling, reuse and
                                                     conservation.
12-16
                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
Land Use
The existing General Plan policies and programs (Table B) support higher density in the
Downtown and in other targeted areas of the City, an urban growth boundary, density bonus
transfers, jobs/housing balance, and mixed use development. The following additional
policies and programs will help the City to reduce GHG emissions by reducing emissions
associated with vehicle travel.
Objective CLI-1.2 Encourage and provide greater support for infill, mixed use, and
higher density development in order to reduce GHG emissions associated with
vehicle travel.
   Policies
   P1.    MIXED USE INTENSIFICATION–Conduct a survey of sites that currently do
         not permit any residential or residentially mixed uses in order to identify additional
         sites that have the potential for mixed-use development as follows:
         a.   Site-selection efforts should be focused on areas located near to the Downtown
              and in or near commercial corridors, shopping centers, and mixed use areas.
         b.    For each identified site, analyze current zoning and development standards to
              identify constraints that may limit mixed-use development.
         c.     Develop criteria for site identification, such as proximity to transit, availability
              of commercial services, compatibility with surrounding land uses and scale of
              development, lack of land use conflicts, and applicability of CEQA Section
              15332 (“Infill Development Projects”).
   P2. BASELINE DENSITIES–Expand allowable baseline densities of mixed-use
         designations located within close proximity and/or within activity centers that can
                                                                                                      12-17

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
             be served efficiently by public transit and alternative transportation modes. Update
             the zoning code accordingly.
      P3. DENSITY–Investigate feasibility of establishing minimum residential densities and
             parking maximums in areas designated for transit-oriented, mixed use development
             to ensure higher density in these areas.
      P4.     DENSITY–Promote infill, mixed use, and higher density development located in
             close proximity to existing public transportation corridors by providing incentives
             for these projects.
      P5.     FORM BASED CODE–The City shall update the Livermore Planning and Zoning
             Code (LPZC) to include Form Based Code Principles and application areas, which
             helps to create a more predictable public realm primarily by controlling physical
             form, with a lesser focus on land use, through City regulations.
      P6.     HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE–As part of the Housing Element update, the
             City shall reiterate/reinforce policies that promote infill, mixed use, and higher
             density development.
TABLE B. EXISTING LAND-USE-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                                BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                                  POLICY/PROGRAM
 MIXED USE INTENSIFICATION
 Housing Element Policy 1.1                           Land density inventory
 Housing Element Program 1.1.2                        Redesignation of non-residential sites
 INFILL
 LU-1.1, P1                                           Development adjacent to urban areas
 LU-1.1, P2                                           Urban growth boundary
12-18

                                                      C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                              C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY          BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
              PROGRAM                   POLICY/PROGRAM
LU-5                          Coherent pattern of urban uses
CC-1.1, P2                    Protection of hills
CC-1.1, P6                    Non-urbanized land surrounding Livermore
DENSITY
Housing Element Policy 1.1    Land density inventory
Housing Element Program 1.1.1 Inventory of residential lands/densities
Housing Element Program 1.1.3 Downtown specific plan update
Housing Element Program 1.1.4 Consistency with general plan density
Housing Element Program 1.1.5 Support of mixed-use development
Housing Element Policy 2.1    Adequate housing and infrastructure
Housing Element Program 2.1.1 Housing Implementation Program
Housing Element Policy 3.1    Promotion of affordable housing
Housing Element Program 3.1.3 Density Bonuses
LU-1.2, P1                    Mixed-use neighborhoods
LU-1.3, P1-P4                 Density transfers
LU 1.4, P3                    Neighborhood shopping centers
LU-1.5, P2                    Publicly-owned lands
LU-2.1, P7                    Housing Implementation Program/growth
                              determination
LU-2.1, P8                    Protection of agriculture
LU-2.1, P9                    Downtown redevelopment and housing
LU-2.1, P13                   Balanced communities
LU-2.1, P15                   Housing allocations/TDC Ordinance
LU-3.1, P1                    Specific plan/Greenville BART TOD
LU 13                         Support of wineries
LU-14                         Support of agriculture
LU-15                         Maintain a land trust
LU-16                         Support of agriculture
                                                                                12-19
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                         BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                            POLICY/PROGRAM
 LU-17                                        Growth boundary and open space buffers
 LU-18                                        Urban growth boundary
 LU-19                                        Support of agriculture and responsible
                                              development
 LU-20                                        Support of agriculture and natural resources
 N-1.1, P6                                    Support of active uses in downtown area
 CC-2.1, P6                                   Multi-modal transportation, mixed uses, and
                                              pedestrian scale neighborhoods
 CC- 4.17                                     Coordination of scenic routes and
                                              recreation areas
 INF-7.3, P3                                  Schools and public recreation
                                              areas/connections
 INF-7.3, P4                                  School locations and multi-modal access
 ED-2.1, P1                                   Diversification of employment
 ED-2.1, P2                                   Jobs/housing balance
 ED-2.1, P3                                   Maintain range of housing opportunities
 Housing Implementation Program               Facilitates a process for competing building
                                              proposals to earn preference points for: 1)
                                              exceptional architectural design and
                                              amenities that meet or exceed green
                                              building ordinances and 2) compliance with
                                              General Plan guidelines and community
                                              vision.
Transportation
The existing General Plan policies and programs (Table C) support mixed use development,
expansion of transit, promotion of alternative transportation modes, transit oriented
developments, downtown development, and bicycle/pedestrian friendly roadways. The
12-20
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
following additional policies and programs would provide further support for transit and
other alternative modes of travel, alternative fuels, and reduction of vehicle miles travelled.
Objective CLI-1.3: Support measures that encourage alternative modes of
transportation and alternative fuels in order to reduce emissions associated with
vehicle travel.
    Policies
    P1.     ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE/ PUBLIC–Provide
            the necessary facilities and infrastructure to encourage the use of City-owned low
            or zero-emission vehicles such as electric vehicle charging facilities and
            conveniently locate alternative fueling stations.
     P2.    ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE/PRIVATE–Promote
            the necessary facilities and infrastructure to encourage the use of privately owned
            low or zero-emission vehicles such as electric vehicle charging facilities and
            conveniently locate alternative fueling stations.
     P3.    ALTERNATIVE FUELS–Collaborate with local and regional governments and
            businesses to support expanded use of renewable fuels by, for example, helping
            to coordinate and leverage the purchasing power of multiple
            jurisdictions/businesses and to properly site alternative fuel infrastructure.
     P4.    VMT REDUCTION–Evaluate the feasibility of a VMT reduction target in
            concert with other Alameda County municipalities. Evaluate the feasibility of a
            VMT target for new development below “business as usual” VMT levels. If
            determined feasible, adopt a VMT reduction target in conjunction with adoption
            of the Climate Action Plan. Part of the evaluation of a VMT reduction target
            would require an analysis of the City’s existing multi-modal circulation
            infrastructure such as pedestrian routes, bicycle lanes, and transit services and
            operations. Monitor VMT every two years to evaluate the effectiveness of VMT
            reducing strategies in this element.
                                                                                                     12-21

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
       P5.     TRANSIT PROMOTION–Evaluate and consider multi-modal transportation
               benefits to all City employees, such as free or low-cost monthly transit passes.
               Encourage employer participation in similar programs.                                 Encourage new
               transit/shuttle services and use. Encourage appropriate use of telecommuting for
               municipal employees.
       P6.     BICYCLE USE–Evaluate and consider free bicycles for public use and/or charge
               a nominal fee for their use.
       P7.     CAR SHARE–Encourage community car-sharing and carpooling.
       P8.     PARKING–Build upon the City’s Downtown Parking Study and adopt a
               comprehensive parking policy for the entire City that encourages carpooling and
               the use of alternative fuel vehicles and transportation. The feasibility of potential
               use of parking fees/parking maximums shall also be evaluated.
       P9.     TRAFFIC SIGNALING–Evaluate potential efficiency gains from further signal
               synchronization and transit signal priority.
       P10. ANTI-IDLING REQUIREMENTS–Limit idling of municipal, community,
               and/or commercial vehicles for new development through the CEQA process.
               Support CARB anti-idling requirements and provide signage in key areas where
               idling that is not consistent with CARB requirements might occur. 6
       P11. NEW ROAD WIDTHS–To reduce heat gain from pavement, consider reducing
               street pavement in new developments.
6 CARB anti-idling requirements apply to diesel-fueled commercial motor vehicles with gross vehicular weight ratings
over 10,000 pounds that are or must be licensed for operation on highways as well as in-use sleeper berth equipped
diesel trucks. CARB requirements specify that these drivers shall not idle for more than five minutes at any location,
except as noted in the California Code of Regulations. Idling restrictions do not apply, for example, when the vehicle
must remain motionless due to traffic conditions or during an official traffic control signal over which the driver has no
control. For additional information regarding idling, please see CARB’s website: http://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/truck-
idling/truck-idling.htm#OVERVIEW
12-22

                                                                  C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
P12. CONGESTION PRICING–Work with regional partners to analyze and develop
     potential congestion road pricing scenarios for the I-580 HOT (High Occupancy
     Toll) lanes and address any legal and implementation issues. Report findings and
     recommendations on pricing options as well as mechanisms for applying part or
     all of the road-pricing revenues to fund transit and other alternatives to single
     occupancy vehicles.
P13. TRANSPORTATION PLANNING–Work with county, regional, and state
     governments to account for greenhouse gas emissions in evaluations of land use
     and regional transportation infrastructure investments.
P14. TRANSPORTATION FUNDING–Consider a public transportation impact fee
     on new development in order to provide additional capital improvements to
     support increased public transit service.
P15. TRIP REDUCTION ORDINANCE–The city shall evaluate the feasibility of
     implementing a voluntary trip reduction ordinance that promotes the preparation
     and implementation of a trip reduction plan (TRP) for large employers (100
     employees or more) in the City. The TRP should include, at a minimum,
     performance of annual employee commute surveys, marketing of commute
     alternatives, ride matching assistance, telecommuting, and transit information.
     The suggested performance target for the TRPs is a reduction of the vehicle trips
     per employee by 15% in five years and 25% in ten years.
P16. CARBON FOOTPRINT FEE–Explore and consider a carbon footprint fee on
     new developments to fund transit, other alternatives to single occupancy vehicles,
     and alternative fuel infrastructure.
P17. TRANSIT REAL-TIME INFORMATION - Promote real-time information for
     transit and ridesharing.
                                                                                            12-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
TABLE C. EXISTING TRANSPORTATION-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL
PLAN POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                  BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                     POLICY/PROGRAM
  ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLE
  INFRASTRUCTURE
  OSC-6.1, A.1                          Incentives for alternative fuel vehicles
  OSC-7.1, A2, A3                       City ownership of alternative fuel vehicles
  BICYCLE USE
  CIR-3.3, P3                           Bicycle and pedestrian facilities services
  CAR SHARE
  CIR-3.2, A1-A2                        Vehicle trip reduction strategies
  OTHER
  CIR 1.1, P3                           Location of high traffic generating uses and
                                        major streets
  CIR 1.1, P4                           Mixed-use and transit oriented
                                        development
  CIR-3.1, A1                           Promotion of local transit
  CIR-3.1, A2                           Support of future transit facilities/use
  CIR-3.1, A3                           Extension of BART
  CIR-3.1, A4                           Exploration of other rail options
  CIR-3.1, A5                           I-580 and HOV, BART and auxiliary lanes
  CIR-3.1, A6                           Expansion of ACE passenger railroad
                                        service
  CIR-3.1, A7                           Coordination with regional transit providers
  CIR-3.3, P1                           Bike and trails system
  CIR-3.3, P2                           Bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian in City
                                        planning
  CIR-3.3, P4                           Bicycle and pedestrian safety
12-24
                                                                        C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                        BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                 PROGRAM                                 POLICY/PROGRAM
 CIR-3.3, P5                                   Maintenance of roadway/multi-use trails
 CIR-3.3, P6                                   Bikeway system and community input
 CIR-3.3, A1                                   Master plan for Citywide bicycle and trails
                                               network
 CIR-3.3, A2                                   Development of bicycle and multi-use trails
 CIR-3.3, A3                                   Acquisition of land for trails
 CIR-4.1, P2                                   No LOS for the downtown area
 CIR-6.1, P1                                   Pedestrian access primary mode of travel
 CIR-6.1, P2                                   Roadway subordinate to pedestrian
                                               environment
 CIR-9.2, A1                                   Shared parking arrangements
 CIR-10.1, P1                                  Truck traffic not allowed in residential areas
 OSC-6.1, P7                                   Development/use of regional/local transit
 City charging stations                        The City maintains charging stations at City
                                               Hall and the Maintenance Service Center
                                               for two electric trucks it currently operates.
 Hybrid vehicles                               The City operates seven hybrid vehicles
Water Efficiency
Water is an important and scarce resource and the importation of water to the City requires
energy which produces GHG emissions. As a result, water conservation and efficiency both
help to reduce GHGs.
The existing General Plan policies and City programs (Table D) support water conservation
and efficiency. The following additional policies and programs will help to further the
efficient use of water and thus the reduction water delivery GHG emission associated with
pumping.
                                                                                                  12-25
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
Objective CLI-1.4 Enhance existing water efficiency and conservation measures and
adopt new programs that encourage recycled water use and water efficiency in order
to reduce energy and GHGs associated with water use.
       Policies
       P1.     RECYCLED WATER USE–Update the Recycled Water Master Plan to establish
               additional areas and uses that could also be required to use recycled water.
       P2.     RECYCLED WATER USE–Assess the feasibility of using advance treatment of
               recycled water with microfiltration or reverse osmosis for future potable water
               use. Assess associated energy/GHG tradeoffs vs. out of basin water supply.
       P3.     WATER EFFICIENCY–Review and update the City's water efficient landscape
               ordinance.
       P4.     WATER EFFICIENCY–Promote water audit programs that offer free water
               audits to single family, multi-family and commercial customers.
       P5.     WATER EFFICIENCY–Participate in and support regional programs and
               projects that target the improvement and conservation of the region’s
               groundwater and surface water supply. Also consider programs to collect
               stormwater for landscape watering.
12-26

                                                               C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
TABLE D. EXISTING WATER EFFICIENCY-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL
PLAN POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                 BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
PROGRAM                                         POLICY/PROGRAM
INF-1.2                             Land use planning/water service
                                    coordination
INF-1.3, P2                         Recycled water requirements
INF-1.3, P3                         Water conservation measures
INF-1.3, P4                         Compliance with water efficient landscape
                                    ordinances
INF-1.3, A1                         Incentives for reduced water consumption
INF-1.3, A2                         Water conservation measures for new
                                    development
INF-1.3, A3                         Reclaimed water and irrigation
Landscape Water Conservation System Many civic areas are connected to the
                                    Landscape Water Conservation System via a
                                    centralized irrigation system that schedules
                                    irrigation cycles based on evaporation rates
                                    provided by a weather station. To minimize
                                    water waste, sites are frequently checked and
                                    automatically shut off when a broken pipe
                                    or large flow increase is detected.
Recycled Water System               Recycled water has been produced at the
                                    Livermore Water Reclamation Plant for over
                                    30 years. City water treatment facilities
                                    utilize effluent filters and an ultra-violet
                                    disinfection system. The recycled water
                                    system contains over 14 miles of pipeline, a
                                    pump station, and a 1.9-million-gallon
                                                                                         12-27
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
 GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                     BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
 PROGRAM                                            POLICY/PROGRAM
                                         reservoir. Livermore Municipal Water
                                         delivers high-quality recycled water for
                                         irrigation and fire protection to Las Posits
                                         Golf Course, Las Posits Community
                                         College, and commercial customers in
                                         northwest Livermore. The Oaks, west of
                                         Isabel Avenue, will be Livermore’s first
                                         development to use recycled water for toilet
                                         flushing. The City continues to seek new
                                         ways to use recycled water and conserve
                                         potable water. The 2004 Recycled Water
                                         Master Plan allocates improvements
                                         necessary to supply recycled water for
                                         projected General Plan land uses within the
                                         recycled water area. The Wastewater
                                         Connection Fee Study and Capital
                                         Improvement Plan have been updated to
                                         provide funding for the $4.2 million recycled
                                         water system capacity improvements
                                         stipulated in the Master Plan. Overall, the
                                         existing system is sized well for ultimate
                                         build-out. Future plans include filter and
                                         pumping improvements at the Water
                                         Reclamation Plant and construction of a
                                         new 1.9-million-gallon storage reservoir.
 Landscape efficiency/water conservation The City provides literature to new
 literature                              homeowners on how to maximize landscape
                                         efficiency and water conservation.
12-28

                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
Energy
The General Plan energy related policies and programs (Table E) associated with climate
change support alternative energy production, green building practices, and the reduction of
air pollution and energy consumption. The following additional policies will help to
promote energy-efficiency and expand the use of renewable energy.
Objective CLI-1.5 Expand and adopt new policies and programs that will help to
provide energy efficiency alternatives to fossil fuel use and reduce consumption in
order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
    Policies
    P1.    ALTERNATIVE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PLAN–Explore possibilities for
           alternative energy production and establishing City-wide measurable goals.
           Develop an Alternative Energy Development Plan to identify the allowable and
           appropriate alternative energy facility types (i.e., solar photovoltaic (PV) on urban
           residential and commercial roofs and wind farms on the edge of town or in rural
           areas) and locations within Livermore as well as propose phasing and timing of
           alternative energy facility and infrastructure development. Continue to identify
           and remove regulatory or procedural barriers to producing renewable energy in
           building and development codes, design guidelines, and zoning ordinances. Work
           with related agencies such as fire, water, and health that may impact the use of
           alternative technologies. Develop protocols for alternative energy storage such as
           biodiesel, hydrogen, and/or compressed air. Establish a protocol for reviewing a
           proposed alternative energy project against existing City policies and ordinances.
           The Alternative Energy Development Plan shall identify optimal locations and
           best means to avoid noise, aesthetic, and other potential land use compatibility
           conflicts (e.g., installing tracking solar PV or angling fixed solar PV in a manner
           that reduces glare to surrounding land uses.)
                                                                                                      12-29

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
       P2.     RENEWABLE ENERGY PROMOTION–Expand incentives and goals for
               incorporating energy reducing practices into existing and proposed public and
               private developments and alternative energy vehicles. Consider potential public
               and private funding partnerships for solar roofs through a solar power loan
               program that would pay for the installation of solar panels and solar hot water
               systems for any homeowner or commercial building owner. For example, the
               owners of the home or the business building could retain ownership of the solar
               systems, by paying back the cost through an assessment on their annual property
               tax bill.
       P3.     RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR MUNICIPAL FACILITIES–Explore using
               renewable energy and clean generation technologies such as solar, wind, biogas,
               or fuel cells to power City facilities where appropriate.
       P4.     RENEWABLE                ENERGY/REGIONAL             COLLABORATION–Explore
               regional collaborations among local governments, special districts, nonprofits,
               and other public organizations to share resources, achieve economies of scale,
               and develop renewable energy policies and programs that are optimized on a
               regional scale.
       P5.     ENERGY MANAGEMENT–Use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to
               map and assess local renewable resources, the electric and gas transmission and
               distribution system, community growth areas anticipated to require new energy
               services, and other data useful to deployment of renewable technologies.
       P6.     GREEN BUILDING ORDINANCE EXPANSION–City departments will
               work together to periodically review (approximately every five years) the City's
               Green Building Ordinances in order to expand LEEDTM (Leadership in Energy
               and Environmental Design) or GreenPoint Rating System (or other) certification
               requirements to all new construction of private and public buildings.
       P7.     ALTERNATIVE BUILDING MATERIALS–Encourage the use of cement
               substitutes and recycled building materials for new construction.
12-30

                                                                       C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
    P8.   GREEN BUSINESSES–The City shall support green businesses through the
          efforts of the Alameda County Green Business Program to recognize and assist
          businesses to operate in an environmentally friendly manner.
TABLE E. EXISTING ENERGY-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS
 GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                          BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                PROGRAM                                  POLICY/PROGRAM
 RENEWABLE ENERGY
 OSC-7.1, P1                                  Support of wind turbines
 OSC-7.1, A1                                  Support of alternative energy sources
 The Livermore and Pleasanton Solar Cities    The Livermore and Pleasanton Solar Cities
 Program                                      Program is in the design stage to provide
                                              residents and businesses comprehensive
                                              assistance with the purchase and installation
                                              of photovoltaic systems. This is a privately
                                              operated program that is not managed by
                                              the City and is expected to establish a “Solar
                                              Buyers Club,” which would bring buyers and
                                              qualified contractors together, resulting in
                                              cost savings to consumers.
 Livermore’s Green City Hall                  In 2002, Livermore’s Green City Hall
                                              celebrated its “grand re-opening” after a
                                              major renovation that incorporated many
                                              sustainable building materials and practices
                                              to conserve natural resources. More than
                                              75% of the original building shell was
                                              retained and more than half of demolition
                                              materials were salvaged or recycled. Green
                                                                                                 12-31

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                   BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                      POLICY/PROGRAM
                                        redesign features qualified the City to receive
                                        a $30,000 rebate from PG&E. Since 2004,
                                        City Hall’s 75-Kilowatt Photovoltaic System
                                        has been generating 13.5% of the facility’s
                                        annual electricity needs and lowering power
                                        bills. Expandable to 100 kilowatts with
                                        additional solar panels, the $880,000
                                        installation cost was reduced by about
                                        $335,000 through a PG&E (State mandated)
                                        rebate program.
 ABAG Energy Watch Partnership Program  The City has participated in the ABAG
                                        Energy Watch Partnership Program since
                                        2004 which has provided technical
                                        assistance toward achieving energy efficiency
                                        and cost savings in public facilities.
 GREEN BUILDING
 LU-4.2, P2                             “Green construction” and land development
                                        techniques
 LU-4.2, P3                             Incorporate LEEDTM prerequisites and
                                        credits
 CC-2.1, P5                             Green building practices
 INF-4.2, P3                            City’s design review process
 Civic Green Buildings Ordinance LEED   The City’s existing Civic Green Buildings
 requirement                            Ordinance (Muni Code 15.74) requires
                                        certain city projects to incorporate LEEDTM
                                        green building measures. Projects following
                                        the LEEDTM rating system, under this
                                        program, shall be required to have a
                                        LEEDTM accredited professional on the
12-32

                                                                  C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                      BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
               PROGRAM                              POLICY/PROGRAM
                                         project team.
Commercial and Residential Green         The City’s existing Commercial and
Buildings Ordinance                      Residential Green Buildings Ordinance
                                         (Municode Chapter 15.76) requires new
                                         residential and commercial projects to
                                         incorporate green building measures.
ALTERNATIVE BUILDING
MATERIALS
Use of Rubberized Asphalt Concrete (RAC) RAC is used on City high-volume/major
                                         arterial road paving projects and is
                                         implemented when the City receives
                                         significant grants for large projects due to
                                         the costs. RAC uses recycled tires to add
                                         rubber to a concrete mix. This practice
                                         reduces the stockpile of waste tires statewide
                                         and studies show that RAC-paved roadways
                                         are cost-effective and decrease road noise
                                         compared to other paving methods.
OTHER
OSC-6.1, P1                              Construction-period air pollution control
                                         plan
OSC-6.1, P3                              Reduction of automobile-related emissions
OSC-6.1, P4                              Industrial uses and pollution standards
OSC-6.1, P5                              Increase of employment to population ratios
OSC-6.1, A2                              Reduction of vehicle trips and increase of
                                         ridesharing
OSC-6.1, A3                              State standards for emissions of air
                                         pollutants
OSC-6.1, A5                              Coordination of control of fugitive dust
                                                                                            12-33

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
   GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                                          BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                                               POLICY/PROGRAM
  OSC-7.1, P2                                                   Reduction of energy, air, land, and water
                                                                impacts
  Street-Level Imagery Project                                  Livermore’s award-winning Street-Level
                                                                Imagery Project enables staff to inspect city
                                                                streets via photo files from any computer on
                                                                the City’s network. In addition to saving
                                                                staff the time of site visits, this innovative
                                                                system reduces City vehicle workload, fuel
                                                                consumption and emissions.
  Spare the Air program                                         The City is active in the Spare the Air
                                                                program and the Tri-Valley Resources
                                                                Subcommittee of the Bay Area Air Quality
                                                                Management District. Since 2002, on
                                                                declared Spare the Air days, City
                                                                maintenance crews have been minimizing or
                                                                eliminating turf mowing, paving work, and
                                                                the use of two-cycle engines.
Open Space/Conservation
The existing General Plan policies and programs (Table F) support native and/or low water
use vegetation, promote tree planting, and prohibit the use of invasive non-native plant
species in new developments. The following additional policies and programs would
increase the level of support for these initiatives.
Objective CLI-1.6 Expand the number of trees in Livermore in order to provide a
larger carbon sink 7 or area containing natural sources that retain more carbon than
what those sources emit.
7 Carbon sinks, such as forests, oceans, and soils help to remove carbon from the atmosphere by sequestering carbon.
12-34

                                                                       C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
   Policies
   P1.    URBAN FORESTRY–Evaluate feasibility of expanding tree planting within the
          City during preparation of the Climate Action Plan including evaluation of
          potential carbon sequestration as well as GHG emissions associated with
          irrigation.
   P2.    AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT–Support the voluntary efforts of
          the wine industry and other agricultural businesses to promote land management
          activities that reduce GHG emissions and promote sequestration of carbon in
          agricultural soils.
TABLE F. EXISTING OPEN SPACE/CONSERVATION-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE
GENERAL PLAN POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                          BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                PROGRAM                                 POLICY/PROGRAM
URBAN FORESTRY
OSC-1.3, P1                                   Natural resource area linkages
National Arbor Day Foundation’s Tree City Livermore has participated in The National
USA Program                                   Arbor Day Foundation’s Tree City USA
                                              Program for over 13 years. The City was
                                              recently awarded the Sterling Tree City USA
                                              designation for urban forestry achievements
                                              in education and public relations, planning
                                              and management, partnerships, and tree
                                              planting and maintenance.
Tree Preservation Ordinance                   This ordinance establishes the policies,
                                              regulations, and standards for the
                                              protection of trees on any parcel of land
                                              within the City.
                                                                                                 12-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
Waste Reduction
The existing General Plan policies and City programs (Table G) support waste diversion and
recycling goals. The following additional policies will expand the amount of waste diversion
and recycling and the effectiveness of existing programs.
Objective CLI-1.7 Expand methods to increase waste diversion and recycling goals
in order to reduce GHGs associated with waste disposal.
       Policies
       P1.     WASTE REDUCTION–Research, evaluate and report to the Council on best
               practices, innovations, trends and developments in waste-to-energy, climate-
               friendly building materials and waste reduction practices, as relevant to
               greenhouse gas emissions reduction. Promote regional development and use of
               new waste-to-energy technologies, waste reduction and climate-friendly materials
               as relevant to greenhouse gas emissions reduction.
       P2.     WASTE REDUCTION–Expand educational programs to inform residents about
               reuse, recycling, composting, waste to energy, and zero waste programs.
       P3.     WASTE REDUCTION–Support State legislative or regulatory efforts that will
               aid in achieving zero waste.
       P4.     WASTE MANAGEMENT–Work with public and private waste disposal entities
               to reduce methane emissions released from waste disposal and promote methane
               recovery for energy production from other sources.
12-36

                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
TABLE G. EXISTING WASTE REDUCTION-RELATED CITY OF LIVERMORE GENERAL
PLAN POLICIES AND CITY PROGRAMS THAT PROMOTE REDUCTIONS IN
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
 GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                   BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
              PROGRAM                             POLICY/PROGRAM
 WASTE REDUCTION
 INF-8.2, A1                            Purchase and use of recycled materials in
                                        City operations
 Environmental Education for Kids (EEK) Education and Recycling Programs in
 and Go Green Initiative                Livermore Schools – For 14 years,
                                        Environmental Education for Kids (EEK)
                                        and, more recently, the Go Green Initiative
                                        have provided hands-on projects and
                                        assistance with on-site recycling and
                                        diversion programs. These programs
                                        promote the understanding and importance
                                        of environmental stewardship for students
                                        and school staff.
 WASTE DIVERSION
 INF-8.1, P1                            Meet/exceed State requirements
 INF-8.1, P2                            Alameda County Measure D waste
                                        diversion goal
 INF-8.1, A1                            Source reduction and recycling programs
 INF-8.1, A2                            On-site storage facilities for recycled
                                        materials
 INF-8.1, A3                            Expansion of recycling facilities
 INF-8.2, A2                            State requirements for recycled container
                                        enclosures
 INF-8.2, A4                            Development of procedures that increase
                                        recycling
                                                                                           12-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                    BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                       POLICY/PROGRAM
 PS-4.1, P6                               Reduction of solid and hazardous wastes
 PS-4.1, P8                               Reuse and/or recycling of debris after a
                                          disaster
 PS-4.1, A1                               Hazardous materials and waste management
                                          plans
 PS-4.1, A2                               Access for disposal of household hazardous
                                          wastes
 Annual electronic waste recycling events Livermore has conducted annual Electronic
                                          Waste Recycling events for residents and
                                          businesses and will continue to provide
                                          support as needed as there are now frequent
                                          events held by private firms. These events
                                          enable participants to comply with State
                                          regulations that prohibit the disposal of e-
                                          waste in landfills.
 E-waste and cell phones programs         The public has been able to drop off cell
                                          phones for free at City Hall since 2005. E-
                                          waste and cell phones are recycled
                                          domestically in a socially responsible
                                          manner.
 City Resolution 2007-225                 A 75% waste diversion goal by 2015
                                          consistent with the Alameda County Waste
                                          Management Authority guidelines (Adopted
                                          by City Resolution 2007-225 in November
                                          2007).
 Community Recycling                      More than 30 years ago, Livermore began
                                          Community Recycling—13 years before
                                          solid-waste diversion became mandatory
                                          statewide. Residential and commercial
12-38

                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     C L I M A T E  C H A N G E E L E M E N T
GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
              PROGRAM                         POLICY/PROGRAM
                                    recycling have evolved into Waste
                                    Management’s current “Single-Stream”
                                    Recycling Program. This program makes it
                                    easy and efficient for residents and
                                    businesses to mix recyclable materials in
                                    one cart or bin and has helped Livermore
                                    exceed State-mandated diversion goals.
                                    Between 2004 and 2006, Waste
                                    Management added both Residential and
                                    Commercial Food Scrap Recycling
                                    Programs. When customers recycle more,
                                    they can often reduce their costs, since rates
                                    are based on container size and pickup
                                    frequency for businesses.
Construction and Demolition (C&D)   In force since 2002, the Construction and
Ordinance                           Demolition (C&D) Ordinance helps
                                    Livermore meet State mandates to divert at
                                    least 50% of solid waste from landfills
                                    through recycling and reuse.
Damaged asphalt recycling           The City has been using a cold milling
                                    machine since 2003 to remove and recycle
                                    approximately 3,000 tons of damaged
                                    asphalt—eliminating unnecessary landfill
                                    waste and associated high disposal fees.
Recycled Product Procurement Policy In 1992, the Recycled Product Procurement
                                    Policy directed City staff to purchase
                                    recycled content products and encouraged
                                    City consultants, contractors and vendors to
                                    do the same. Examples of recycled content
                                    materials procured to date include office
                                                                                       12-39

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C L I M A T E C H A N G E E L E M E N T
  GENERAL PLAN POLICY OR CITY                   BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
                      PROGRAM                      POLICY/PROGRAM
                                        supplies, furniture, park benches, picnic
                                        tables, and school and park playground
                                        structures. To expand and strengthen this
                                        policy, the City is developing an
                                        Environmentally Preferable Practices Policy
                                        for City Council consideration. If
                                        approved, this policy would direct staff to,
                                        whenever feasible, purchase products that:
                                        are lead and mercury-free, energy and water
                                        efficient, reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
                                        include recycled content and/or durable
                                        and long-lasting features, minimize
                                        environmental pollutants and hazards to
                                        worker and public safety, use
                                        unbleached/chlorine-free manufacturing
                                        processes, agricultural fibers/residues, and
                                        sustainably harvested wood.
(Reso. 2009-040)
12-40
  City of Livermore
         2015 Housing
                 Element
                        Adopted
                     March 23, 2015
  Prepared by Lisa Wise Consulting, Inc., PlaceWorks and
City of Livermore Community and Economic Development
                       Department

                                              TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................... III
Purpose .............................................................................................................................................. iii
Housing Needs Assessment ............................................................................................................ iii
Housing Opportunities and Constraints ...................................................................................... vi
Housing Resources ..........................................................................................................................vii
Housing Plan.................................................................................................................................... viii
1    INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................... 1-1
1.1  Role of Housing Element .................................................................................................... 1-1
1.2  Data Sources ....................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.3  Outreach and Public Participation ................................................................................. 1-2
1.4  Relationship to the General Plan ..................................................................................... 1-6
2    HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT ............................................................. 2-1
2.1  Regional Population and Economic Context ............................................................... 2-1
2.2  Population Characteristics ................................................................................................ 2-2
2.3  Household Characteristics ................................................................................................ 2-9
2.4  Special Need Groups ....................................................................................................... 2-11
2.5  Housing Stock Characteristics ........................................................................................ 2-21
2.6  Housing Costs and Affordability ..................................................................................... 2-25
2.7  Regional Housing Need ................................................................................................... 2-34
2.8  Affordable Housing .......................................................................................................... 2-35
3    HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS ................................... 3-1
3.1  Market Constraints .............................................................................................................. 3-1
3.2  Governmental Opportunities and Constraints.............................................................. 3-4
4    HOUSING RESOURCES .......................................................................... 4-1
4.1  Availability of Sites for Housing ......................................................................................... 4-1
4.2  Housing Resources ............................................................................................................ 4-13
4.3  Financial Resources .......................................................................................................... 4-15
4.4  Programs ............................................................................................................................. 4-21
4.5  Opportunities for Energy Conservation ........................................................................ 4-25
                                                                                                                                                         i
   5   HOUSING PLAN ..................................................................................... 5-1
   5.1 Accomplishments under the 2009-2014 Housing Element .......................................... 5-1
   5.2 Housing Goals, Policies, and Programs .......................................................................... 5-8
   APPENDIX A .................................................................................................. 5-1
   APPENDIX B ................................................................................................... 5-1
ii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PURPOSE
The Housing Element addresses one of the most basic human needs for shelter. It also
provides a critical link between land use and transportation policies, which define the
location, layout, and movement of people and goods. For a region to have a strong and
balanced economy, its workers must also have places to live within their economic
means. From the perspective of human needs, housing should be high on the hierarchy
of policy priorities.
The City of Livermore Housing Element is part of the City’s General Plan, a
comprehensive policy framework guiding the physical, economic, and social
development of the City. This update to the Housing Element supersedes the Livermore
Housing Element adopted in 2009. The Housing Element is intended to assist Livermore in
identifying housing needs for residents of all income levels and developing an action
program to meet those needs. The Housing Element should be used in conjunction with
the Land Use Element to identify appropriate sites and land use designations for the
development of quality, affordable housing. The Housing Element must be internally
consistent with other General Plan elements and address State mandates that can
restrict the ability of the City to designate certain sites for housing.
The Housing Element consists of five chapters: Introduction, Housing Needs Assessment,
Housing Opportunities and Constraints, Housing Resources, and the Housing Plan. The
Introduction explains the role of the Housing Element, the data sources used to conduct
the housing needs assessment, the public involvement process, and the relationship of
the Housing Element to the General Plan. The remainder of this executive summary
highlights the key findings and considerations of the other chapters.
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
•   From 2000 to 2010, the population of Livermore increased at an average annual rate
    of 1.04 percent, a significantly greater rate than Alameda County’s rate of 0.46
    percent.
•   The median age for the city of Livermore was 38.3 years of age in 2010, slightly older
    than Alameda County’s median age of 36.6.
•   Residents aged 35 to 44 decreased in number and proportion from 2000 to 2010 in
    both Livermore and Alameda County. In Livermore, this decrease was countered by
    a large increase in adults ages 55 and older over the same time period.
•   In 2010, 5.3 percent of Livermore’s residents and 7.7 percent of Alameda County
    residents had less than a high school degree. A greater portion of Alameda County
    residents had graduate degrees than Livermore residents.
•   Livermore’s average unemployment rate in 2013 was 4.7 percent, significantly lower
    than the County’s unemployment rate of 5.8 percent.
                                                                                        iii

•   There were 38,230 employed residents in Livermore in 2010, compared to a local
    employment base of 38,450 jobs, which equates to a balanced ratio of 1.01 jobs per
    employed resident.
HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
•   The City of Livermore had 29,134 households in 2010, an 11.5 percent increase in
    households from 2000.
•   Livermore has a higher percentage of family households (73.1 percent), compared
    to Alameda County (64.6 percent).
•   The City of Livermore had a higher median household income than Alameda County
    but a lower median household income than the nearby Cities of Pleasanton and
    Dublin in both 2000 and 2011.
•   A total of 26.6 percent of Livermore households had incomes defined as either low
    (from 51 percent to 80 percent of Area Median Income (AMI)) or moderate (from 81
    percent to 120 percent of AMI). Livermore had a lower proportion of extremely and
    very low-income households, accounting for approximately 15.9 percent compared
    to 25.8 percent countywide.
•   Six percent of Livermore residents and 11.8 percent of Alameda County residents had
    an income below the poverty level between 2007 and 2011.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
•   State Housing Element Law defines “special needs” groups to include the following:
    senior households, female-headed households, large families, persons with disabilities,
    homeless persons, and agricultural workers.
Seniors
•   In 2010, 10.3 percent of Livermore residents were seniors, defined as 65 years of age
    or older. Of the 29,134 households in the City of Livermore, 5,157 (17.7 percent) of
    those were headed by a senior.
•   As of 2011, 9.4 percent of seniors were estimated to be living in poverty. This
    percentage has more than doubled since the year 2000, combined with a 51.2
    percent increase in the Livermore population ages 65 and over.
Female-headed Households
•   In 2010, Livermore had 2,834 female-headed households, nearly 13 percent of all
    households. About 20.8 percent of female-headed families with children under 18
    lived in poverty.
Large Households
•   In 2010, there were 3,363 large households (five or more persons) in Livermore,
    representing approximately 11.5 percent of all households. Alameda County’s
    population was very similar with 12.6 percent of all households considered large.
iv

•   A large household generally requires a home with at least three bedrooms.
    According to 2011 estimates, approximately 74.8 percent of Livermore’s total housing
    units (both owned and rental) had three or more bedrooms, significantly more than
    Alameda County’s portion of large units. Yet of this 74.8 percent, only 14.7 percent of
    these larger units were rentals.
Disabled
•   In 2011, approximately 8.7 percent of the Livermore population, ages 18 to 64 and
    12.5 percent of the Alameda County population classified themselves as disabled
    (defined as physical or mental).
•   There are 39 licensed community care facilities located in the City of Livermore.
    These facilities provide a supportive environment to persons with special needs in a
    group situation.
•   There are five affordable housing developments and shared housing projects built
    specifically for developmentally disabled adults in Livermore.
Homeless Persons
•   In January 2013, the EveryOne Home community organization conducted an
    Alameda Countywide Homeless Point-in-time Homeless Count and Survey. This survey
    found that about 4,264 people in Alameda County are homeless at any given point
    in time.
•   According to Alameda County, there are approximately 60 to 80 homeless people in
    the City of Livermore, although this figure does not include data from all temporary
    shelters serving Livermore and appears to underestimate the homeless population.
•   The City of Livermore partners with local organizations to offer several facilities and
    services for persons that are homeless or fleeing domestic violence.
Farm Workers
•   It is estimated that about 120 Livermore residents were employed in the Agriculture,
    Forestry, Fishing and hunting, and Mining occupational sector in 2010.
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
•   The majority (70.8 percent) of the housing stock in Livermore is comprised of single
    family detached homes, whereas Alameda County’s proportion is slightly over half
    (53.2 percent). Multi-family units make up 19.0 percent of the housing stock in
    Livermore and 37.8 percent of the stock of Alameda County.
•   The proportion of owner-occupied housing in Livermore (67.2 percent) is greater than
    that of Alameda County (50 percent).
•   The City of Livermore experienced an increase of approximately 3,792 housing units
    from 2000 to 2010, averaging 379 new homes per year and accounting for
    approximately 9.1 percent of total housing production in the county. Livermore built
    a higher proportion of single-family units than the county overall. Approximately 68.3
    percent of new housing built in Livermore during this period was single-family,
    compared to 57.1 percent for the county.
                                                                                          v

HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
•  Since the economic downturn in 2008, Livermore home sale prices have shown an
   upward trend. The median home sale price of 2008 ($513,000) increased by 1.8
   percent to $522,000 in 2010. This trend has continued into 2014 more rapidly. The
   median price for all homes sold in June and July 2014 was $622,000. During this
   period, the median price for homes sold within Livermore containing two, three, and
   four bedrooms was $436,000, $590,500, and $684,500, respectively.
•  The price per square foot of homes in Livermore and the Tri-Valley Region increased
   at an average annual growth rate of 0.3 and 1.3 percent, respectively, not
   accounting for inflation between 2008 and 2013.
•  Due to the continued increase in home sale prices, only above moderate-income
   households can afford the typical median price for a home in Livermore. In other
   words, homes in the City of Livermore remain unaffordable to even moderate-
   income households.
•  Rental housing in the City of Livermore has similar trends to rental prices of Alameda
   County. One-bedrooms averaged approximately $1,230 per month in Livermore
   compared to the countywide average of $1,547 for 1-bedrooms. While rents for 2-
   bedrooms were also lower in Livermore, rents for 3-bedrooms were almost identical.
   Rents for 4-bedrooms in Livermore exceeded those of Alameda County.
•  In general, extremely low- and very low-income households cannot afford market
   rental or owner-occupied housing.
•  In 2010, 42 percent of occupied households were paying more than 30 percent of
   their income on housing. Renters have a higher cost burden than home owners.
   renters, with 48 percent of renters and 40 percent of owners paying more than 30
   percent of their income on housing.
•  There is a higher incidence of overcrowding among renter-occupied households
   than owner-occupied households in both Livermore and Alameda County. The City
   of Livermore has a larger percentage of renter-occupied households with 1.0 to 1.5
   occupants per room (1.5 percent) than owner-occupied units (1.0 percent). Similarly,
   Alameda County has a larger percentage of renter-occupied households with 1.0 to
   1.5 occupants per room (2.5 percent) than owner-occupied units (1.4 percent).
   Although renter-occupied households tend to be more prone to overcrowding than
   owner-occupied, the majority of renter occupied households have 1.00 or less
   occupants per room.
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS
MARKET CONSTRAINTS
•  As of September 2014, residential properties in Livermore had prices ranging from as
   low as 30 cents per square foot of floor area to $11 per square foot. According to the
   2013 Residential Financial Feasibility Analysis, land values ranged from $47 per square
   foot of lot area in high density areas to $79 per square foot in low-density areas. This
vi

  range can be attributed to varying locations of the land, existing infrastructure, and
  other parcel-specific factors such as environmental conditions and topography.
• Based on the 2013 Residential Financial Feasibility Analysis, a typical single-family
  detached unit of 1,900 square feet would cost approximately $410,700 per unit to
  build, including land. A single family attached home of 1,500 square feet would cost
  approximately $362,825 per unit. A multi-family apartment complex would cost
  approximately $279,100 per 950 square foot unit.
• Although problems in the housing and home mortgage industries and access to
  home financing have subsided in recent years, it is still difficult for low and moderate
  first time homeowners to enter the market. To assist, the City offers a down payment
  assistance program to facilitate additional access to financial resources for lower
  and moderate-income households to attain homeownership, as well as home
  improvement assistance for low and moderate-income households.
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS AND OPPORTUNITIES
• In 2010, the City adopted the Livermore Development Code, which describes zoning
  districts and regulations. It also provides a clear roadmap for the entitlement of
  development projects. The Development Code ensures consistency with the General
  Plan, existing policies and procedures, and applicable state regulations. The Code
  includes new form-based regulations, revisions of outdated development regulations
  and zoning districts, and an update of its parking regulations for tandem parking and
  smaller units (studios and one-bedrooms).
• An analysis of the City’s existing land use controls, growth management policies, and
  development review process indicates that the City is not unreasonably restrictive
  but rather facilitates development through its zoning and other standards.
• The City complies with the most recent provisions of State density bonus law.
• The fees charged by the City of Livermore for residential development are
  comparable to those of the neighboring Tri-Valley cities of Pleasanton and Dublin.
  Furthermore, projects involving multiple planning applications can have fees
  reduced by 10 percent. Planning fees are based upon anticipated staff processing
  and review time and are charged at the time an application for development is
  received. Other development fees are collected as part of the building permit
  issuance process.
• The City provides Reasonable Accommodation to persons requesting modifications
  to their homes for accessibility improvements. Requests for flexibility in development
  standards in order to accommodate accessibility improvements has been codified in
  the City’s Development Code and are reviewed and approved at the staff level.
HOUSING RESOURCES
• The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is responsible for developing the
  Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the City of Livermore. The current
  RHNA plans for an eight-year period, from July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2022. For the
  current planning period, ABAG has determined that Livermore’s share of the RHNA is
  2,729 new housing units.
                                                                                        vii

•    Based on residential capacity in the General Plan and Downtown Specific Plan (DSP)
     areas, the sites identified in the land inventory would accommodate a total of 4,425
     units, which exceeds the RHNA of 2,729.
•    Livermore has access to a variety of existing and potential funding sources available
     for affordable housing activities, including in-lieu fees, low-income housing impact
     fees, Community Development Block Grants (CDBG), HOME funds, and Section 8
     vouchers. The City actively works with a number of non-profit organizations whose
     activities are related to the provision of affordable housing and human service
     programs, including Eden Housing, Abode Services, Tri-Valley Haven, ECHO Housing,
     Hello Housing, Housing Consortium of the East Bay, MidPen Housing, and Habitat for
     Humanity - East Bay/Silicon Valley.
•    The City has a number of policies and programs to encourage energy conservation
     and green building. In 2012, the City adopted a Climate Change Element and a
     Climate Action Plan with the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions within the
     community. As of 2013, the City requires new structures to exceed the requirements
     of the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards by 15 percent.
HOUSING PLAN
     This Housing Element contains goals, policies, and programs outlined in Table ES-1
     and discussed in more detail in Chapter 5, Housing Plan. Since adoption of its existing
     Housing Element in 2009, the City has been working proactively to implement the
     goals, policies, and programs aimed at conserving, improving and expanding the
     City’s affordable housing stock. The City has advanced goals for accommodating
     special needs groups and increasing the energy efficiency of residential buildings. For
     this Housing Element Update, the City of Livermore has aimed to increase the
     effectiveness of the policies and programs at reaching its goals and to leverage new
     opportunities to meet housing needs. The following summarizes major policy
     commitments and changes:
     •   As part of the 2015-2022 Housing Element update, the City updated the inventory
         of vacant and underutilized sites available for residential development. The land
         inventory identifies properties that can accommodate 4,425 residential units,
         which is sufficient to address Livermore’s RHNA of 2,729 units.
     •   Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) has partnered with the City of Livermore on the
         proposed Livermore Extension Project. The extension would run along the I-580
         from the existing Dublin/Pleasanton Station to a new station within the vicinity of
         the Isabel Avenue/I-580 interchange. The City is currently in the process of
         developing a Specific Plan for the surrounding area. The station area is one of
         three Priority Development Areas (PDAs) that the City designated as part of the
         regional “Plan Bay Area” process. The other PDAs cover the Downtown Specific
         Plan and the future Greenville BART station area. This Housing Element continues
         to support transit-oriented development in the Downtown PDA, which is served by
         the local bus system and the ACE commuter train. The Land Inventory, however,
viii

        does not assume any new housing in the two PDAs covering the BART station
        areas during this cycle, given the schedule for the BART extension project.
    •   The City of Livermore intends to investigate the feasibility of participation in the
        Mills Act Property Tax Abatement Program. This program grants participating
        cities the authority to enter into contracts with owners of qualified historic
        properties who actively participate in the restoration of their properties while
        receiving property tax relief.
    •   Since 2009, the City adopted a Climate Change Element and Climate Action
        Plan, as well as the Cal-Green building standards. During this cycle, the City will
        implement these plans and standards to increase energy efficiency of new
        residential development and large remodels. In addition, the City will continue to
        promote energy reduction programs such as weatherization and use of solar
        equipment for existing residential units.
Table ES-1      Summary of Housing Element Goals and Policies
Goals                  Policies
                       P 1.1: Develop and maintain an inventory of land with adequate densities
                       and development standards to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                       (RHNA) in all income categories.
G-1 Diversity of
Housing Choice         P 1.2: Facilitate the development of a range of housing types through area
                       planning efforts and the Development Code.
                       P 1.3: Encourage the development of housing for individuals with disabilities.
                       P 2.1: Encourage the provision of lower income housing, infill development,
G-2 Well Managed
                       and mixed-use projects in locations served by existing infrastructure,
Growth
                       particularly transit services.
                       P 3.1: Facilitate the production of affordable housing through the regulation
                       of and incentives to new development.
                       P 3.2: Actively pursue and utilize a variety of funding resources and
G-3 Production of
                       public/private partnerships in the development or purchase of housing
Affordable Housing
                       affordable to lower and moderate-income households.
                       P 3.3: Provide housing assistance to lower and moderate-income households
                       and other households with special needs.
G-4 Preservation       P 4.1: Improve the quality of existing affordable housing.
and Improvement of
Affordable Housing     P 4.2: Preserve housing that is affordable on the market or due to subsidies.
G-5 Provision of
                       P 5.1: Support and implement state and federal laws that prohibit
Equal Housing
                       discriminatory housing practices.
Opportunity
G-6 Regional
                       P 6.1: Foster regional cooperation and partnerships to address regional
Cooperation to
                       housing issues related to affordability, homelessness, and special housing
Address Housing
                       needs.
Needs
                       P 7.1: Promote the use of energy conservation features in the design and
G-7 Energy
                       siting of new residential structures and in the retrofit of existing residential
Efficiency
                       units.
                                                                                                        ix


1 INTRODUCTION
Housing is a basic human necessity and the need for adequate housing is shared by all
residents. People want living spaces where they feel they have dignity, where they can
express their individuality, and where they can be comfortable and healthy. Safe, well-
maintained housing is a basic necessity that transcends age, race, income, and marital
status. As such, the City of Livermore strives to provide a diversity of housing types, costs, and
locations to serve the variety of needs and wants of local residents.
1.1      ROLE OF HOUSING ELEMENT
The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable
living environment for every citizen as the State’s major housing goal. Recognizing the
important role of local planning programs in the pursuit of this goal, the Legislature has
mandated that all cities and counties prepare a Housing Element as part of the
comprehensive General Plan. Section 65583 of the Government Code sets forth the specific
components to be contained in a Housing Element. State law further requires Housing
Elements be updated at least every five years to reflect the changing housing needs of a
community. Livermore’s Housing Element was last updated in 2009. This Housing Element
update is for the planning period of 2015-2022.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
     •  An analysis of Livermore’s demographic profile, housing characteristics, and existing
        and future housing needs (Chapter 2);
     •  A review of potential market, governmental, and environmental constraints to housing
        development (Chapter 3);
     •  An evaluation of the land, financial, and organizational resources available to address
        the identified housing needs (Chapter 4); and
     •  A housing plan to address the identified housing needs, including a statement of
        goals, policies and programs (Chapter 5).
1.2      DATA SOURCES
Various sources of information contribute to the Housing Element. The Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) provides a data package that serves as the primary data source for
population and household characteristics. Several additional data sources were used to
supplement the 2014 ABAG Data Package:
     •  Population and demographic estimates and projections by ABAG and the California
        Department of Finance;
     •  Housing market information, such as home sales, rents, and vacancies, updated by
        City surveys and property tax assessor's files;
     •  Data on special needs groups, the services available, and gaps in the service delivery
        system provided by public and nonprofit agencies; and
     •  Lending patterns for home purchase and home improvement loans through the Home
        Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) database.
                                                                                                1-1

1.3      OUTREACH AND PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
OUTREACH
Opportunities for input on Livermore’s 2015 – 2022 Housing Element were provided through
various forums. The main venue for sharing information with the public was through posting
information related to the Housing Element Update on the City’s Website. As described further
below, the City gathered input at a community workshop to update the goals, policies,
programs and objectives. Two public hearings (one with the Planning Commission and one
with the City Council) provided additional opportunities to hear from the community.
The City sought participation and input from all segments of the community including:
interested citizens, the residential development community, non-profit housing developers,
housing advocates, and community organizations representing special needs groups such as
the elderly, children, homeless and disabled. For example, City outreach efforts to provide
notice of the public workshop and increase awareness of the Housing Element Update
included:
•   Preparation and release of a Press Release on November 24, 2014
•   Emailed workshop notices to
            o   Housing & Human Services (HHS) email listserv
            o   Alameda County Supervisors Office and other County Staff
            o   Livermore Area Recreation and Parks District (LARPD)
            o   Las Positas Veterans
            o   Hispanic Business Council, Livermore Chamber of Commerce
            o   Premium Outlets Management Office
•   Mailed workshop notices to stakeholder contact list, including housing service providers,
    real estate/development organizations, housing advocates, and the faith-based
    community
•   Posted workshop notices online at:
            o   City’s website home page
            o   Economic Development home page
            o   City’s social media including Twitter, Facebook, and Next Door
•   Posted workshop notices in English and Spanish at the following locations on November
    25, 2014
            o   Multi-service Center
            o   Public Libraries (Main Library and Rincon Library)
            o   Robert Livermore Community Center
            o   Wheels buses (Livermore Amador Valley Transit Authority)
            o   3 local coffee shops
1-2

Additional efforts that the City completed to further target and solicit input related to special
needs housing and specific issues include a presentation at the Human Services Commission
Meeting and two discussions with representatives from the Eden Council for Hope and
Opportunity (ECHO) and Community Resources for Independent Living (CRIL).
Public Presentation
The City gave a short presentation at the Human Services Commission Meeting on November
18, 2014. The presentation included an overview of the Housing Element process and
provided opportunity for attendees to ask questions. Next, the meeting involved a long
discussion about homelessness and related services with representatives from ECHO, Abode
Services, Tri-Valley Haven, and Livermore Homeless Refuge. Comments related to the Housing
Element included, but are not limited to:
     •   Housing affordability is a problem in the Tri-Valley.
     •   The lack of available housing makes it difficult to provide permanent housing
         placement using available subsidies.
     •   The faith-based community is an important component of the network of emergency
         shelters, food provision, and other services.
     •   Service providers currently coordinate with each other but there are specific ways
         that coordination could be improved
Recommendations that were incorporated into the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) as a result of this
meeting include but are not limited to:
     •   Facilitate the coordination of the faith-based community and providers of homeless
         services, building upon the Mayor’s Homeless Summit.
     •   Support the efforts of the Homeless Street Outreach (HSO) Team to proactively
         connect homeless individuals to resources.
Stakeholder Meetings
Eden Council for Hope and Opportunity
On November 21, 2014, the City of Livermore met with a representative from ECHO to discuss
housing issues and opportunities. Specifically, fair housing and housing discrimination were key
topics of discussion. As described in Section 4.4, ECHO receives assistance from the City to
conduct annual fair housing audits, which have found occurrences of housing discrimination
in the city and county. Identifying these issues allows ECHO to reach out to properties and
landlords who may be unlawfully discriminating against proposed tenants.
Existing programs that will be continued in the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) include but are not
limited to:
     •   Continue to refer complaints of discriminatory housing practices to Livermore Housing
         Authority (LHA) and ECHO.
     •   Continue to assist in the distribution of fair housing brochures at public locations, such
         as city counters, public libraries, community/senior centers, and service providers.
     •   Continue to provide financial support for the City’s Fair Housing Audit conducted by
         ECHO and the dissemination of audit results and information on fair housing laws to
         landlords, rental housing organizations and the public.
                                                                                                  1-3

Community Resources for Independent Living (CRIL)
On December 4, 2014, the City of Livermore met with representatives from CRIL to discuss
specific housing concerns for persons with disabilities. The discussion covered issues related to
affordability, the growing need for affordable and accessible housing, universal design to
accommodate persons with disabilities, and the loss of subsidized/affordable units due to
market forces.
Recommendations that were incorporated into the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) as a result of this
meeting include but are not limited to:
    •   Support “aging in place” through community design, partnering with organizations
        that provide support services, and encouraging accessibility improvements to rental
        housing.
    •   Explore additional funding sources and opportunities to leverage existing funding to
        increase resources for affordable housing programs.
    •   Support the preservation of existing market rate housing that is affordable to lower
        income households through rehabilitation and rental assistance programs.
COMMUNITY WORKSHOP
As part of the community outreach on the Livermore Housing Element Update, Lisa Wise
Consulting, Inc. (LWC) held a public workshop at the Robert Livermore Community Center on
Tuesday December 9th 2014, 7:00 – 8:30 pm. The intent of the workshop was to gather input
from the community on the highest priority housing issues facing the City of Livermore. There
were ten (10) community members in attendance.
The workshop began with a PowerPoint presentation that included a brief description of: the
components of a Housing Element, existing conditions in Livermore, the land inventory,
current programs, and the updated goals. The session then continued with two breakout
groups. LWC staff took notes as attendees provided comments on: 1) The most pressing
housing issues in Livermore, 2) The main barriers to addressing housing needs, 3) Gaps in the
City’s housing-related services, and 4) Policies and programs that should be prioritized. The
information collected guided the Consultant Team’s research and analysis, and ultimately
informed recommendations in the Housing Element Update, including the addition of policies
and programs to address community feedback. Below is a summary of the input:
1) What do you perceive as the most pressing housing issues in Livermore?
    • Affordability
            o Many long-term residents of Livermore now cannot afford to live in the City
            o Rents are quickly rising beyond the range of affordability
            o Section 8 vouchers are expiring before persons can find a viable housing
                 option/a landlord who will accept them
    • Housing Supply
            o There needs to be a more diversified gradient of housing stock for Livermore’s
                 low-income community
            o Consider more higher density zoning for apartments (standards related to size,
                 height, density, and housing types)
                      Desire for studio apartments at affordable prices ($800/month)
1-4

            o  Low-income housing should continue to be built close to public services and
               transportation
    •   Disabled residents
            o Provide project-based housing for the disabled
    •   Homeless population
            o Provide more and better services for the homeless population
2) What are the main barriers to addressing housing needs?
    • Market
            o Overall market constraints such as land cost, fees, and financing.
    • Regulation
            o Perceived long and complicated City permit process
            o City regulations, permit fees, and building code requirements such as Title 24
               add to development costs
            o Zoning that limits a wider range of housing types that would serve lower
               income households
    • Communication
            o City can better communicate new projects and efforts to the public
    • Funding
            o The lack of funding for low-income housing projects and homeless services
3) Are there gaps in housing-related services provided in the City?
    • Funding
            o The City could access a wider diversity of internal and external funding sources
               to support affordable housing
    •   Regional Housing Planning
            o Lack of communication and collaboration with nearby cities
    •   Vouchers
            o Provide better Section 8 voucher assistance for those in need
4) What policies and programs do you think should be prioritized?
    • Homelessness
            o The City should provide more opportunities for faith-based and non-
               governmental organizations to partner with City, and the City should better
               communicate with these entities
    • Help and enable small landlords
            o Elucidate to landlords the programs and regulations that affect them
            o Find ways to utilize more vouchers
    • Outreach and Media
            o Consider hosting a forum/summit on homelessness in Livermore
            o Show/teach the community about the problem
    • Regional Planning
            o Take a multi-city approach to helping the homeless
                                                                                            1-5

Recommendations that were incorporated into the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) as a result of this
meeting include but are not limited to:
     •  Support the preservation of existing market rate housing that is affordable to lower
        income households through rehabilitation and rental assistance programs.
     •  Support partners that provide outreach to landlords about voucher programs with aim
        of increasing housing opportunities for recipients of rental assistance.
     •  Improve communication with the public to increase awareness of policies, programs,
        and permit processes that support the production of affordable housing.
     •  Analyze potential Development Code updates that would expand opportunities for
        attached housing (e.g., small apartment complexes) and smaller unit types (e.g.,
        studios and cottages).
     •  Evaluate specific barriers to residential development of small properties
PUBLIC HEARINGS
Opportunities for public input were also provided via both Planning Commission and City
Council hearings.
On February 17, 2015 the Public Review Draft Housing Element was presented at a Planning
Commission hearing for public review and comment. The Planning Commission
recommended the City Council adopt the Draft Housing Element. A Minister of a local church
commented that he was pleased about the City's partnerships with faith-based organizations
to provide services to the homeless and resources for affordable housing. He encouraged the
City to continue supporting the partnerships and expressed a need to expand upon existing
services. No public comments resulted in changes to the Public Review Draft Housing
Element.
On March 23, 2015 the Public Review Draft Housing Element was presented at a City Council
hearing for public review and comment. A local real estate broker testified that challenges to
providing affordable housing in the current competitive market include the reluctance of
lenders to engage with prospective home-buyers when they are relying upon financial
assistance programs. No public comments resulted in changes to the Draft Housing Element.
The City Council unanimously adopted the Public Review Draft Housing Element with a vote
5-0.
1.4      RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The 2015-2022 Housing Element is a key component of the City of Livermore General Plan,
which was last comprehensively updated and adopted in 2004. As the City periodically
amends the General Plan, the goal, policies, and implementing programs in other General
Plan elements are reviewed for internal consistency. Specifically, the policies and programs
proposed in this Housing Element need to be consistent with related policies in other General
Elements. To maintain consistency, the General Plan is amended as needed up to four times
per year.
1-6

2        HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment serves as the foundation for developing the City’s housing
goals, policies, and programs outlined in the Housing Plan (Chapter 5, of this Housing
Element). This Chapter analyzes relevant population and housing characteristics to determine
the specific housing needs of Livermore residents. Important characteristics include:
demographics, household characteristics, special housing needs, and housing stock
characteristics.
This chapter references the most recently updated official government data as well as
private market data. The U.S. Decennial Census is the primary source, along with the
American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS is a mandatory, ongoing statistical survey that
samples a small percentage of the population every year. This survey, conducted by the U.S.
Census Bureau, produces population and housing information every year but, unlike the U.S.
Decennial Census (last conducted in 2010), only samples a small portion of households 1.
Additional data sources are referenced when appropriate.
In general terms, this Housing Element update does not find significant shifts in the housing
needs of Livermore residents from those identified in the 2009 Housing Element. Housing
affordability, in particular, has not drastically changed. Households with extremely low and
very low incomes still have difficulty making rental payments on average priced apartments.
Only households with above-moderate incomes are able to purchase a home in Livermore
without down payment assistance. Some low- and moderate-income households also
experience difficulty in finding and affording suitable housing.
In addition, Livermore has seen a notable increase in its senior population since 2000,
following national trends as the large Baby Boomer age cohort continues to age. Elderly
families often experience, due to their fixed income, a greater housing cost burden than
younger families. In order to address this demographic shift, increased attention to the
housing concerns of the elderly may be warranted.
2.1        REGIONAL POPULATION AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT
Livermore is located in eastern Alameda County, part of the nine counties that make up the
San Francisco Bay Area, which had a total population of 7.2 million people in 2010. In 2011,
the regional economy employed approximately 3.4 million people. The Health, Education,
and Social occupational sector employs the most residents; other significant sectors include
Professional and Waste Management, Manufacturing and Retail.
Alameda County has a population of approximately 1.5 million people, making it the second
most populous county in the region and the seventh most populous county in the state.
1
  The Census Bureau combines the data from the samples to generate three- and five-year estimates. This means that
   a given figure from the 2007-11 five-year estimates represents the average from 2007 through 2011.
                                                                                                               2-1

Economic growth has slightly increased from the years 2000 to 2011. According to the ABAG
data package, the County has seen an increase of 3.6 percent in employed residents
between 2000 and 2011, increasing to 718,035 employed residents ages 16 and over. Strong
residential growth has also continued to be a common trend in Alameda County. Between
the years 2000 and 2010, the County had an estimated 4.1 percent increase in the number of
households, 3.6 percent increase in employed residents, and 4.3 percent increase in total
population. Growth in the City of Livermore has surpassed the County, with increases nearly
double the rate of County growth.
2.2        POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
The type and amount of housing needed in Livermore is in part determined by the
characteristics of the population. Characteristics such as age, household makeup, cultural
background, employment location, and population growth trends influence the type of
housing a community needs. These characteristics also affect residents’ ability to afford
housing. For example, housing needs and preferences, as well as income-earning ability,
change as people age. This section outlines these characteristics as they impact housing
need.
POPULATION TRENDS
Beginning in the mid-1950s, Livermore evolved from a small agricultural town into a bedroom
community for the region. By the 1980s, Livermore had begun to also establish its own
industries, including commercial, light industrial, warehouse, and office development, adding
to its residential base. The continued population growth in the Bay Area has maintained
consistent demand for housing in Livermore, spurring more residential development.
As shown in Table 2-1, the population of Livermore increased by 10.4 percent between the
years 2000 and 2010, a significantly greater increase than Alameda County. ABAG
projections indicate that Livermore is expected to continue to grow by 34 percent by 2040.
Table 2-2 below indicates citywide population growth has also contributed to an increase in
the number of households. The number of households increased by 11.5 percent between
2000 and 2010 while the average household size remained relatively unchanged.
        Table 2-1.      Population Growth: 2000-2010
                            2000         2010      Average Annual growth rate
  City of Livermore          73,345       80,968                         1.04%
  Alameda County          1,443,741    1,510,271                         0.46%
  Source: U.S. Census, 2000 & 2010; ABAG Data Package Projections, 2014.
2-2

        Table 2-2.      City of Livermore Population Growth, 2000 - 2020
                                                                        Average Annual Growth Rate,
                                   2000         2010         2020                  2000- 2020
  Population                       73,345        80,968       88,000                                1.48%
  Households                       26,123        29,134       32,390                                1.71%
  Persons Per Household              2.80          2.76         2.74                                    ---
  Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010; ABAG Data Package Projections 2014.
AGE
As shown in Table 2-3, the median age for the City of Livermore was 38.3 years of age in 2010,
slightly older than Alameda County’s median age of 36.6. As a result of an aging population,
both geographies experienced an increase in the median age between the years 2000 and
2010.
        Table 2-3.      Median Age: City of Livermore and Alameda County, 2000 & 2010
                                                                   2000                    2010
  Livermore                                                                35.0                       38.3
  Alameda County                                                           34.5                       36.6
  Source: U.S. Census 2000 & 2010.
As shown in Table 2-5, 21.3 percent of Livermore residents are between the ages of 5 and 19.
This is compared to 18.9 percent countywide. Livermore also has a large proportion of middle-
age residents (persons from 35 to 54 years old), which account for approximately 33.2
percent of Livermore’s population.
       Table 2-4.      Age Distribution: City of Livermore and Alameda County, 2010
                                             City of Livermore                 Alameda County
Age Group                                Number            Percent         Number           Percent
Under 5                                    5,360            6.6%            97,652             6.5%
5-19                                      17,241            21.3%          286,010            18.9%
20-34                                     14,183            17.5%          335,253            22.2%
35-44                                     12,558            15.5%          227,491            15.1%
45-54                                     14,347            17.7%          222,617            14.7%
55-64                                      8,937            11.0%          173,502            11.5%
65+                                        8,342            10.3%          167,746            11.1%
Total                                     80,968           100.0%         1,510,271          100.0%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 & 2010.
                                                                                                            2-3

As shown in Table 2-5, adults aged 35 to 44 decreased in absolute number and proportion of
the population (share) between 2000 and 2010, reflecting the increase in median age in both
Livermore and Alameda County during that time. In Livermore, the city’s older age cohorts
experienced the largest increases of approximately 51 percent for the 55 to 64 age group, as
well as the 65 and older age groups. A minor decrease in the residents age 5 and under
implies a decrease in the citywide birthrate. These trends, although not as prominent, are
consistent across with the county population trends.
A decreasing young adult population and an increasing older population affect housing
needs as each demographic cohort has distinctive preferences. This follows national trends as
the large Baby Boomer age cohort, persons born from 1945 to 1965, continue to age and the
smaller Generation X age cohort, persons born from 1965 to 1980, forms families that are
smaller in size than the previous generation. Young families with children often prefer single-
family homes. While some seniors choose to live in single-family homes, their preferences may
start to lean towards condominiums and alternative living arrangements, according to the
2012 “State of Housing in California” report by HCD.
       Table 2-5.       Age Distribution: City of Livermore and Alameda County, 2000 - 2010
                               City of Livermore                                  Alameda County
                                                        2000 -                                              2000 -
                     2000                   2010         2010           2000                   2010        2010
 Age                                                   Percent                                            Percent
 Group      Number        Share     Number       Share Change   Number       Share     Number       Share Change
 Under 5      5,650        7.7%       5,360       6.6%   -5.1%   98,378       6.8%      97,652       6.5%   -0.7%
 5-19         16,622      22.7%      17,241      21.3%    3.7%  293,865      20.4%     286,010      18.9%   -2.7%
 20-34        14,461      19.7%      14,183      17.5%   -1.9%  341,818      23.7%     335,253      22.2%   -1.9%
 35-44        14,878      20.3%      12,558      15.5%  -15.6%  248,706      17.2%     227,491      15.1%   -8.5%
 45-54        10,300      14.0%      14,347      17.7%  39.3%   200,518      13.9%     222,617      14.7%   11.0%
 55-64        5,918        8.1%       8,937      11.0%   51.0%  112,865       7.8%     173,502      11.5%   53.7%
 65+          5,516        7.5%       8,342      10.3%   51.2%  147,591      10.2%     167,746      11.1%   13.7%
 Total      73,345      100.0%      80,968     100.0%  10.4%   1,443,741    100.0%    1,510,271    100.0% 4.6%
 Source: U.S. Census, 2000 & 2010.
ETHNICITY
Like many other communities throughout Alameda County, the racial and ethnic
composition of Livermore’s population has been gradually changing. As shown in Table 2-6,
Livermore is less ethnically diverse than Alameda County. Approximately 65 percent of
Livermore’s population identified as White in 2010, while only 34 percent of Alameda County’s
population was White. However, the ethnicity of Livermore residents has become more
diverse than it was in 2000. The White population significantly decreased while the Hispanic or
Latino and the Asian or Pacific Islander populations increased. Both of these ethnic groups
2-4

represent a significant portion of the City and County population. The Hispanic or Latino
population is the second largest ethnic group within the City of Livermore, while in Alameda
County, the Asian or Pacific Islander ethnic group is the second largest, followed by the
Hispanic or Latino ethnic group.
        Table 2-6.      Ethnic Trends: City of Livermore and Alameda County, 2000 - 2010
                                                 City of Livermore             Alameda County
                Ethnic Group                   2000              2010      2000            2010
  White                                        74.4%             64.7%     40.9%          34.1%
  Black                                         1.5%             1.9%      14.6%          12.2%
  American Indian and Alaska Native             0.4%             0.3%       0.4%           0.3%
  Asian or Pacific Islander                     5.9%             8.5%      20.9%          26.6%
  Two or more ethnicities                       0.3%             0.2%       0.3%           0.3%
  Other                                         3.1%             3.4%       3.9%           4.0%
  Hispanic or Latino (of any race)             14.4%             20.9%     19.0%          22.5%
  Total                                       100.0%            100.0%    100.0%         100.0%
  Source: U.S. Census, 2000 & 2010.
EDUCATION
Educational attainment is often positively correlated with type of employment and level of
income, which drives the type of housing residents are able to afford. As shown in Table 2-7,
8.0 percent of Livermore residents aged 25 years or over had less than a high school diploma,
compared to 14.3 percent in Alameda County. Conversely, over 38 percent of adult residents
earned a Bachelor’s degree or higher in both the city and the county.
      Table 2-7.       Educational Attainment (Population 25 years and over), 2010
                                            City of Livermore               Alameda County
Education Level                        Number              Percent      Number          Percent
Less than high school                    2,901                5.3%       78,323           7.7%
Some high school, no diploma             1,473                2.7%       67,023           6.6%
High school graduate                     9,537               17.4%      204,665          20.0%
Some college, no degree                 13,304               24.3%      195,717          19.1%
Associate's degree                       6,254               11.4%       65,248           6.4%
Bachelor's degree                       15,360               28.0%      246,174          24.1%
Graduate degree                          5,934               10.8%      165,798          16.2%
Total                                   54,763              100.0%     1,022,948        100.0%
Source: ACS 1-year Estimates, 2010
                                                                                                2-5

EMPLOYMENT
ABAG estimates that there are 38,230 employed Livermore residents as of 2010 (Projections
2013). In April 2014, the unemployment rate for Livermore was 3.7 percent, lower than the
County’s unemployment rate of 5.7 percent (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics). Part of the lower
unemployment rate may be attributed to Livermore’s greater percentage of residents with at
least a high school diploma. Also reflecting relatively high educational attainment levels, a
large share of both Livermore and Alameda County residents are employed in the
Professional services and Government sectors. In Livermore, the sector with the highest share
of working residents was the Professional and Scientific and Management sector, employing
approximately 19 percent of residents. Other sectors that employed a significant number of
residents were the Educational, Health, and Social Services Sector, employing 17 percent of
employed residents.
FUTURE JOB GROWTH
ABAG estimates that there were about 38,400 jobs in Livermore in 2010. 2 Table 2-8 shows job
by industry according to ABAG’s Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy. Compared to Alameda
County, Livermore has a larger share of jobs within the Construction, Retail, and
Manufacturing and Wholesale industries.
       Table 2-8.      Jobs by Industry, 2010
                                                     City of Livermore       Alameda County
Industry                                              Jobs      Percent      Jobs       Percent
Agriculture and Natural Resources                       27        0.07%       876        0.13%
Construction                                          5,243      13.66%     31,695       4.56%
Manufacturing and Wholesale                           7,118      18.55%    104,507       15.05%
Retail                                                4,487      11.69%     65,239       9.39%
Transportation, Utilities, and Warehousing            1,322       3.45%     26,025       3.75%
Information                                            327        0.85%     15,271       2.20%
Financial activities                                  1,453       3.79%     28,812       4.15%
Professional services                                 5,024      13.09%    112,214       16.16%
Health and Education                                  3,566       9.29%     95,541       13.76%
Leisure, Hospitality, and Other Services              4,098      10.68%     84,084       12.11%
Government                                            5,708      14.88%    130,163       18.74%
Total                                                38,373     100.00%    694,427      100.00%
Source: ABAG Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy, 2012.
2
  ABAG’s Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy (2012) shows Livermore having 38,373 jobs in 2010, while ABAG
   Projections 2013 shows the figure as 38,450.
2-6

As shown in Table 2-9, ABAG projects the number of jobs in the City of Livermore to increase
at a 1.3 percent annual growth rate between 2010 and 2040, similar to Alameda County.
Based on these projections, it is estimated that Livermore will account for approximately 5.8
percent of the county’s overall job growth from 2010 to 2040. Livermore’s share of countywide
jobs would remain close to 5.5 percent.
    Table 2-9.        Job Projections: City of Livermore and Alameda County
                                     2010           2040          Average Annual growth rate
  Livermore                         38,450         53,210                   1.3%
  Alameda County                   694,460         947,650                  1.2%
  Source: ABAG Projections 2013.
As shown in Table 2-10, the majority of the job growth in the City of Livermore is projected to
take place in the Health and Education, Construction, and Leisure, Hospitality and other
occupational categories. Generally, service-oriented industries will continue to grow rapidly,
while Manufacturing and Agriculture occupations will grow at a slower pace.
    Table 2-10.     Job Projections: City of Livermore, 2010-2040
                                                                        Average Annual Growth
                Industry                     2010           2040              2010 - 2040
  Agriculture and Natural Resources            27            25                  -0.3%
  Construction                               5,243          8,380                 2.0%
  Manufacturing and Wholesale                7,118          7,326                 0.1%
  Retail                                     4,487          5,398                 0.7%
  Transportation, Utilities and
  Warehousing                                1,322          1,935                 1.5%
  Information                                 327            366                  0.4%
  Financial activities                       1,453          1,970                 1.2%
  Professional services                      5,024          6,981                 1.3%
  Health & Education                         3,566          5,967                 2.2%
  Leisure, Hospitality and Other
  Services                                   4,098          6,070                 1.6%
  Government                                 5,708          7,201                 0.9%
  Total                                     38,374         51,619                1.2%
  Source: ABAG Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy, 2012.
Table 2-11 shows that job growth in the County is expected to follow similar trends as those in
Livermore. Agriculture is projected to slightly decrease and the Health and Education,
Construction and Arts, Recreations and other industries show strong growth for Livermore and
the County. Unlike the City, the largest growth in County employment is expected to occur in
the Professional Services sector.
                                                                                              2-7

        Table 2-11. Job Projections: Alameda County, 2010-2040
                                                                            Average Annual
 Industry                                     2010               2040      Growth 2010 - 2040
 Agriculture & Natural Resources              876                803             -0.3%
 Construction                                31,695             52,335            2.2%
 Manufacturing and Wholesale                104,507            107,563            0.1%
 Retail                                      65,239             79,076            0.7%
 Transportation, Utilities and
 Warehousing                                 26,025             38,111            1.5%
 Information                                 15,271             17,750            0.5%
 Financial activities                        28,812             42,725            1.6%
 Professional Services                      112,214            186,490            2.2%
 Health & Education                          95,541            137,945            1.5%
 Leisure, Hospitality and other              84,084            120,619            1.4%
 Government                                 130,182            164,219            0.9%
 Total                                      694,447            947,630           1.2%
 Source: ABAG Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy, 2012.
JOBS-HOUSING BALANCE
Ideally, a community would have enough jobs to meet housing needs. A numeric balance
between jobs and housing (or more accurately employed residents) indicates the potential
for reduced commute distances, which translates to decreased congestion and greenhouse
gas emissions, as well as improved quality of life. According to ABAG, Livermore had a
balanced ratio of 1.01 jobs per employed resident as of 2010. The ratio increases to 1.21 for
Livermore’s subregional service area, which had an estimated 46,650 jobs in 2010. The City’s
ratio is similar to Alameda County’s ratio of 1.04 jobs per employed resident (Table 2-12).
        Table 2-12.     Jobs and Employed Residents, 2010
 Category                                        City of Livermore        Alameda County
 Employed Residents                                    38,230                 669,770
 Jobs                                                  38,450                 694,460
 Ratio                                                  1.26                    1.23
 Note: An ideal job to employed residents ratio would provide 1 job per employed resident, or a
 1:1 ratio.
 Source: ABAG Projections 2013.
Both Alameda County and Livermore have more jobs than employed residents. Although
there were an adequate number of jobs within the city to accommodate employed
residents, many commute to other Bay Area job centers both inside and outside of Alameda
County. This may indicate that jobs available in both geographies do not match employed
residents’ skill levels or preferences.
2-8

2.3       HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
Understanding household characteristics such as type, size, and income levels further helps to
determine the type of housing needed and desired by residents. For example, households
with children typically have less flexibility in their housing needs and require larger units. In
addition, income is a critical characteristic in determining residents’ housing opportunities
and affordability. Income affects a household’s decision when it comes to tenure, type, and
location of housing.
This section outlines how household characteristics impact housing needs.
HOUSEHOLD TYPE
According to the U.S. Census, the City of Livermore had 29,134 households in 2010, an 11.5
percent increase from 2000. As shown in Table 2-13, Livermore has a higher percentage of
family households (73.1 percent), compared to Alameda County (64.6 percent). The majority
of family households in both the City of Livermore and Alameda County were comprised of
married couples, of which Livermore also has a larger percentage. In both the City and
County, singles make up the majority of non-family households.
    Table 2-13.      Household Characteristics: City of Livermore and Alameda County, 2010
                                                            City of Livermore             Alameda County
                                                                       Percent of                  Percent of
  Household Type1                                        Estimate                      Estimate
                                                                          Total                       Total
  Total Family households                                 21,299          73.1%        352,423        64.6%
     Married-couples                                      17,058          80.1%        253,685        72.0%
     Male householder, no wife present                     1,407           6.6%         28,573         8.1%
     Female householder, no husband present                2,834          13.3%         70,165        19.9%
  Total Nonfamily households                               7,835          26.9%        192,715        35.4%
     Singles                                               5,997          76.5%        141,926        73.6%
     Other                                                 1,838          23.5%         50,789        26.4%
  Total Households                                        29,134         100.0%        545,138       100.0%
  Average Household Size                                    2.76                         2.70
  Source: U.S. Census, 2010.
  1Family households consist of a householder and one or more other people living in the same household who
  are related to the householder by birth, marriage, or adoption. Nonfamily households are comprised of a
  group of unrelated people or of one person living alone.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
Table 2-14 shows the median household income for Livermore and the neighboring cities of
Dublin and Pleasanton, as well as Alameda County. According to data from the U.S. Census
and the ACS, the City of Livermore’s median household income was higher than Alameda
County, but lower than Pleasanton and Dublin. Based on information from the State of
California’s Franchise Tax Board in 2012, Alameda County ranked fourth among all counties in
                                                                                                              2-9

California for the highest median income. This indicates that Alameda County’s cities have a
higher median household income than most other locations in California.
       Table 2-14. Median Household Income: 2000 & 2011
                                                                             Percent
                                                        2000     2011        Change
Livermore                                             $101,685  $96,322       -5.3%
Dublin                                                $104,332 $111,481       6.9%
Pleasanton                                            $122,660 $118,713       -3.2%
Alameda County                                         $75,527  $70,821       -6.2%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000; ACS 5-year estimates, 2007-2011.
The State requires jurisdictions to address the housing needs of residents in the following
income categories:
     •   Extremely low-income, defined as annual household incomes of 30 percent or less of
         Area Median Income (AMI)
     •   Very low-income, defined as annual household incomes of 31 to 50 percent or lower
         of AMI
     •   Low-income, defined as annual household incomes 51 to 80 percent of AMI
     •   Moderate-income, defined as annual household incomes 81 to 120 percent of AMI
     •   Above moderate-income, defined as annual household incomes above 120 percent
         of AMI
The income categories listed above help focus federal, state and local housing programs
and subsidies to those people most in need. These income categories, combined with
household size, are used to qualify people seeking subsidized housing options. It is also used to
allocate housing production need to local jurisdictions as part of the housing element update
process to promote balanced communities.
Table 2-15 displays the 2006-2010 Housing and Urban Development (HUD) household income
distribution for the City of Livermore and Alameda County. HUD uses a Comprehensive
Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) to evaluate housing affordability by income group.
Livermore has a higher proportion of above moderate-income households than the county. A
total of 26.6 percent of Livermore households have incomes defined as either low (from 51
percent to 80 percent of AMI) or moderate (from 81 percent to 120 percent of AMI).
Extremely low income households, a subset of very low income, earn 30 percent or less of the
median household income. According to CHAS datasets, as of 2010, approximately 2,515
households had extremely low incomes. Furthermore, Livermore has a lower proportion of
extremely and very low-income households, accounting for approximately 15.9 percent,
compared to 25.8 percent countywide. A greater percent of extremely low (72 percent) and
very low income (52 percent) households are renters, as compared to moderate (33 percent)
and above moderate households (14 percent).
Data on poverty status from the ACS estimates that 6 percent of Livermore residents and 11.8
percent of Alameda County residents had an income below the poverty level between 2007
2-10

and 2011. However, as shown in Table 2-15, the percentage of people below the poverty
level increased between 2006-2010 for both Livermore and the County. As will be discussed
later in this section, very low-income households often have difficulty finding decent and
affordable housing within Livermore and Alameda County.
  Table 2-15. Household Income Distribution by Income Category, 2006 - 2010
       Estimates
                                 HUD          Percentage Households by Approximate Income Threshold
              Percent of       Income                    City of Livermore              Alameda County
                  Area        Threshold
Income          Median        (4-Person                 Number                 Percent Number   Percent
Group           Income       Household)
Extremely                                    Owner        Renter       Total
Low               <30%         $28,050         710         1,805       2,515
                                                                                 15.9% 136,616    25.8%
Very Low         31-50%        $46,750         970         1,045       2,015
Low              51-80%        $67,600        1,655        1,105       2,760     9.7%   73,386    13.9%
Moderate       81%-120%        $93,500        3,225        1,580       4,815     16.9%  93,264    17.6%
Above            120%+        $112,200       14,025        2,310      16,335     57.4% 225,883    42.7%
Total                                        20,585        7,845      28,440    100.0% 529,099   100.0%
Source: CHAS data based off ACS 5-year estimates, 2006-2010; HCD Income Limits, 2014.
 2.4      SPECIAL NEED GROUPS
Special needs groups often find it difficult to find affordable housing that can meet their
unique requirements. For example, persons with physical disabilities often require accessible
ground floor units, and seniors sometimes need on-site care. Homeless persons may need
transitional housing and health services such as drug and alcohol treatment before
placement in more stable, permanent housing. As such the Housing Element is required to
analyze the special needs population and provide policies that assist in meeting their needs.
State Housing Element Law defines “special needs” groups to include the following: senior
households, female-headed households, large families, persons with disabilities, homeless
persons, and agricultural workers. This section describes the housing needs of each of these
groups in the City of Livermore.
                                                                                                     2-11

     Table 2-16.      State-identified Special Needs Groups, Livermore
                                                   City of Livermore                      Alameda County
       Special Needs Groups                   Residents         Households           Residents           Households
  Seniors (65 years and older)                  8,342                5,157             167,746             100,540
  Female Householder                      Not  Applicable1           2,834         Not Applicable          70,165
  Large Households (5+
  person)                                  Not Applicable            3,363         Not Applicable          68,653
                                                                      Not                                     Not
  Disabled                                      6,0192           Applicable            134,360           Applicable
                                                                                                          No Data
  Homeless Persons                                763                 67                5,844             Available
                                                                      Not                                     Not
  Farm Workers                                   1205            Applicable             2,1164           Applicable
  1 “Not Applicable” is listed if data is not reported by the unit heading. For example, persons with disabilities are
  reported by the number of residents that are disabled, not the number of households where a person with a
  disability lives.
  2 The number of disabled residents for the City of Livermore and Alameda County includes the Total Civilian non-
  institutionalized population aged 5 and over
  3 Data   on homeless persons in the City of Livermore and Alameda County was provided by in 2014 from
  Alameda County Community Development Department from the Homeless Management Information System
  (HMIS).
  4 American Community Survey 2007 – 2011 estimate (provided by 2014 ABAG Data Package) of residents
  working in the Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting, and mining occupational sector.
  Source: U.S. Census 2010; ABAG Data Package; ACS 3-year estimates, 2011; Alameda Countywide Homeless
  Count and Survey Report, 2013.
SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS
The special needs of senior households derive from three concerns: seniors generally live on a
fixed income, have higher health care costs, and have higher disability rates. According to
the 2010 Census, 10.3 percent of Livermore residents were seniors, which are defined as 65
years of age or older. The senior population increased by 51.2 percent between 2000 and
2010, reflecting an aging population in Livermore. Of the 29,134 households in the City of
Livermore, 5,157 (17.7 percent) of those were headed by a senior. Of all senior headed
households, 3,832 (74 percent) were owner-occupied and 1,325 (26 percent) were renter
occupied.
Housing expenses coupled with medical care costs can cause a financial burden among
elderly residents, especially for those with incomes below the poverty level. According to the
2000 U.S. Census, approximately 4 percent of Livermore senior residents were living in poverty.
The ACS estimated that this percentage more than doubled to 9.4 percent by the year 2011.
Project design can assist in addressing senior’s special housing needs. Some examples
include:
2-12

     •   Accessibility – A common challenge is the ability to move around (mobility) and
         access basic needs (accessibility) both within homes and the community. The design
         and siting of housing can help address these challenges.
     •   Independence - Senior citizens generally prefer to be autonomous and maintain
         independent living lifestyles, while also being a part of a community and not isolated.
         In order to support this lifestyle choice, seniors need convenient and close access to
         public transportation and destinations such as shopping, health care facilities, social
         services, and activity centers.
     •   Affordability - Senior citizens are often on fixed incomes and require stable housing
         arrangements without the risk of significant increases in rent.
     •   Security - Senior citizens are concerned about physical and psychological security,
         more so than younger age groups.
The City has several programs that assist seniors. The Livermore Area Recreation and Park
District (LARPD) operates a comprehensive Senior Services program that includes both social
services and recreation opportunities such as classes, special programs, daily lunch,
information, referrals, classes and trips. The Meals on Wheels Program delivers hot meals to
seniors with limited mobility, as well as to disabled individuals. Residents also have access to
the Open Heart Kitchen free meal program and Senior Support Program of the Tri-Valley,
which provides services that promote seniors ability to live independently in their homes. The
City also provides funding for legal assistance for seniors.
Livermore has several senior housing complexes providing both market rate and below
market rate units: Arbor Vista, Heritage Park, Heritage Estates, Hillcrest Gardens, Vandenburgh
Villa, and Vineyard Village. Rosewood Gardens is a market rate senior housing complex. In
addition to providing independent senior rental apartments, Heritage Estates also provides
assisted living care.
FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
Generally, female-headed households have lower incomes than male-headed households,
limiting their opportunities for finding affordable and quality housing. Female-headed families
with children are a particularly vulnerable group because they have higher living expenses
associated with childcare and must balance the needs of their children with work
responsibilities. Female-headed households require special consideration and assistance to
accommodate their housing needs. In addition to affordable housing, these needs often
include accessible day care, health care, and other support services.
Based on U.S. Census data provided by ABAG, there were 2,834 female-headed households
in Livermore in 2010, representing approximately 13 percent of all households. In addition,
there were 1,721 female-headed families with children. The 2007-2011 ACS reports that while
4.3 percent of families living in Livermore were below the poverty level, 20.8 percent of
female-headed families with children under 18 lived in poverty.
As described in Chapter 5, the City has a variety of programs that support affordable housing
for very low-income families, which often have a single earner. In addition, the City
encourages the development of housing that provides enriched on-site services such as
affordable childcare and/or youth activities coordination. The City’s Multi-Service Center
provides a central, accessible location for residents to obtain services from the Alameda
                                                                                            2-13

County Social Services Agency, including CalWorks, and Axis Community Health Care Clinic,
which provides subsidized medical services.
LARGE HOUSEHOLDS
Large households are family households with five or more people. Large households are
considered a special needs group because there is typically a limited supply of adequate
and appropriately sized housing that is also affordable.
Table 2-17 shows the distribution of household sizes for both the City of Livermore and
Alameda County. According to the 2010 Census, Livermore had about 3,363 large
households, representing approximately 11.5 percent of all households. Alameda County’s
distribution of household size was very similar with 12.6 percent of all households considered to
be large households.
    Table 2-17.     Household Size, 2010
                                           City of Livermore            Alameda County
                                                      Percent of
  Household                            Number            Total    Number      Percent of Total
  1-2 Person Households                15,329            52.6%     302,867         55.6%
  3-4 Person Households                10,442            35.8%     173,618         31.8%
  5+ Person Household                   3,363            11.5%     68,653          12.6%
  Total Households                     29,134           100.0%    545,138         100.0%
  Source: U.S. Census, 2010.
Based on ACS estimates for 2007-2011, approximately 74.8 percent of Livermore’s total
housing units (both owned and rental) had three or more bedrooms, significantly more than
Alameda County’s portion of large units (Table 2-18). While only 39 percent of the rental stock
in Livermore had 3 or more bedrooms, 88.8 percent of the owned units had 3 or more
bedrooms. Large households made up 10.6 percent of owner occupied units and 13.8
percent of renter-occupied units (2010 Census).
2-14

       Table 2-18. Bedroom Mix by Tenure, 2011
                             City of Livermore                           Alameda County
                                      Total Units                              Total Units
               Owned      Rental          by      Percent   Owned     Rental       by        Percent
 Bedrooms        Units     Units       Bedroom    of Total    Units     Units   Bedroom      of Total
 0-1              317      2,144         2,461     8.6%      11,449    98,167    109,616      20.4%
 2               1,960     2,783         4,743     16.6%     62,299    92,136    154,435      28.8%
 3               8,900     2,250        11,150     39.1%    124,075    40,176    164,251      30.6%
 4+              9,311      887         10,198     35.7%     94,624    13,234    107,858      20.1%
 Total          20,488     8,064        28,552    100.0%    292,447   243,713    536,160     100.0%
 Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2007-2011.
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
There is a broad range of conditions that are considered disabilities, and housing needs can
vary by disability type. Persons with disabilities may have special housing needs for several
reasons, such as living on a fixed income, the lack of housing choices that are both
affordable and accessible, and higher health care costs or limited access to health care.
Many persons with disabilities are still able to live at home independently or with friends or
family members, while others need in-home services or to reside in a special care facility. In
order to maintain an independent lifestyle, a home may need to be modified to increase
accessibility through universal design features. Universal design is also known as “design for
all” and “lifespan design.” The objective is to improve the accessibility of homes not only for
residents of all ages and abilities, but visitors as well.
The six disability types covered by the ACS are defined below:
     •   Hearing Difficulty: Deaf or having serious difficulty hearing (DEAR).
     •   Vision Difficulty: Blind or having serious difficulty seeing, even when wearing glasses
         (DEYE).
     •   Cognitive Difficulty: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional problem, having
         difficulty remembering, concentrating, or making decisions (DREM).
     •   Ambulatory Difficulty: Having serious difficulty walking or climbing stairs (DPHY).
     •   Self-Care Difficulty: Having difficulty bathing or dressing (DDRS).
     •   Independent Living Difficulty: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional problem,
         having difficulty doing errands alone such as visiting a doctor’s office or shopping
         (DOUT).
According to the ACS, 8 percent of Livermore’s population aged 5 and over had a disability
between 2009 and 2011. In Alameda County, 9.6 percent of residents age 5 and over had a
disability.
The ACS estimates that about 5.1 percent of Livermore’s civilian non-institutionalized
population age 18 to 64 had a disability in 2009-11. Of this population, over half were not in
the workforce, while 11 percent were in the workforce but unemployed (Table 2-20).
                                                                                                 2-15

    Table 2-19.      Persons with Disability, Age 18 to 64 by Workforce Participation, 2009-2011
                                            City of Livermore                           Alameda County
                                      Number             Percent of Total         Number          Percent of Total
  Not in Workforce                     1,429                   54.2%               40,516                59.6%
  In Workforce:
  Employed                              915                    34.7%               27,514                31.4%
  In Workforce:
  Unemployed                            292                    11.1%                6,125                 9.0%
  Total                                2,636                   100%                68,030                100%
  Note: Total includes the Civilian Non-institutionalized Population 18 -64 years
  Source: ABAG Data Package, 2014.
While independent living difficulty was the most common disability for City residents, the most
commonly reported disability among Alameda County residents was ambulatory difficulty
(Table 2-20).
    Table 2-20.      Reported Disabilities by Disability Type, Age 18 to 64 , 2009-2011
                                                  City of Livermore                       Alameda County
                                                               Percent of                          Percent of
  Disability Type                       Number              disabilities tallied    Number      disabilities tallied
  Hearing difficulty                       677                    15.1%              12,071            9.7%
  Vision difficulty                        289                     6.4%              11,342            9.1%
  Cognitive difficulty                    1,050                   23.4%              28,385          22.8%
  Ambulatory difficulty                    951                    21.2%              33,438          26.9%
  Self-care difficulty                     387                     8.6%              13,464          10.8%
  Independent living                                              25.2%                              20.7%
  difficulty                              1,127                                      25,784
  Total Disabilities Tallied              4,481                  100.0%             124,484          100.0%
  Source: ABAG data package, 2014.
As shown in Table 2-21, 39 licensed community care facilities are located in the City of
Livermore. These facilities provide a supportive environment to persons with special needs in a
group situation. Most of the facilities are residential, allowing full-time residency. Livermore
also has two adult day care programs, including GARDEN Tri-Valley run by Futures Explored,
Inc. and an Intellectual Disability (ID) Outpatient program run by Anka Behavioral Health, Inc.
at the Amador Tri-Valley Center. The GARDEN program provides educational opportunities
and activities to adults with cognitive and physical disabilities, while the ID Outpatient
program provides a mix of pre-vocational and vocational training, as well as counseling.
Of the 424 units, 108 are affordable to lower income households. The Heritage Estates Assisted
Living facility has 102 below market rate units, while REACH’s Lily House provides a subsidized
group home environment (with in-home care coordinator) for six developmentally disabled
individuals.
2-16

Bay Area Community Services (BACS) also provides adult day center services for persons with
mental health disabilities. While the center is located in Pleasanton, it supports residents of
their housing units in Livermore. Their services are free of charge to participants.
      Table 2-21. City of Livermore Licensed Community Care Facilities, 2014
Type of Facility                                  Number of Facilities                         Combined Capacity
Group Homes                                                    2                                            28
Adult Day Care                                                 2                                            20
Elderly Residential                                          37                                            376
Total                                                        39                                           424
Source: CA Department of Social Services, Community Care Licensing Division, July 2014.
In addition, the city has five affordable housing developments and shared housing projects
built specifically for developmentally disabled adults: Lily House (6 units), Corte Cava (2 units),
Creekside (2 units), Locomotive (2 units) and Arroyo Commons Apartments (12 units). It also
has three housing projects specifically for individuals with mental health related disabilities:
McLeod Apartments (5 units), Dogwood House (3 units), and Kennedy House (6 units). These
housing units are supported by independent living services agencies, including East Bay
Innovations, BACS, and Tri-Valley REACH.
Developmental Disabilities
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a “developmental disability”
means a disability that originates before an individual reaches 18 years of age, continues or
can be expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that
individual. The term generally includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and
autism. It shall also include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental
retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental
retardation, but shall not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in
nature.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The Regional Center of the East Bay (RCEB) provides point of
entry to services for people residing in Alameda and Contra Costa Counties. RCEB is a
private, non-profit agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of
services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. RCEB served
approximately 488 people in the Livermore area in 2014. 3 Of these, 315 (65 percent) are
under 23 years of age, 149 (30 percent) are between the ages 23 and 54, and the remaining
24 (5 percent) are ages 55 and above.
3
  RCEB provides information for the 94551 and 94550 zip codes, which include area outside of the City of Livermore.
                                                                                                                    2-17

Regarding housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities, many can live and work
independently within a conventional housing environment. Individuals with more severe
developmental disabilities require a group living environment that provides supervision. The
most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment that also provides
medical attention and physical therapy. Because developmental disabilities exist before
adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the persons with developmental disabilities is
transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence
as an adult.
Therefore, housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability include:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes.
The design of housing-accessibility modifications, proximity to services and transit, and
availability of group living opportunities represent the types of considerations important in
serving this need group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all new multifamily housing (as
required by California and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the
widest range of choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to
affordability of housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
HOMELESS PERSONS
In January 2013, a community-based organization called EveryOne Home conducted a
Point-in-Time Homeless Count and Survey for Alameda County. Based on their findings, 4,264
people in Alameda County are homeless at any given point in time and 931 people in
Alameda County meet HUD’s definition of chronic homelessness 4 at the time of the count.
Since the survey was conducted at a single point in time, the report must assume the number
of homeless persons counted is representative of the typical number of homeless persons
living within the County. Many factors may affect the total count, including weather, time of
year, and time of day. Although the total number of homeless individuals slightly increased
from 2011 by 2.1 percent, the number of people identified as chronic homeless decreased by
17 percent.
The 2013 EveryOne Home survey report found the following demographic distribution of the
community-defined homeless population in Alameda County 5:
      •    Families. 32 percent were in a family with children.
      •    Gender. About 84 percent of the county-wide homeless population was male,
           compared to 13 percent female. The remaining three percent either identified as
           transgendered or declined to state their gender.
4
  The HUD definition of chronically homeless includes only single adults with a disability, who have been continuously homeless for a year
or more, or has had at least four episodes of homelessness in the past three years.
5
  The community definition of homelessness includes people staying in emergency shelters or transitional housing, living on the street or in a
car, and people who will lose their housing within a month and have nowhere to go.
2-18

    •   Race and ethnicity. Blacks/African Americans, American Indians, and Alaska Natives
        were over-represented when compared to Alameda County’s population as a whole.
    •   Seniors. Alameda County had 168 homeless people aged 61 or older (10 percent of
        the total). About 48 percent were between the ages 41 and 60, implying that the
        percentage of homeless people aged 61 and older could grow as the population
        ages.
    •   Special Needs. The report stated that 26 percent of the homeless population in
        Alameda County had severe mental illness and 30 percent suffered from Chronic
        Substance Abuse.
    •   Living situation. About 45 percent of the homeless population was sheltered in
        transitional housing or emergency shelters, while the remaining people were
        unsheltered.
This report did not provide any information on the homeless population specifically in
Livermore. Based upon data from the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS),
Alameda County estimates a homeless population of 60 to 80 people in the City of Livermore.
However, only one of the four agencies that provide direct services to persons experiencing
homelessness in Livermore submits information to HMIS database. Based on feedback from
these agencies, there are significantly more persons who experience homeless in the City at
any one time. For example, the Street Homeless Outreach Team outreached to over 200
people and provided case management to 73 persons during the last half of 2014. Sojourner
House, the Tri-Valley Haven’s homeless shelter, served 97 persons in Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
EXISTING FACILITIES
Table 2-22 provides a list of the homeless facilities and services in Livermore. There are three
types of facilities that provide shelter for homeless individuals and families:
    •   Emergency (Temporary) Shelter: provides overnight shelter and meets a person’s
        basic needs, either on-site or through off-site services. The length of stay varies with the
        shelter and can range from one day to several months.
    •   Transitional Housing: provides housing for up to two years. The residents at these
        shelters are typically connected to a rehabilitation program, including substance
        abuse and mental health interventions, employment services, individual and group
        counseling, and life skills training.
    •   Permanent (Supportive) Housing: provides permanent housing that is affordable,
        linked with on-going supportive services, and gives formerly homeless residents the
        opportunity to live in the facility on an indefinite basis.
In addition to the services listed in the table below, the City of Livermore participates in the
Adobe Services Tri-Valley Housing Scholarship Program, which provides limited temporary
rental assistance to persons who currently reside, work, or attend school in Livermore and are
homeless or at risk of becoming homeless.
Although Livermore has several facilities to help meet the identified need for shelter, there is
always demand for additional beds according to shelter employees. For example, the
Shepherd’s Gate Homeless Shelter has an extensive waitlist for its 70 beds. While many shelters
target families and women with children, the Livermore Homeless Refuge has an established
                                                                                                2-19

winter shelter program that serves single males. The Refuge operates through local churches,
which provide space on a rotating basis, and serves at least 30 homeless people each night
they are open. Furthermore, the City has included Programs 3.3.3 (Rental Assistance) and
3.3.4 (Homelessness Prevention) to address homelessness in Livermore. While continuing to
support existing emergency (temporary) shelters, the City is focused on long-term solutions to
homelessness and placing more individuals in permanent housing.
There are many groups working to address homelessness in Livermore. In April 2014, the City
convened the Mayor’s Summit on Homelessness. The event brought together over 200
stakeholders including, elected officials, non-profit organizations, the faith community,
persons experiencing homelessness, and other interested community members to examine
ways to reduce and prevent persons from experiencing homelessness in the Tri-Valley region.
The City is organizing smaller stakeholder groups to create a survey to determine the actual
number of homeless in Livermore and use that information to determine potential
programmatic solutions to the issue.
Also in 2014, the City established a Homeless Street Outreach (HSO) Team, which includes a
social worker and peer counselor. The purpose of the team is to engage homeless individuals,
connect them with resources, and ultimately help them acquire housing. The HSO Team also
receives referrals from and collaborates with Police, Neighborhood Preservation, Public Works,
and other local agencies. After contact has been made, the HSO Team provides a report to
the referring agency that includes a description of the interaction and future follow-up.
    Table 2-22.   Homeless Facilities and Services in Livermore, 2014
       Facility Name      Beds           Clients                              Type
                                          Families (including single fathers
 Tri-Valley Haven/
                                         with children or families with teen-    Emergency Shelter
 Sojourner House
                                16                    age boys)
 Tri-Valley Haven/Shiloh
 House/Domestic                                 Women and children               Emergency Shelter
 Violence Shelter               30
 Shepherd's Gate                70              Women and children               Emergency Shelter
                                            Homeless families, survivors of
 Carmen Avenue                               domestic violence, very low
                                                                                Supportive Housing
 Apartments                                 income, emancipated foster
                                30            youth and disabled adults.
 Bluebell Apartments             9                        All                   Transitional Housing
 Tri-Valley Haven Food         Not
                                                          All                       Food Pantry
 Pantry                    Applicable
                               Not
 Open Heart Kitchen                                       All                      Soup Kitchen
                           Applicable
                              30-50
 Livermore Homeless                                                              Emergency Shelter
                           depending            Chronically homeless
 Refuge                                                                              (seasonal)
                             on site
                                10                                             Permanent supportive
 AC Impact                                      Chronically homeless
                           permanent                                                   housing
2-20

    Table 2-22.      Homeless Facilities and Services in Livermore, 2014
         Facility Name         Beds           Clients                           Type
                                   housing
                                  vouchers
  Homeless Outreach                  Not
                                                     Chronically homeless           Support services
  Team                           applicable
                                Varies upon
  Project Independence                             Emancipated Foster Youth        Supportive housing
                                   funding
                                Varies upon       Families at risk of becoming
  Homeless Prevention                                                                Rental housing
                                   funding                  homeless
  Sources:http://www.sahahomes.org/properties/carmen-avenue-apartments
  http://www.trivalleyhaven.org/index.html
  http://www.shepherdsgate.org/Campus-Locations
  http://www.openheartkitchen.org/
  http://www.livermorehousingauthority.com/pb/wp_795d8d7a/wp_795d8d7a.html
FARM LABOR
Though Livermore is no longer the small agricultural town it once was, farming – particularly
viticulture – is still a part of Livermore’s economy and identity. However, it is difficult to
estimate the extent of the farm labor population in the city as government agencies do not
consistently define farm labor, length of employment, or place of work. Nevertheless, farm
workers are considered by the State of California to have special housing needs due to their
limited income, the seasonality of housing needs, and an increased likelihood of
overcrowding and substandard housing conditions.
The ACS identified 120 Livermore residents employed in the Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and
hunting and Mining occupational sector (2007-2011). ABAG estimates there were 27
agriculture jobs in Livermore in 2010. It is likely that the city’s existing affordable housing stock
can fulfill the housing needs of this small number of permanent farm workers.
The City of Livermore’s Development Code provides standards to allow farm worker housing.
It allows for a caretaker’s residence (conditional use permit required) within the Planned
Development/Agriculture District (PD-AG) or within the South Livermore Valley Agricultural
Zone (SLV-AG). The code defines a caretaker’s residence as a temporary dwelling for people
and their families employed in the agricultural use of the property. The size of this residence
type is restricted to 1,200 square feet in the SLV-AG. Farm labor housing is also permitted with
conditional use permit approval within two Open Space Districts: Agricultural and Rural
Preservation (OS-A and OS-R).
2.5       HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
Ideally, a city’s housing stock should align with the needs of its population, provide both small
and large units in a variety of forms, and offer housing affordable to its workforce and special
needs populations. Market realities often result in housing supply outcomes that do not meet
the needs of all members of the local population. This section describes housing stock
characteristics in Livermore and Alameda County.
                                                                                                    2-21

HOUSING STOCK
As shown in Table 2-23, the City of Livermore has a significantly greater share of single-family
detached houses compared to Alameda County (70.8 percent v. 53.2 percent). Conversely,
multi-family units make up 19 percent of Livermore’s stock in and 37.8 percent of Alameda
County’s stock.
    Table 2-23.        Housing Stock, 2010
                                         City of Livermore                    Alameda County
                                     Units        Percent of Total      Units         Percent of Total
Single Family:
   Detached                         21,490             70.8%          309,306              53.2%
   Attached                          2,555              8.4%           44,280              7.6%
Single Family Total                 24,045             79.2%          353,586             60.8%
Multifamily:
   2-4 Units                         1,466              4.8%           65,326              11.2%
   5+ Units                          4,291             14.1%          154,629              26.6%
Multifamily Total                    5,757             19.0%          219,955             37.8%
Mobile Homes                          540              1.8%            7,831               1.3%
Total                               30,342            100.0%          581,372             100.0%
Vacancy     Rate2                              4.0%                                 6.4%
Source: Department of Finance, 2010. Estimates include owner-occupied supply and renter occupied
     supply.
Housing Type Definitions:
Single Family Detached - 1-unit structure detached from any other house, with open space on all four sides.
Single Family Attached - 1-unit structure that has one or more walls extending from ground to roof
     separating it from adjoining structures.
Multifamily - structures containing 2 or more housing units.
Mobile homes – a dwelling that sits on wheels and may be moved.
TENURE AND OCCUPANCY
As shown in Table 2-24, the percentage of both occupied housing units and owner-occupied
units is greater in Livermore than in Alameda County. Conversely, the proportion of renter-
occupied housing units is greater in Alameda County (43.6 percent) than Livermore (28.8
percent).
HOUSING GROWTH
According to the Department of Finance (DOF), approximately 41,841 new housing units
were built in Alameda County from 2000 to 2010. Approximately 28.1 percent of these units
(131,774 units) were built in the Tri-Valley Region, defined as the cities of Livermore, Dublin,
and Pleasanton. Of these units, 3,792 were built in Livermore, averaging 379 new homes per
year and accounting for approximately 9.1 percent of total housing production in the county
between 2000 and 2010. A higher proportion of single-family units were built in Livermore than
in the county overall (68.3 percent v. 57.1 percent). Table 2-25 compares housing estimates
for the City of Livermore, the Tri-Valley Region, and Alameda County.
2-22

       Table 2-24. Tenure and Vacancy, 2010
                                                  City of Livermore                     Alameda County
Housing Units                                Estimate             Percent           Estimate           Percent
Owner-occupied housing units                   20,399               67.2%           291,242              50.0%
Renter-occupied housing units                   8,735               28.8%           253,896              43.6%
Occupied housing units                         29,134               96.0%           545,138              93.6%
Vacant housing units                            1,208                4.0%            37,411               6.4%
Total housing units                            30,342              100.0%           582,549             100.0%
Source: U.S. Census, 2010.
       Table 2-25. Estimated Housing Growth, 2000-2010
                           City of Livermore                   Tri-Valley Region1                 Alameda County
                                          Average                              Average                         Average
                     New                   Annual        New                    Annual       New                Annual
                     Units     Percent     Growth        Units       Percent   Growth        Units    Percent  Growth
Single Family2       2,591       68.3%       1.1%       6,966          59.2%     1.4%       24,227     57.1%     0.7%
Multifamily          1,091       28.8%       2.1%        4724          40.1%     3.2%       16781      40.9%     0.8%
Mobile Homes          110         2.9%       2.3%         84           0.7%      0.9%        833        2.0%     1.1%
Total                3,792      100.0%       1.3%       11,774        100.0%     1.8%       41,841    100.0%     0.7%
Percent of
County                           9.1%                                 28.1%                           100.0%
1    Defined in this housing element as the cities of Dublin, Pleasanton, and Livermore.
2    Single family includes both detached and attached units.
Source: Department of Finance, 2000 & 2010.
HOUSING AGE
The age of a housing unit can be an indicator of its condition. As units age, they require
maintenance and modernization. Without it, homes will deteriorate and can negatively
impact the values of surrounding properties. A general rule of thumb is that houses older than
30 years begin to show signs of deterioration and require reinvestment to maintain the quality,
while homes older than 50 years tend to require major renovations.
As of 2011, approximately 57.1 percent of the housing stock in Livermore was built before 1980
(and now at least 34 years of age). Alameda County’s housing stock is older than Livermore’s,
with approximately 74 percent of its housing stock built before 1980 (see Table 2-26 below).
                                                                                                                   2-23

  Table 2-26.        Housing Units by Tenure and Age, 2011
                                           City of Livermore                 Alameda County
                                     Number               Percent       Number         Percent
Built 2005 or later                     855                 2.9%         15,532         2.7%
Built 2000 to 2004                     2,766                9.2%         25,411         4.4%
Built 1990 to 1999                     5,255                17.6%        47,084         8.1%
Built 1980 to 1989                     3,964                13.3%        63,564         10.9%
Built 1970 to 1979                     6,064                20.3%        93,339         16.1%
Built 1960 to 1969                     6,665                22.3%        81,741         14.1%
Built 1950 to 1959                     2,837                9.5%         81,040         14.0%
Built 1940 to 1949                      581                 1.9%         50,518         8.7%
Built 1939 or earlier                   920                 3.1%        122,496         21.1%
Total                                 29,907               100.0%       580,725        100.0%
Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2011.
Figure 2-1 below provides an historical look at the percentage of housing units construction in
both Livermore and the Alameda County. The data indicates Livermore’s residential has
outpaced that of the County.
Figure 2-1      Percent Housing Units by Year Built
 50.00%
 45.00%
 40.00%
 35.00%
 30.00%
 25.00%
 20.00%
 15.00%
 10.00%
  5.00%
  0.00%
                  2000s             1990s             1980s       1970s         1960s      < 1960
                                            City of Livermore      Alameda County
Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2011.
2-24

HOUSING IN NEED OF REPAIR/REPLACEMENT
The overall number of substandard residential units in need of either rehabilitation or
replacement is approximately 350 to 400. This is based on the number of complaints to the
City’s Neighborhood Preservation Division, who responds to complaints regarding
substandard building and development code violations. They estimate that they receive
approximately 200 complaint calls per year related to substandard or dilapidated housing
and estimate approximately 150 to 200 unreported cases per year. They also work to identify
existing housing problems related to blight, abandoned properties, and tenant/landlord
issues.
2.6       HOUSING COSTS AND AFFORDABILITY
The cost of housing relative to the income of residents indicates the affordability of housing in
a community. For example, if housing costs are high compared to the median household
income, families with lower income levels may find it difficult to afford housing. Overcrowding
or longer commutes may result. Setting the stage to provide housing choice for all segments
of the community is an important of the Housing Element.
HOME SALES TRENDS
As shown in Table 2-27, the median price for homes sold within Livermore in June and July
2014 was $622,000. The median price ranged from $436,000 for houses with two bedrooms to
$902,500 for houses with five bedrooms.
      Table 2-27. City of Livermore Home Sale Prices, June-July 2014
                                              Median                     Average
                                  Median                  Average
  Bedrooms            Sales                    Price /                    Price /        Price Range
                                   Price                     Price
                                                  SF                         SF
  Homes
  2                     16       $436,000       $379      $430,781,        $398    $599,000    to  $183,500
  3                     86       $590,500       $394       $576,610        $381   $1,030,000   to  $115,500
  4                     64       $684,500       $353       $705,252        $391   $1,550,000   to   $62,000
  5+                    18       $902,500       $322       $967,167        $318   $1,390,000   to  $600,000
  Homes Total          184       $622,000       $369       $646,881        $380   $1,550,000    to $62,000
  Condominiums
  1                      3       $260,000       $375       $195,500        $298    $274,000    to   $52,500
  2                     11       $400,000       $345       $385,136        $335    $485,000    to  $183,500
  3                     14       $481,500       $318       $492,036        $335    $675,000    to  $337,000
  Condos Total          28       $447,500       $338       $418,268        $331    $675,000     to $52,500
  Source: Zillow: Recently sold houses, condos/co-ops, June & July 2014.
                                                                                                         2-25

       Table 2-28.       Tri-Valley Region Home Prices: Livermore, Dublin, and Pleasanton June-
                                         July 2008
                                    Median                      Average
  Bedrooms              Sales         Price       Price/SF        Price      Price/SF             Price Range
  Homes
  1                        2        $253,250        $385        $253,250       $385          $321,500     to   $185,000
  2                       16        $400,000        $361        $407,344       $355          $555,000     to   $275,000
  3                      107        $520,000        $342        $565,215       $354        $1,127,000     to   $255,000
  4                      103        $720,000        $313        $734,757       $326        $1,725,000     to   $360,000
  5+                      41        $900,000        $292       $1,013,341      $305        $2,231,000     to   $500,000
  Homes Total            269        $622,500        $329        $691,448       $336        $2,231,000     to   $185,000
  Condominiums
  1                        3        $320,000        $360        $335,833       $363          $427,500     to   $260,000
  2                       36        $400,000        $310        $390,181       $324          $445,500     to   $254,000
  3+                      25        $445,000        $298        $422,580       $295          $530,000     to   $319,000
  Condos Total            64        $400,000        $304        $396,291       $314          $530,000     to   $254,000
  Source: Zillow 2014
Due to the economic downturn, national housing market trends significantly declined
between 2007 and 2008. Between 2008 and 2013, home prices in Livermore and the Tri-Valley
Region increased at an average annual growth rate of 0.3 and 1.3 percent, respectively, not
accounting for inflation (Table 2-29). This increase was significantly less than inflation (8.8
percent) for that same period. Between 2013 and 2014, prices have increased at higher rates
in both Livermore and the Tri-Valley, at 19 percent and 15 percent respectively. As home
prices have continued to rise, most of the homes in Livermore remain affordable to above
moderate income households.
       Table 2-29.      Home Sale Prices, City of Livermore, 2008, 2013, 2014
                               City of Livermore                                       Tri-Valley Region
Year      Median             Avg          Price      Avg Annual         Median         Avg         Price     Avg Annual
            Price         Annual           per         Growth in         Price       Annual         per       Growth in
                         Growth in        Sq. ft.    Price per Sq.                 Growth in      Sq. ft.   Price per Sq.
                        Price (2008                ft. (2008 - 2013               Price (2008                 Ft. (2008 -
                         – 2013 or                     or 2014) 1                   – 2013 or               2013 or 2014)
                           2014)1                                                    2014) 1                        1
2008       $513,000                         $302                        $530,000                    $326
2013       $522,000             0.3%        $324                1.4%    $565,500           1.3%     $339               0.8%
2014       $622,000              19%        $358               10.5%    $652,000          15.3%     $379              11.8%
1 The rate of inflation was 8.8% from 2008 – 2013 and 2.9% from 2013 – 2014.
Source: Zillow.com, 2014; Usinflation.org, 2014.
2-26

Housing prices decreased dramatically during the economic downtown; however, this did
not result in home ownership among low- and moderate-income households. Stricter
underwriting standards contributed to barriers to homeownership for those without a
substantial down payment and good credit history. As housing prices have begun to climb,
many homes remain unattainable to low- and moderate-income households.
FORECLOSURES
As of September 15, 2014, there are 67 homes in Livermore facing a stage of foreclosure.
These foreclosures account for approximately 0.2 percent of the overall Livermore housing
stock and 3.7 percent of all properties in Alameda County facing foreclosure (Table 2-30). The
foreclosure rate in Livermore is considered to be low.
       Table 2-30. Livermore Homes Currently Facing Foreclosure, 2014
 Zip         Notice of     Percentage of                      Percentage of       Bank    Percentage of
 Code         Default      Alameda Total         Auction      Alameda Total     Owned     Alameda Total
 94550           15            0.84%                 9            0.50%             9          0.50%
 94551           18            1.01%                 9            0.50%             7          0.39%
 Total           33            1.85%                18            1.01%            16          0.90%
 Source: Trulia.com, 2014.
RENTAL HOUSING COSTS
Rental housing in the City of Livermore is more affordable compared to Alameda County
overall. During the second quarter of 2014, the average rent per square foot within Livermore
was $1.67, compared to $2.16 for Alameda County (Table 2-31). However, while Livermore
has lower rents for 1- and 2-bedroom units compared to the county average, it has higher
rents for 3- and 4-bedroom units
       Table 2-31. Average Rental Price, First Quarter 2014
                                        City of Livermore                      Alameda County
 Bedrooms                          Price             Rent per Sq ft         Price       Rent per Sq ft
 Studio                              --                    --              $1,217          $3.01
 1 Bedroom                        $1,230                $1.76              $1,547          $2.32
 2 Bedroom                        $1,467                $1.76              $1,853          $1.99
 3 Bedroom                        $2,200                $1.68              $2,233          $1.67
 4 Bedroom                        $2,725                $1.38              $2,583          $1.82
 Average                          $1,830                $1.67              $1,887          $2.16
 Source: Zillow.com, 2014.
Similarly, a review of apartments advertised on Craigslist.com and Zillow.com shows that the
monthly rent of apartments currently on the market ranges from about $900 to about $2,400
depending on the unit size (Table 2-32).
                                                                                                       2-27
       Table 2-32. Rental Price Range for Livermore Apartments, September 2014
                                                                  Price Range
 Bedrooms                                           Min                        Max
 Studio                                            $900                        $995
 1                                                $1,099                      $1,617
 2                                                $1,097                      $2,290
 3                                                $1,750                      $2,400
 Sources: Zilow.com, September 2014; craigslist.org, September 2014;
As shown in Figure 2-2, rents have increased in Livermore since the first quarter of 2012 at an
average annual growth rate of 20.6 percent, a slightly slower pace than Alameda County
overall (23.3 percent). The increase in rental prices in Livermore has exceeded the rate of
inflation (4.6 percent) and is likely a result of the recent decline of the for-sale housing market
and tightening of credit available to homebuyers; households who might have otherwise
bought or owned a home are finding themselves renting instead. Also, households that
experienced foreclosure have reentered the rental housing market, increasing rental
demand.
    Figure 2-2      Average Rent, 2012 - 2014
  2200
  2100
  2000
  1900
  1800
  1700
  1600
  1500
  1400
                                  City of Livermore            Alameda County
Source: Zillow.com, 2014.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
A community’s housing affordability is measured by evaluating market rate prices for homes
compared to the ability of residents to afford these market rates. For purposes of the Housing
Element, a home is considered affordable if it is suitably sized and costs the household 30
percent or less of its gross monthly income. Households that pay more than 30 percent of their
income towards housing (including either rent or mortgage and utilities) are considered to be
2-28

“cost burdened”. Housing that is not suitably sized can result in overcrowding, which occurs
when a household has more than one person per room. 6
Clearly, housing affordability varies by income group with extremely low-income households
having greater challenges in accessing housing that is affordable at their incomes compared
to above moderate-income households who are able to spend significantly more on housing.
Accordingly, the following analysis evaluates housing affordability by income group (i.e.
extremely low-, very low-, low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income groups). The U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) determines the income groups, which
are then adopted by the California Housing and Community Development Department
(HCD). 7
It is important to note that this analysis of housing affordability does not take into account the
costs of home maintenance. Since landlords of rental housing typically pay for maintenance
costs, which can be considerable, homeownership is inherently more expensive than rental
housing. The discussion also does not take into account the second highest household
expense (transportation), the cost of which is strongly influenced by housing location and
context (e.g., availability of transit, parking prices, etc.).
Table 2-33 shows the maximum amount that a household can pay for housing each month
without exceeding the 30 percent threshold and without overcrowding. As noted in the table
below, the income figures are based on the 2014 HCD area median income (AMI) figure for
Alameda County of $93,500 for a family of four, and calculation of affordable home sales
prices are based on an annual interest rate of 4.5 percent for a mortgage.
Comparing this table to the housing cost information described in the previous section,
reveals that extremely low- and very low-income households in Livermore cannot afford
market rental or owner-occupied housing. Based on prevailing rents, some low-income
households could generally afford market rate rental units. Although Livermore is more
affordable than the Tri-Valley as a whole, only above moderate-income households can
afford the typical median price for a home in Livermore. In addition, the ability of very low-,
low- and moderate-income households to secure home financing has become increasingly
difficult in the current financial climate. Households with poor credit histories or unsteady
employment will struggle to secure home financing, regardless of whether they can afford to
make payments on the home.
The following sections describe in more detail housing affordability by income group.
6
  Rooms include living rooms, dining rooms, bedrooms, study, and other rooms, but does not include kitchens, hallways, or bathrooms.
7
  HCD and HUD apply the 30 percent of gross income standard to set affordable rents for income-restricted units.
                                                                                                                                     2-29

       Table 2-33. Livermore Affordable For-Sale Prices, Rental Rates and Maximum Income
           Limits, 2014
  For-Sale Housing
                              Very Low- Income         Low- Income          Median- Income           Moderate- Income
                                (31-50%AMI)             (51-80%AMI)            (100%AMI)               (81-120%AMI)
House-       Number                       Max                    Max                  Max                          Max
hold         of Bed-          Max       Purchase     Max      Purchase    Max       Purchase         Max        Purchase
Size          rooms        Income         Price    Income        Price  Income        Price        Income          Price
  1         Studio          $32,750      $59,531   $47,350     $120,991 $65,500     $197,396       $78,550       $252,331
  2         One             $37,400      $79,105   $54,100     $149,406 $74,800     $236,545       $89,750       $299,479
  3         Two             $42,100      $98,891   $60,850     $177,821 $84,200     $276,115      $101,000       $346,837
  4         Three           $46,750     $118,465   $67,600     $206,236 $93,500     $315,265      $112,200       $393,984
  5         Four            $50,500     $134,521   $73,050     $229.178 $101,000    $346,837      $121,200       $431,871
Rental Housing
                               Extremely Low-        Very Low- Income      Lower- Income                Low- Income
                             Income (<30%AMI)          (31-50%AMI)            (60%AMI)                 (51-80%AMI)
            Number                        Max                    Max      Max         Max            Max           Max
House-      of Bed-           Max       Purchase     Max      Purchase  Income      Purchase      Income        Purchase
hold Size   rooms          Income         Price    Income        Price                Price                        Price
  1         Studio          $19,650       $491     $32,750       $819   $39,300       $983        $47,350         $1,184
1.5*        One             $21,050       $526     $35,075       $877   $42,090      $1,052       $50,725         $1,268
  2         One             $22,450       $561     $37,400       $935   $44,880      $1,122       $54,100         $1,353
  3         Two             $25,250       $631     $42,100      $1,053  $50,520      $1,263       $60,850         $1,521
  4         Three           $28,050       $701     $46,750      $1,169  $56,100      $1,403       $67,600         $1,690
  5         Four            $30,300       $758     $50,500      $1,263  $60,600      $1,515       $73,050         1,826$
Source: City of Livermore 2014
Notations:
AMI = Area Median Income for Alameda County
(*) Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) Household size
Income data source is the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for Alameda County.
               HCD establishes income limits based on those published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
               Development for the Section 8 Program for Alameda County, (Oakland-Fremont Metro Region).
The 2014 HCD median income for a 4-person Household is $93,500.
Sales prices assume a 4.5% interest rate, 30-year mortgage, and housing payments (PITI) which do not exceed 30% of the
               household's monthly income.
Rental affordability is based on 30% of the household's monthly income and does not include tenant utility allowances.
               Utility allowances should be deducted from the maximum rents based on the Livermore Housing Authority's
               utility allowance schedule for the Section 8 Program.
   2-30
Extremely Low-Income Households
Extremely low-income households in the City of Livermore have incomes that are 30 percent
or less of the Area Median Income (AMI). The maximum affordable home rental price for an
extremely low-income household ranges from $491 for a one-person household to $758 for a
five-person household (Table 2-33). With lower end studios renting for $900/month, market
rents exceed the affordable housing payment for an extremely low-income household. In
practical terms, this means that a one-person household cannot afford an average priced
studio or 1-bedroom unit without assuming a cost burden. The problem is exacerbated for
larger extremely low-income households.
Very Low-Income Households
Very low-income households in the City earn between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI. The
maximum qualifying home price for a very low-income household ranges from $59,531 for a
one-person household to $134,251 for a five-person household (Table 2-33). With home
median home sale prices starting at $235,250 for a one bedroom homes, market rate homes
in Livermore are not attainable for most very low-income households.
A very low-income household can afford to pay $819 to $1,263 in rent per month, depending
on the household size. With the average rents in Livermore starting at $1,230 for a 1-bedroom
unit, a very low-income household cannot afford to pay the average rental price without
facing overcrowding or cost burden issues. Rental prices for one-bedrooms in Livermore
currently range from about $1,099 to $1,617, indicating that a 2-person, very low-income
household earns less than the amount necessary to afford a typical lower-priced 1-bedroom
in Livermore. In practical terms, this means that very low-income households cannot afford an
average market rate rental without assuming a cost burden.
Low-Income Households
Low-income households earn between 51 and 80 percent of the AMI. The maximum
qualifying home price for a low-income household ranges from $120,991 for a 1-person
household to $229,178 for a five-person household (Table 2-33). Compared to the median
selling price of homes in Livermore, low-income households cannot afford homeownership in
the city, regardless of household size.
A low-income household can afford to pay $1,184 to $1,826 in rent per month, depending on
the household size. With the average rents in Livermore ranging from $1,230 for a 1-bedroom
to $2,725 for a 4- bedroom unit, some low-income households can afford to pay the average
rental price in Livermore, depending on household size. Larger, low-income households could
not afford market rate rentals, as 3- and 4-bedroom units, as well as some 2-bedroom units,
based on the prevailing rents.
Moderate-Income Households
Moderate-income households earn between 81 and 120 percent of the AMI. The maximum
qualifying home price for a moderate-income household ranges from $252,331 for a one-
person household to $431,871 for a five-person household (Table 2-33). Based on the median
housing prices in Livermore, moderate-income households cannot afford to purchase a home
in Livermore without a sizeable down payment. To assist households just out of reach from
homeownership, the City of Livermore offers a down payment assistance program for first-
time homebuyers. This program offers a loan of up to $15,000 at 2.5 percent interest for first-
                                                                                          2-31
time homebuyers making a 1-bedroom home affordable to a family of two and a 2-bedroom
home affordable to a family of three.
COST BURDEN
HUD uses a Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) to evaluate housing cost
burden. According to CHAS data for 2006-2010, renters in the City of Livermore were more
cost burdened than owners, with 48 percent of all renter households and 40 percent of all
owner households paying more than 30 percent of their income on housing.
Table 2-34 shows cost burden by income group and tenure. Lower-income renter households
(those earning less than 50% of the area median family income, or AMFI) are more likely to be
cost burdened, with approximately 31 percent of very low income renters cost burdened
compared to only 6.4 percent of low income home owners.
Large families (5 or more related individuals) and elderly households tend to experience
greater cost burden for housing. Elderly residents on fixed incomes sometimes overpay for
housing, and rental increases are particularly difficult for this group. For large families to avoid
overcrowding, owning or renting a large home is required, which costs more and is more likely
to stretch the household budget for housing. Conversely, for families to avoid being cost-
burdened, they may increase the number of people living in the housing unit, causing
overcrowding. The prevalence of overcrowding in Livermore is discussed in the following
section.
2-32
  Table 2-34.      Cost Burden by Income Classification and Tenure for Livermore, 2010
                                       Renters                         Owners                     Total
Cost Burdened Totals
                                       Percent      Percent             percent  Percent             percent of
                         Number                                Number                     Number
                                      of renters    of total           of owners of total               total
Total Occupied Units       7,841        100%          28%       20,589   100%      72%     28,430       100%
    Cost Burdened
                           1,820         23%            6%       5,159    25%      18%      6,979        24%
                 >30%
    Cost Burdened
                           1,949         25%            7%       3,080    15%      11%      5,029        18%
                 >50%
Cost Burden by Household Income Group
Very Low Income
                           2,440        31.1%         8.5%       1,325    6.4%     4.6%     3,765       13.2%
<=50% AMFI
Low Income >50 to
                            729          9.3%         2.6%        929     4.5%     3.3%     1,658        5.8%
<=80% AMFI
  Moderate Income
                            545          6.9%         1.9%       1,805    8.7%     6.3%     2,350        7.8%
>80% to <=120% AMFI
   Above Moderate
                             55          0.7%         0.2%       4,180   20.3%    14.7%     4,235       14.9%
 Income >120% AMFI
  AMFI= Area Median Family Income
  Sources: CHAS data based off ACS 2006-2010 5-year estimates.
           OVERCROWDING
           In response to high housing costs and a limited supply of affordable housing, lower income
           families may choose a smaller home in an effort to save money to pay for other necessities
           including transportation, food, and clothing. Another strategy is to increase the number of
           people living together. In extreme cases, two families will choose to share one home. For
           these reasons, large families and low-income households are more at risk of overcrowding. In
           addition to neighborhood effects such as potential parking shortages, overcrowding can
           accelerate housing deterioration and cause adverse health effects on the affected families.
           HCD defines overcrowding as more than 1.01 occupants per room, and severe overcrowding
           as more than 1.51 occupants per room. The ACS estimates that about 1.7 percent of owner-
           occupied units and 7.1 percent of rental units in Livermore are considered overcrowded or
           severely overcrowded (Table 2-19). These overcrowding trends are consistent with those of
           Alameda County. The higher rate of overcrowding among renter households compared to
           owner-occupied units is strongly linked to the lower number of rental units available to
           accommodate larger families in both Livermore and Alameda County.
                                                                                                        2-33
      Table 2-35.      Tenure by Occupants per Room, 2011
                                                 City of Livermore               Alameda County
                                             Estimate          Percent       Estimate        Percent
Owner occupied:                               20,488            71.8%        292,447          54.5%
1.00 or Less Occupants per Room               20,156            98.4%        283,082          96.8%
1.01 to 1.50 occupants per Room                 298              1.5%          7,454           2.6%
> 1.51 Occupants per Room                        34              0.2%          1,911           0.7%
Renter occupied:                               8,064            28.2%        243,713          45.5%
1.00 or Less Occupants per Room                7,488            92.9%        223,458          91.7%
1.01 to 1.50 occupants per Room                 436              5.4%         13,407           5.5%
> 1.51 Occupants per Room                       140              1.7%          6,848           2.8%
Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2011.
2.7       REGIONAL HOUSING NEED
State law requires all regional councils of governments to determine the existing and
projected housing need for their region and to allocate a portion of the regional housing
need to each jurisdiction. The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is the agency
responsible for determining the City of Livermore’s Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA).
    Table 2-36.      Regional Housing Need Allocation by Income Group, January 2015 - 2022
                          Percent of Area Median
  Income Group                       Income                  Income Threashold1    Livermore  Alameda County
  Very Low                             0-50%                        $46,750            839           9,912
  Low                                 51-80%                         $67,600           474           6,604
  Moderate                           81-120%                        $112,200           496           7,924
  Above Moderate                      120%+                                            920          19,956
  Total                                                                               2,729         44,036
  1Based on state income limits for 4-person household in Alameda County.
  Source: ABAG, 2013.
As shown in Table 2-36, based on ABAG’s allocation, the City of Livermore should plan for
2,729 new housing units between January 31, 2015 and January 31, 2023. Approximately 31
percent of these units should be for very low-income households, 17 percent for low-income
households, 18 percent for moderate-income households, and 34 percent for upper income
households. The RHNA estimate for very low-income housing need in Livermore is 839 housing
units. Based on HCD standards, 50 percent of these should be planned for extremely low-
income households. Therefore, there is a projected need for an additional 419 units
affordable to extremely low-income households in Livermore.
2-34

2.8         AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Housing that receives public funding or is created through governmental policies is often a
significant source of affordable housing in many communities. This section identifies the
affordable housing in Livermore, evaluates the potential for conversion to market rate
between 2014 and 2024, and analyzes the cost to preserve the units. Resources for
preservation replacement and construction of new units are described in Chapter 4. Housing
programs to address preservation of these units are described in Chapter 5.
INVENTORY OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Livermore has produced a large supply of affordable housing through the use of federal,
state, and local policies and assistance programs. The City has created senior, disabled-
serving, rental, and for-sale units through the use of in-lieu fees, the Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance and planning efforts such as the Housing Implementation Program (HIP). Table 2-
37 through Table 2-39 provide an inventory of affordable housing in Livermore.
     Table 2-37.       Affordable Housing Inventory: Rental Housing
                                                     Affordable Units
                                                                                  Total
                                       Total  Very                                Affordable Senior and/or
 Development                           Units  Low       Low        Moderate       Units      Disabled
 Arroyo Del Valle Commons                  12    11                                     11          11
 Bluebell Apartments                       18    9                                       9
 Carmen Ave.                               30    29                                     29          10
 Chestnut Apartments                       6     6                                       6           3
 Colgate                                   6     6                                       6           6
 Corte Cava                                2     2                                       2           2
 Dogwood House                             5     5                                       5
 Las Posadas                               9     9                                       9
 Leahy Square                             125   125                                     125          5
 Lily House                                6     6                                       6           6
 Marilisa Meadows                          8                                             2
 McLeod Apartments                         50              31                           31          10
 Oak Street Apartments                     8     2                                       2
 Outrigger Apartments                      42              28                           28          11
 Owl’s Landing                             72    38        34                           72
 Portola Meadows       1                  176    36                                     36           9
 Railroad Ave                              2     2                                       2           2
 Stoney Creek Apartments                   70              70                           70
 Total:                                   774   323       163                           486         85
 1  At-risk projects identified in color.
 Source: Tri-Valley Rental Housing Opportunities Guide, 2014; City of Livermore, 2014.
                                                                                                        2-35

        Table 2-38.     Affordable Housing Inventory: Senior Housing
                                                Affordable Units
                               Total                                    Total            Senior and/or
 Development1                  Units     Very Low    Low    Moderate    Affordable Units Disabled
 Arbor Vista                       80        80                                80              80
 Heritage Estates
    (Assisted living)             250        25        77                     102             250
 Heritage Estates (Senior
    Apartments)                   130        22        33                      55             130
 Heritage Park                    167                  33                      33             167
 Hillcrest Gardens                 54                  54                      54              54
 Vandenburgh Villas                40        40                                40              40
 Vineyard Village                  73                  73                      73              73
 Total:                           794       167       270         0           437             794
 Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
        Table 2-39.     Affordable Housing Inventory: For-Sale Housing
                                                    Affordable Units
                                                                           Total
                                   Total     Very                          Affordable    Senior and/or
 Development                       Units     Low        Low    Moderate    Units         Disabled
 Arroyo Crossing                   155                  5                  5
 Birchwood Park                    66                   7                  7
 Creekside Villas                  112       1          11                 12
 Habitat for Humanity              22        4          11     7           22
 Hillcrest Gardens                 54                   54                 54            54
 Fanfare                           22                          2           2
 K&B                               125                  25                 25
 Montage                           566                  14                 14
 Orchid Ranch                      18                   2      2           4
 Palasage                          90                   9                  9
 Rosegate                          40        1          3                  4
 Savannah Terrace                  8         2                             2             2
 Station Square                    110                  8                  8
 Seven Hills                       21                   2                  2
 The Grove                         49        2          6                  6             The Grove
 Vineyard Terrace                  96                   10                 10
 Total                             1,500     10         113    11          133           2
 Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
2-36
AT-RISK RENTAL HOUSING
Affordable housing options for most lower-income households are limited primarily to rental
housing. Therefore, preserving the existing affordable rental housing stock is an important
goal for Livermore. Most affordable rental housing units in the City were achieved through
subsidy contracts and deed-restrictions/affordability covenants in exchange for construction
and mortgage assistance. From time to time, restricted units lose the affordability controls and
revert to market-rate units. For instance, development projects are typically considered at-risk
due to: (1) the prepayment provisions of HUD-insured mortgage loans; (2) expiration of
Section 8 and Section 236 contracts; and (3) expiration of restrictions on mortgage revenue
bonds. The following describes in detail these conditions.
    •   Prepayment of HUD loans: In the mid-1960s, the federal government provided low-
        interest financing or mortgage insurance to housing developers in return for
        guaranteeing that rents remain affordable to lower-income households. After 20
        years, the owners could prepay the mortgages and lift their rent restrictions, or
        maintain the affordability controls until their mortgages were paid.
    •   Section 8 Program: In the mid-1970s, the federal government provided two
        approaches to encouraging the production of affordable rental housing. Under the
        Section 8 program, HUD provided a 15- or 20-year agreement to provide rental
        subsidies to property owners in return for making the units affordable to very low-
        income households. The income is typically the difference between 30 percent of the
        household’s income and a negotiated fair market rent for the area. Due to expiring
        Section 8 contracts and uncertainty of future Section 8 funds, the future of an
        affordable complex receiving Section 8 funding is uncertain.
    •   Section 236 Program: The other federal program, Section 236, provided rent subsidies,
        in the form of interest reduction, through which multifamily housing could be
        produced. Two rent schedules were utilized: market rent, based on a market rate
        mortgage; and basic rent, based on a one percent mortgage. Tenants were required
        to pay the basic rent of 25 percent of their income, with rent payments never to
        exceed the market rents. Units were restricted to households that met the low- and
        moderate-income limits established for the program. The subsidized housing
        moratorium imposed by President Nixon in January 1973 brought an end to additional
        Section 236 construction.
    •   Bond Financed Projects: State, county, and local governments have the authority to
        issue tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds to provide below market rate financing for
        rental housing construction. State and federal law require that multi-family projects
        built with tax-exempt bond proceeds set aside a portion of units as affordable to
        lower-income households for a specified period of time. The typical contractual
        period is 10 to 15 years. After the term expires, the property owners may rent the units
        at market rates.
        In many communities, bond-financed projects typically convert to market rates. Over
        time, rent levels increase in the community and the differential in market versus
        restricted rents increases to the point that unless additional financial benefits are
        offered, property owners have no incentive to maintain the units as affordable.
                                                                                             2-37

AT-RISK AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNITS IN LIVERMORE: JULY 1, 2014 - JUNE 30, 2024
State law requires that the City assess the risk of losing affordable rental housing over a ten-
year planning period. “At-risk” housing is defined as multi-family rental housing that is at risk of
losing its status as housing affordable for low- and moderate-income tenants due to the
expiration of federal, state or local agreements. For this Housing Element, the at-risk analysis
covers the ten-year period from July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2024.
As shown in Table 2-40, there is only one at-risk housing project within Livermore: Portola
Meadows. The project’s Section 8 financing restrictions have expired, and Livermore’s
affordability restriction expires in 2019. As a Section 8-financed project, 36 of the 176 units
within the complex are deed-restricted as affordable to very low-income households. Both
affordable and market rate units are mixed within 10 apartment buildings. The 36 affordable
units are split evenly between 1- and 2-bedroom apartments. The City’s affordability
restriction applies to 13 units for very low and low income households.
    Table 2-40.         Projects At-Risk 2014–2024
                                                                      Earliest             Units
  Project                          Type of   Type of    Current                  Elderly
                  Address                                           Conversion               at
  Name                             Units     Subsidy    Owner                      Units
                                                                       Date                 Risk
  Portola         1160 Portola               Section 8,
                                   Mixed                Davidon     2019         0         36
   Meadows        Meadows Rd                 Bonds
  Total                                                                          0         36
  Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
PRESERVATION OPTIONS
The appropriate preservation option depends largely on the type of project at risk and the
type of financing used to make the units affordable. The following describes the City’s
preservation options.
Bond-Financed Projects
One bond-financed project with a total of 36 rent-restricted units are potentially at risk
between 2014 and 2024. All restricted units are for low-income households. Communities that
are able to preserve bond units typically do so through refinancing of the remaining loan at
subsidized interest rates or providing a lump-sum grant or loan for property improvements and
the use of inclusionary housing funds. If unsuccessful, communities may also provide rental
assistance (through city funds or Section 8) to ensure that tenants are not impacted by the
conversion. The cost of refinancing or amount of funds needed for property improvements will
depend largely on the market conditions at the time, the financial profile of the projects, and
building conditions of the projects.
Section 8 and Section 236 Contracts
The at-risk project also received Section 8 funding. Although maintaining these units as
affordable is the intent, it cannot be assumed that units will remain affordable in the future
because they are privately-owned.
2-38

The potential loss of rent subsidies is another risk factor. Should Section 8 funding become
unavailable in the future, the City may use other funding sources to provide ongoing rent
subsidies. Approximately $12,762 in rent subsidies may be needed monthly, or $153,144
annually, to maintain affordability for these 36 units (Table 2-41).
       Table 2-41.      Section 8 Contract Rent Subsidy Calculations
                 Annual      Affordable                    Per Unit Monthly
                                             Average                                          Total Monthly
 Unit Size      Income        Monthly                            Subsidy             Units
                                                Rent                                             Subsidy
                                Cost                             Needed
 1 bed          $37,400         $935          $1,230               $295               18          $5,310
 2 bed          $42,100        $1,053         $1,467               $414               18          $7,452
 Total                                                                                36         $12,762
 Notes:
 1-bedroom = 2-person household; 2-bedroom = 3-person household
 Annual income estimated at 31 to 50% of the maximum income for very low-income households, adjusted
 by household size
 Source: City of Livermore income limits and affordable rental rates, 2014; Zillow.com, 2014.
REPLACEMENT COST ANALYSIS
The purpose of the cost analysis is to estimate the cost of replacement or preservation of
assisted housing units at-risk of conversion to market rate. The cost analysis will enable
decision-makers to use a "bottom line" approach to evaluate proposals targeted towards
preserving units at risk of conversion.
In 2013, the City conducted an Inclusionary Housing Financial Feasibility Analysis, detailing
development costs for various building profiles, one being “Rental” units. Based upon this
analysis, the estimated cost of replacing the 36 units at-risk of conversion during the analysis
period (2014-2024) is approximately $10,047,600, with an average cost of $279,100 per unit
(Table 2-42). The Feasibility Analysis is based on assumptions regarding land cost, hard costs,
government fees, and soft costs.
                                                                                                            2-39

        Table 2-42.        Residential Development Costs Summary for At-Risk Units
 Development Program Assumptions
 Number of Units                                                                              36
 Unit Size (sq. ft.)                                                                         950
 Number of Bedrooms                                                                         1.651
 Costs
 Land Costs per unit                                                                       $50,000
 Hard Construction Costs per unit 2                                                        $39,100
 Average Government Fees per unit 3                                                       $152,000
 Soft Costs per unit 4                                                                     $38,000
 Total Development Costs                                                                 $8,373,000
 Price Per Unit                                                                           $279,100
 Total At-Risk Units                                                                          36
 Total Replacement Costs                                                                $10,047,600
 1 Feasibility Analysis provided estimates for 1.65 bedroom rental only. Costs will vary for 1 and 2
 bedroom at-risk units.
 2 Assumes wood frame construction and surface parking.
 3 Government fees (include planning, engineering, permitting, and plan check fees) were estimated by City Staff.
 5 Assumes soft costs are 25 percent of hard construction costs. Soft costs includes architecture and
  engineering costs, financing costs, developer overhead, legal and accounting, and
 contingencies.
 Sources: City of Livermore, 2014; Inclusionary Housing Financial Feasibility Analysis, 2013.
Entities Qualified To Preserve At-Risk Units
There are many other affordable housing developers in the Bay Area and throughout the
state who participate in preservation projects. Organizations in the region that have the
capacity to own and manage affordable rental projects include:
     •    Livermore Housing Authority(Livermore)
     •    Satellite Affordable Housing Associates (Berkeley)
     •    Eden Housing (Hayward and Livermore)
     •    Housing Consortium of the East Bay (Oakland)
     •    Mid Pen Housing Corporation (Foster City)
2-40

3 HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS
The provision of adequate and affordable housing is an important goal of the City. As a result,
the City has proactively implemented a variety of programs, incentives, and development
standards to encourage the development, maintenance, and improvement of affordable
housing and address potential constraints to housing development. Nonetheless, a variety of
factors, including environmental conditions, market mechanisms, and government
regulations, can influence or constrain the development of housing. This section identifies
existing constraints that inhibit the production of affordable housing in the community, as well
as opportunities and programs to mitigate these constraints, as appropriate.
3.1 MARKET CONSTRAINTS
Land costs, site development costs, and financing contribute to the cost of housing
reinvestment and can potentially hinder the production of new affordable housing. Although
many constraints are driven by market conditions, jurisdictions have some leverage in
instituting policies and programs to address the constraints.
LAND COST
A key component of residential development costs is the price of raw land. The diminishing
supply of residential land combined with fairly high demand generally keeps land cost
relatively high in the Bay Area. The recent economic downturn caused land sales and land
development to slow down, but according to the 2013 Inclusionary Housing Feasibility
Analysis, the Livermore housing market is recovering, resulting in higher sales prices and rental
rates for new housing products. According to the analysis, costs range from $47 per square
foot of floor area for a higher density single-family development (15-20 dwelling units per
acre) to $79 per square foot of floor area for a low density project (4 dwelling units per acre).
As of September 2014, residential land in Livermore listed through Coldwell Banker varies
considerably from as low as 30 cents per square foot to $11 per square foot. This range can
be attributed to varying locations of the land, existing infrastructure, and other parcel-specific
factors such as environmental conditions and topography.
SITE DEVELOPMENT COSTS
The cost to develop new housing involves both land improvement costs, the expenses to
prepare the site for housing construction, as well as the actual cost to construct the housing
itself. A portion of the total cost to develop new housing is associated with government fees
that mitigate the impact of new development on local infrastructure and services.
Based on the 2013 Residential Financial Feasibility Analysis and the listed assumptions, a
typical single-family detached unit of 1,900 square feet would cost approximately $453,314
per unit to build, including land (see Table 3-1 below). These estimates reflect the cost to build
a basic dwelling unit in Livermore and may not reflect the actual cost to build new homes
currently for sale, as home prices also depend on the home finishes, amenities, and location-
specific costs (such as environmental mitigation), among other factors. In addition, while
developer profit is a cost to the home purchaser, development profit is not included in Table
3-1 because of its variability and volatility. Normally, developers attempt to determine the
potential profit that could be generated from a project before moving forward. In general,
                                                                                               3-1
developers target projects that yield an estimated profit of at least 10 percent above total
development costs.
         Table 3-1. Residential Development Costs Summary for Typical Home
                                                      Single Family                Single Family          Multi-Family
Assumptions/Costs                                        Detached1                     Attached1              Rentals2
Development Program Assumptions
Density (dwelling units per acre)                                  10                           20                  30
Unit Size (square feet)                                        1,900                        1,500                 950
Number of Bedrooms                                               3.25                          2.5                1.65
Costs Per Unit
Land Costs                                                 $110,000                       $55,000             $46,500
Hard Construction Costs                                    $212,000                      $192,500           $123,500
Average Government        Fees3                             $77,544                       $79,193             $64,500
Soft  Costs4                                                $53,500                       $59,400             $25,600
Total Development Costs (Per Unit)                         $453,314                     $386,093            $260,100
1 Assumes wood frame construction of average quality and an attached garage.
2 Assumes wood frame construction and surface parking
3 Government fees (planning, engineering and building permitting, and plan check fees) were estimated by City
Staff (see Table 3-14).
4 Assumes soft costs are 25 percent of hard construction costs. Soft costs includes architecture and engineering costs,
financing costs, developer overhead, legal and accounting, and contingencies.
Source: City of Livermore, 2015; Inclusionary Housing Financial Feasibility Analysis, 2013.
The Inclusionary Housing Feasibility Analysis (2013) found that single family detached housing
continues to represent a major portion of units being developed in Livermore, but small lot,
compact single family detached and attached products represent a growing part of the
market. Even though the cost per unit for multifamily attached housing is lower than for single-
family housing, total construction costs can be about 50 percent higher due to the larger
development scale, which tends to require a longer land use entitlement process and
construction period. While the financial feasibility of multifamily rental housing continues to be
challenging, rents have increased over the past year, indicating that it may soon become
profitable.
MORTAGE AND REHABILITATION FINANCING
The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to purchase or improve a home.
Mortgage interest rates are extremely volatile. In 2008, the average 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage (FRM) was approximately 6.0 percent. The average 30-year fixed loan declined
3-2

through 2012 reaching rates as low as 3.7 percent in November of 2012. 8 Currently, rates
hover at about 4.0 percent.
 Home Loans in Livermore (2012)
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions must disclose
information on the disposition of loan applications. Table 3-2 summarizes the disposition of
loan applications submitted to financial institutions for home purchase and home
improvement loans within the City.
In 2012, approximately 8,633 households applied for home purchase, refinance, or
improvement loans in the City of Livermore. Of that total, approximately 99.6 percent of these
loans were for low-density single and multi-family homes (1-4 family dwellings), while 0.1
percent were for higher density multi-family homes (5+ family dwellings) and 0.3 percent were
for manufactured housing. The largest percent of home loan applications (76.5 percent) were
for home refinancing. Approximately 13.7 percent of applicants applied for conventional
home purchase loans, while only 7.7 percent of applicants applied for government-assisted
home purchase loans.
Approval rates for home purchase loans vary by loan type. Conventional home purchase
loans had a higher approval rate of 61.2 percent than government-assisted home purchase
loans, which had an approval rate of 47 percent. For all applicants, approximately 60 percent
were approved and accepted, 8 percent were denied, 13 were purchased by a financial
institution and the remaining 19 percent were not accepted, withdrawn, or incomplete.
As Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are tightening their lending practices and loaning primarily
to people with excellent credit scores who can afford at least 10 percent for a down
payment, FHA loans are the only remaining option for many homebuyers. FHA loans require
the buyer to pay an upfront fee and a monthly insurance premium and ensure that the
borrower has sufficient income to cover the loan, but borrowers are able to pay a down
payment as low as 3 percent and are not required to have an excellent credit score.
8 HSH National Monthly Mortgage Statistics, accessed July 2014. HSH Fixed-Rate Mortgage Indicator includes jumbo
   loans and second mortgages. This provides a combined average mortgage interest rate which is often higher than
   conventional loans that under $300,000.
                                                                                                              3-3
          Table 3-2. Home Loan Application Status Disclosure, 2012
                                                                                  Loans on
                                                                                  Dwellings    Manufactured         Total
                           Loans on 1-4 Family and Manufactured Dwellings
                                                                                    for 5+         Housing     Applications
                                                                                   Families
                       Home Purchase Loans
                                                                        Home
                   FHA, FSA/                                       Improvemen      All Loan
Loan
                     RHS, VA       Conventional      Refinancing       t Loans      Types      All Loan Types All Loan Types
Application
Status             #        %       #         %       #        %    #         %   #        %   #         %      #         %
Approved,                                                                                 75.0
accepted         312      47.0%    726     61.2%    4095    62.0%  64      45.1%  9        %    6     26.1%   5212      60.4%
Approved,
Not
Accepted          24      3.6%      51      4.3%     176     2.7%   8       5.6%  0      0.0%   4     17.4%   263       3.0%
Denied            36      5.4%      81      6.8%     516     7.8%  31      21.8%  0      0.0%  12     52.2%   676       7.8%
                                                                                          25.0
Withdrawn         35      5.3%      76      6.4%     496     7.5%  21      14.8%  3        %    1      4.3%   632       7.3%
Purchased
by financial
institution        7      1.1%      20      1.7%    1043    15.8%  15      10.6%  0      0.0%   0      0.0%   1085      12.6%
Incomplete       250      37.7%    233     19.6%     279     4.2%   3       2.1%  0      0.0%   0      0.0%   765       8.9%
Total                                                              14
Applications     664      100%    1187     100%     6605    100%    2      100%  12      100%  23      100%   8633      100%
Percent                                                                                                                 100.0
Total                     7.7%             13.7%            76.5%          1.6%          0.1%          0.3%               %
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2012.
City of Livermore Programs
In order to facilitate additional access to financial resources for lower and moderate-income
households to acquire homeownership, the City offers a down payment assistance program
to first-time homebuyers. As described in Chapter 4, the program provides a 3 percent interest
fully or partially deferred loan of up to $55,000.
3.2         GOVERNMENTAL OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS
Local policies and regulations can impact the price and availability of housing and, in
particular, the provision of affordable housing. However, other governmental policies or
actions are intended to reduce these barriers and/or actively encourage the development of
housing that meets the diverse needs of the community. This section discusses the following
possible constraints and opportunities related to the maintenance, development, and
improvement of housing:
      •     Land use controls
      •     Inclusionary zoning ordinance
3-4

    •   Provisions for a variety of housing
    •   Growth management policies and programs
    •   Density bonuses and other incentives
    •   Development review process
    •   Building Codes
    •   Housing for persons with disabilities
    •   Public improvements
LAND USE CONTROLS
Land use controls affecting housing development include: General Plan, Downtown Specific
Plan, Neighborhood Plans, and Development Code.
General Plan
The Land Use Element of the Livermore General Plan sets forth the City’s policies for guiding
local development, including density ranges. These policies, together with zoning regulations,
establish the amount and distribution of land for different uses, including housing. The key
questions for evaluating constraints and opportunities associated with the General Plan are:
does it designate enough land available for residential development, and does it allow for a
range of housing types to meet community needs?
As listed in Table 3-3, the General Plan has eleven broad residential land use designations,
permitting a range of rural and urban residential uses. Most of the open space and
agriculture land use designations permit rural residential development, as well as agriculture-
related employee and caretaker housing. Residential uses are also permitted in certain
commercial districts subject to discretionary review.
I-580/Isabel Avenue BART Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Area
The City is currently working with Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) to extend rail service along I-
580 to a station that would be located near the I-580/Isabel Avenue Interchange. The City is
preparing a Specific Plan for the area surrounding the station. The City designated the station
area as a Priority Development Area (PDA) during the regional Plan Bay Area process. The
regional plan envisions this area as a transit-oriented, neighborhood-scale community with a
mix of housing types and an employment center, including a major employer and a regional
educational institution. In addition to BART, bus transit and multi-use trails would provide local
and regional connections for residents, commuters, college students and faculty. The
intention of the development and associated infrastructure improvements would be to serve
residents, commuters, and Las Positas College, while minimizing traffic, noise and other
impacts on nearby neighborhoods.
                                                                                               3-5

Greenville BART Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Transitional Area
The City also designated an area around Greenville Road as a PDA. The General Plan
identifies the Greenville BART TOD 9 transitional area to provide land use appropriate to a
future commuter transit station. At such time that the City receives a commitment from BART
to extend rail service to this station, the City will develop a Specific Plan for the area. The plan
would designate a mix of residential and commercial uses.
Plans to extend BART would increase the land value of the TOD area, encouraging
reinvestment. The development of both the Isabel Avenue and Greenville TOD areas is
constrained by BART’s expansion plans and associated funding sources. The Isabel extension
project would compete with other regional projects for funding, following the City’s adoption
of the Specific Plan and approval of the project by the BART Board of Directors.
               Table 3-3.        General Plan Land Use Categories
  General Plan Land Use               Density (du/ac)          Residential Type(s)
  Residential
                                                               Designed to accommodate large-lot residential of a
  Rural Residential (RR)              1.0-1.0/5
                                                               rural character on urban fringe
  Urban Low Residential
                                      1.0-2.0
  (UL)                                                         Intended to accommodate residential development in
    UL-1                              1.0-1.5                  areas with special land amenities or constraints
    UL-2                              1.5-2.0
                                                               Intended as a transition between lower density at edges
  Urban Low Medium
                                      2.0-3.0                  of town and higher density residential development as
  Residential (ULM)
                                                               one approaches the center of the community
                                                               Urban medium areas are located closer to the center of
  Urban Medium
                                      3.0-4.5                  the community and in areas surrounding commercial
  Residential (UM)
                                                               development
  Urban Medium-High                                            Intended to encourage cluster and higher density
                                      4.5-6.0
  Residential (UMH)                                            residential development to preserve urban open spaces
  Urban High Residential
                                      6.0-55.0
  (UH)
    UH-1                              6.0-8.0                  Intended to provide a variety of housing opportunities
                                                               for all income groups to be located near major roads
    UH-2                              8.0-14.0
                                                               and other public services
    UH-3                              14.0-18.0
    UH-4                              18.0-22.0
9
  Transit-Oriented Development – Development in which land uses are designed and sited to maximize transit ridership and the use of
   alternative forms of transportation; TOD’s are typically also mixed-use developments.
3-6

           Table 3-3. General Plan Land Use Categories
General Plan Land Use   Density (du/ac) Residential Type(s)
  UH-5a                 22.0-30.0
  UH-5b                 30.0-38.0
  UH-6                  38.0- 55.0
Mixed-Use
Neighborhood Mixed-      12.0 – 38.0
Use (NM)
  NM Low (NML)           2.0-3.0 or
                         12.0- 15.0 w/  Intended to help improve the pedestrian orientation of
                         TDC*           Livermore’s neighborhoods by providing neighborhood
  NM Medium (NMM)        3.0-4.5 or     commercial services within walking distance of existing
                         15.0-24.0 w/   residents and integrating housing with commercial
                         TDC            development on a single site
                         6.0-8.0 or
  NM High (NMH)          24.0-38.0 w/
                         TDC
                                        Intended to provide a unique, locally-oriented,
                         Min range 15
                                        pedestrian-friendly shopping environment in Downtown
                         - 30
Downtown Area (DA)                      Livermore and to allow higher-intensity residential
                         Max range
                                        development to support and revitalize the commercial
                         30.0 – 55.0
                                        environment
Commercial
                                        Intended for uses such as auto sales and service,
                                        nurseries, home maintenance centers and wholesale
Service Commercial (SC)                 establishments in the general vicinity of freeway
                                        interchanges, or at other locations with significant
                                        access potential from the community at large
                                        Intended to primarily serve the traveling public with uses
Highway Commercial
                                        such as include hotels and motels, restaurants, and
(HC)                                    motor vehicle and gasoline service stations
                                        Intended primarily for neighborhood serving
Neighborhood
                                        commercial uses such as grocery stores, drug stores,
Commercial (NC)
                                        and personal service.
Community Serving                       Intended for commercial uses in areas outside of
General Commercial                      Downtown with significant access potential from the
(CSGC)                                  region and the community at large
                                        Intended primarily for office uses with no impacts to and
                                        compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods.
Office Commercial (OC)   14.0-18.0
                                        Residential can be considered with a Conditional Use
                                        Permit
Industrial
Business and                            Intended for a mix of uses locating employment-
Commercial Park (BCP)                   generating activities adjacent to destination-oriented
                                                                                                 3-7

             Table 3-3.    General Plan Land Use Categories
 General Plan Land Use         Density (du/ac)    Residential Type(s)
                                                  and limited retail commercial uses
                                                  Intended for uses such as manufacturing, warehousing,
 Low-Intensity Industrial                         research and development facilities, fully-enclosed
 (LII)                                            recycling facilities, and administrative and professional
                                                  offices
                                                  Intended to provide an insulated area for uses with
                                                  objectionable noises, odors, vibrations, glares or hazards
 High-Intensity Industrial
                                                  from uses such as manufacturing, warehousing,
 (HII)                                            research and development facilities, recycling facilities,
                                                  and storage or processing of raw materials
 Open Space and Agriculture
                                1.0
                                                  Permits single-family residential and farm worker
     Open Space (OSP)           du/existing
                                                  housing, subject to environmental review
                                parcel
    Agriculture/Viticulture                       Intended for rural residential densities and farm worker
                                1.0/100
    (AGVT)                                        housing
    Limited Agriculture                           Intended for rural residential densities and farm worker
                                Min 20 acres      housing
    (LDAG)
    Hillside Conservation       1.0/20 to         Intended for rural residential densities and farm worker
    (HLCN)                      1.0/100           housing
    Large Parcel                Min 100 acres     Intended for uses such as agricultural, agriculture
                                                  processing facilities, limited agricultural support,
    Agriculture (LPA)
                                                  secondary residential, visitor serving commercial
                                                  facilities, recreation, public and quasi public and waste
                                                  management facilities
    Resource                    1.0               Intended for a single-family home per parcel
    Management (RMG)            du/parcel;
                                Min 100 acres
    Water Management            1.0               Intended for a single-family home per parcel
    Lands (WML)                 du/parcel;
                                Min 100 acres
    Open Space/Sand                               Intended primarily for open space; secondarily for sand
                                                  and gravel extraction, processing and related activities
    and Gravel (OSP/S&G)
 Community Facilities                             Intended to provide areas for public agencies and
                                                  institutions, including City, County, State and federal
                                                  government facilities. May be designated as any of the
                                                  following: Elementary School (CF-E), Intermediate
                                                  School (CF-I), High School (CF-H), Community College
                                                  (CF-JC), Fire Station (FS), Civic Center (CF-CC),
                                                  Cemetery (CF-CE), Government Services (CF), Airport
                                                  (CF-AIR), Post Office (PO), Hospital (HOSP), BART (BART),
                                                  Government Research and Development (CF-R&D)
 *TDC refers to Transferable Development Credit Program
 Source: City of Livermore Land Use Element, amended 2013
3-8
Neighborhood Plans
In 2007, the City approved two Neighborhood Plans: Brisa and Arroyo Vista. These plans cover
two areas that were re-designated in the 2003 General Plan to a dual designation permitting
either industrial uses (base designation) or residential uses subject to development of a
Neighborhood Plan for each site. The plans are intended to facilitate orderly growth and the
creation of a livable neighborhood that includes community amenities and is compatible
with surrounding uses. The plans represent an important opportunity for infill development of
vacant land with a mix of higher density housing types which would not otherwise be
developed for residential uses.
The Neighborhood Plans facilitate residential development by providing site layout plans that
can be utilized by developers to achieve consistency with and meet the development
standards of each of the plans, including providing a mix of housing types. The concept site
plans for each of the sites demonstrate that a mid- to upper density range can be achieved
on each site while still providing a minimum of three different housing types, as well as other
required circulation and open space requirements. The design guidelines and standards in
each of the Plans are straightforward and feasible for the site, and encourage residential
development. Potential developers can utilize these site plans to reduce design time and also
minimize uncertainty during the development review and approval process as the site layout
plans have already been determined as consistent with provisions of the Neighborhood Plans.
Appendix A contains the conceptual site plans provided in each of the Neighborhood Plans.
Although these two sites are TDC receiver sites, adoption of the residential Neighborhood
Plans preclude these sites from going back to their base designation without discretionary
review by City Council.
Brisa Neighborhood Plan
The Brisa Neighborhood Plan area encompasses 37.5 acres and covers vacant land north
and south of Brisa Street east of Vasco Road adjacent to the ACE train station and parking
area. The plan includes an approved Neighborhood Concept Site Plan for 465 units designed
to create a walkable urban neighborhood and to provide pedestrian access to Livermore’s
multi-use trail system and to the ACE commuter rail station immediately adjacent to the site.
The Plan requires a variety of housing types; a general circulation system layout consistent
with the site plan; consistency with the design standards; two neighborhood parks; and a trail
network along with connections to the ACE train station.
The Livermore City Council approved plans for a residential development within the
neighborhood plan area earlier this year on January 13, 2014. The project is 465 units,
including courtyard and alley-loaded single family homes, row townhouses, and apartments.
This project will provide 26 subsidized very-low and low-income units. Site grading began in
August 2014 and production units will commence construction in early 2015.
Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan
The Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan area is approximately 28 acres and covers the vacant
land south of First Street along the north side of Las Positas Road and east of existing
neighborhood commercial services. The plan includes two conceptual land use plans. The
conceptual plans are intended to show how one might develop the entire site at the lower
end of the density range (402 dwelling units) and at the high end (495 dwelling units). The
plan includes the following mandatory provisions: three variations of housing types, one
                                                                                            3-9

neighborhood park, open space, and trails. Once a residential subdivision is approved under
the Neighborhood Plan, the sites can no longer be developed as industrial without City
Council approval of a major conditional use permit.
Downtown Specific Plan (DSP)
The Downtown Specific Plan (DSP) was adopted by the City Council in February 2004.
Objectives of the DSP are to revitalize the Downtown and re-establish it as the center of the
City and as a viable, pedestrian oriented city neighborhood. The DSP outlines strategies for
accomplishing these goals including:
             •   Revising land use policies to allow housing at a range of types and densities
                 everywhere except on the ground level in the Downtown Core.
             •   Encouraging construction of housing above storefronts in the Downtown Core
                 by requiring new buildings to be mixed-use.
             •   Identifying opportunity sites that provide immediate development prospects
                 for new housing and that offer the potential to deliver a significant number of
                 new units. Examples include the former Livermore Village in the heart of
                 downtown and several vacant, formerly commercial parcels located to the
                 east of Downtown.
             •   Attract potential Downtown residents with transit opportunities that enable
                 them to travel easily and conveniently to job centers in the region.
The DSP established five plan areas. Appendix B shows the boundary of the Downtown
Specific Plan Area as well as the boundaries of the five Plan Areas within the DSP. Plan Area
and the associated assumptions about capacity are described as follows:
        The Downtown Core Plan Area
        The intent of the Downtown Core is to revitalize the City’s historic core area as the
        center of the City. Therefore, mixed-use buildings are required for all parcels fronting
        First Street and are encouraged throughout the Core. In order to ensure that
        Downtown Core is the most densely developed part of the city, a minimum density of
        30 and up to 55 dwelling units per acre is required. At this density, sites in the Core
        would be considered appropriate for lower-income households.
        The Gateway Plan Areas / Boulevard and Transit
        The primary intent of the Gateway Plan Areas is the provision of land for high-quality
        housing adjacent to the Downtown Core. The Downtown Transit Gateway District,
        centered along east First Street, provides an opportunity for transit-oriented
        development due to the proximity of the ACE/LAVTA stations. In this Plan Area,
        residential development located within 2,000 feet of the ACE/LAVTA/station is
        awarded a 25 percent density bonus.
        The Neighborhood Plan Areas / North and South Sides
        The Neighborhood Plan Areas are intended to enhance and maintain the residential
        character surrounding the Downtown Core. The development standards encourage
        residential uses compatible with the single-family neighborhoods adjacent to the
        Downtown.
3-10

Incentives to Facilitate Redevelopment
The DSP development standards were crafted to promote redevelopment in the Downtown,
including increased, more intense housing opportunities. The DSP encourages this through:
alternative open space requirements, relaxed parking standards, minimal setbacks, flexibility
for National Register historic structures or historic resources, and streamlined processing for
smaller projects. The discussion on small sites later in this section discusses specific standards in
more detail.
Since adoption of the DSP, the City has moved forward with implementation steps to further
increase the viability of Downtown redevelopment.
Infrastructure Upgrades
A major step the City has taken to support redevelopment and accommodate intensified
development in the Downtown is improving and upgrading Downtown infrastructure,
particularly in the Core Plan Area where the catalyst sites are located. Following adoption of
the DSP, the City began to implement numerous upgrades and improvements that included:
    •    Moving State Route 84 from First Street to Isabel Avenue to remove truck traffic from
         First Street and create a more pedestrian friendly environment for Downtown residents
         and the shopping community. This step was particularly crucial to foster a pedestrian
         friendly environment in the Downtown Core Plan Area along First Street between
         Maple and L Streets, where mixed-use is required in new buildings.
    •    Reconfiguring First Street from 4 lanes to 2 and adding diagonal parking, street trees,
         landscaping and hardscape to create a more lively, walkable environment for
         commercial and mixed-use buildings.
    •    Widening Railroad Avenue to accommodate increased traffic diverted from the First
         Street in the Downtown Core.
    •    Water and sewer upgrades along Railroad Avenue to accommodate estimated
         Downtown Specific Plan buildout.
    •    New water mains and sewer laterals to all parcels along First Street in the Downtown
         Core from Maple to L Streets to accommodate intensified mixed-uses.
Streamlined Project Review Process
The Downtown Specific Plan provides detailed development standards and regulations as
well as purposeful goals and objectives to achieve revitalization. Due to the specificity and
detail in the plan, potential developers and property owners tend to have a clear
understanding regarding the use of their property, as well as development standards that
must be addressed in new or redeveloped buildings. The DSP also streamlined the review
process for Downtown projects by a) establishing sufficient detail on regulations and b)
allowing a majority of the projects to be reviewed at an administrative level, thereby
reducing the overall processing time for new projects. Most projects that are consistent with
the DSP can be processed at the staff level. Only larger residential and commercial projects
require discretionary review by the Planning Commission and City Council.
                                                                                                3-11

Housing Implementation Program (HIP) Exemption
The Housing Implementation Program (HIP) permits 200 units per year to be approved in the
downtown beginning in 2004. Of the 2,000 DSP available allocations, 261 have been
allocated through May 2014, leaving 1,739 DSP available allocations for subsequent years
including proposals made in the 2014-2016 HIP. In addition, the HIP provides average annual
allocation of 100 dwelling units to the Transferable Development Credit (TDC) Program for six
years (2004 through 2009) and 200 dwelling units annually for an additional seven years (2010
through 2016). Of the 2,000 TDC allocations made available through 2016, 647 have been
allocated through May 2014, leaving 1,353 TDC available allocations remaining.
Development Code
The City implements the General Plan policies and regulates the type, location, and scale of
residential development primarily through the Development Code. Development regulations
are designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents, as
well as to preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods.
In February 2010, the City of Livermore adopted a new Development Code, replacing the
Zoning Code. The City updated the standards in the code to ensure consistency with the
General Plan, existing policies and procedures, and applicable state regulations including
those for “reasonable accommodations”. The City also revised outdated development
regulations and older zoning districts to help reduce any constraints to development currently
caused by the City’s previous zoning law. The new code was designed to be easier for
residents, developers, and staff to understand and apply, which can save time during the
entitlement process. For example, residential projects with four or fewer units are subject to
administrative design review by staff.
The City is currently conducting another update of the Development Code to further improve
the code and reduce any constraints to development caused by confusing or conflicting
provisions.
Residential Zoning
The current Development Code has twelve major residential zoning districts, in addition to a
Planned Development (PD) District (see Table 3-4 below). Most of the residential zoning
districts permit a range in density. In all cases, the density range permitted in each zoning
district is consistent with the underlying General Plan designation. As described further below,
the code establishes development standards for each zoning district, such as lot coverage,
setbacks, and minimum lot sizes.
Form-based Zoning
As part of the 2010 Development Code update, the City included form-based regulations to
promote pedestrian-scaled urbanism in “Transect” zones. Unlike conventional zoning, form-
based codes emphasize the built form over the segregation of land uses and parameters
such as setbacks and floor area ratios. Built form involves the relationship between building
facades and the public realm, the form and mass of buildings in relation to one another, and
the scale and types of streets and blocks. Form-based codes frequently use photos and
graphics to explain the details of the requirements, making them more readily
understandable by residents and developers. Use of a form-based code can reduce the
length of the project review process.
3-12

The Code includes two Transect Zones (T3 and T4), with placeholders for four zones not
currently used (T1 and T2 are intended to apply to Natural and Rural areas respectively, while
T5 is reserved for the Urban Center and T-6 for the Urban Core). The development standards
for the T3 and T4 zones primarily focus on mixed-use, walkable areas of the City. They range in
function and density from primarily residential areas with a mix of building types (T3-
Neighborhood) to medium density neighborhoods and other commercial and retail areas
(T4-Neighborhood, T4-Neighborhood Open and T4-Main Street). The City has designated
much of the neighborhoods immediately north and south of the Downtown area as T3 or T4.
Mixed-Use Zoning
The NM zone was created to implement the Neighborhood Mixed-Use land use designation
established as part of the 2003 General Plan Update. The zoning district permits a mixture of
neighborhood-serving businesses and residential uses and refers to the T4 development
standards. A minimum of 20 percent of the site’s floor area shall be developed with
commercial uses. Vertical mixed-use is permitted and encouraged on-site. The City rezoned
three sites to NM. Despite the recent residential construction downturn, the City has received
an application for General Plan Amendment and rezoning to allow for only residential
development on one of these NM sites.
To ensure that residential capacity identified on these sites remains, the City has proposed
Program 1.1.1, Residential Sites Inventory, which stipulates that in the event a mixed-use site
included in the land inventory is developed at a lower residential capacity, the City will
identify additional sites with the same or more capacity as the transitioning site. This will ensure
that residential capacity in the sites inventory is maintained.
The Neighborhood Mixed-Use sites are also designated as TDC receiver sites, meaning they
have dual general plan designations.
Since the TDC program has been implemented, several residential projects have been
approved or constructed on a TDC site (Arroyo Crossings, Grove Phases II and III, Shea Sage,
Magnolia Place, Portola, Brisa, and Bluebell Drive). None of these projects, applications, or
proposals have opted, or even proposed, to utilize the baseline densities on these sites. This
suggests that the higher density Neighborhood Mixed-use option is the most economically
feasible--more so than new commercial or the lower density residential option.
General Plan policy provides an exemption to participating in the TDC program for projects
that provide affordable housing, and affordable units are exempt from the TDC fee. Projects
that provide affordable or other types of special housing may also have the baseline density
increased. The City has included an objective in Program 3.2.3 to market this exemption with
affordable housing developers.
Other Zoning
The City permits single family residential in the Education and Institution (E) and Open Space
(OS-R and OS-A) zones. The City also conditionally permits residential development in the
Professional Office (CP),Commercial Office (CO), and Open Space (OS-F) districts.
Development Standards
The Development Code includes a set of development standards for each zoning district.
Sites zoned as Planned Development (PD) have a unique set of development standards,
                                                                                                3-13

although some refer to a standard zoning district under the current or previous zoning codes.
This section discusses the main types of development standards.
         Table 3-4. Residential Zoning Districts and Development Standards
                           GP         Min/Max     Setbacks
                    GP     Density    . Lot                                     Coverage
                                                                                             Max. Bldg. Ht.
                    Land   (du/       Area in     Front   Sides      Rear
                                                                                1
District/Purpose    Use    acre)      sq. ft
                                                            1 side:
                           1per acre
R-R – Residential                         Min.                 20’
                       RR  to 1 per 5               30’                   50’       25%              35’
Rural                         acres
                                         40,000             Total:
                                                               45’
                      UL,
                             1 per 5
R-S – Suburban       ULM,                 Min.      Min.   Min 10’,
                            acres up                                  Min. 25’  FAR Max. 35%      Max. 35’
Residential           UM,
                               to 6
                                         6,000      20’    and 12’
                     UMH
R-L – Residential    UL-1,                          Min.              Min. 5’ –
                              1–2      Min. 5,000          Min. 15’                 40%           Max. 35’
Low density          UL-2,                          15’                   10’
                                                            8’ min     5’ min
                                                           plus 5’    plus 5’                Main building: Max
MFR – Multifamily                                         for every  for every                    3 stories,
                      UH      6 - 18   Min. 5,000   15’                             50%
Residential                                                  story      story                  45’/Accessory
                                                           above      above                  structure: Max 15’
                                                              first.     first.
RG – Suburban
                      UH     4.5 - 18
Multi-Residential
                                                           1 story:   1 story:
                                                          Min. 10’/  Min. 10’/
                                                            2 to 3     2 to 3
                                                                                             Main building: Max
                                                           stories:   stories:
                                                    Min.                                          3 stories,
    RG-16            UH-3    14 - 18      6,000
                                                    20’
                                                           20’ plus   20’ plus      50%
                                                                                               45’/Accessory
                                                             5’ for    5’ for
                                                                                             structure: Max 15’
                                                            every      every
                                                             story      story
                                                           above      above
                     UH -2    8 – 14                Min.
    RG-14            UH-3     14-18
                                          6,500
                                                    20’
                                                                 ″          ″       40%               ″
                                                    Min.
    RG-12            UH-2     8 - 14      7,500
                                                    25’
                                                                 ″          ″       35%               ″
                                                    Min.
    RG-10            UH-2     8 - 14      9,000
                                                    30’
                                                                 ″          ″       30%               ″
T - Transect
Zones
                     ULM,                           Min.
T3N – T3
                      UM,      2-6                20’/Ma   Min. 5’    Min. 5’                Max. 35’ 2 ½ stories
Neighborhood         UMH                           x 30’
                                                    Min.
                                                  match    1 story
                     UH-2,                        adjace   Min. 5’/
T4N – T4
                     UH-3,    8 - 22                 nt        2+     Min. 5’                Max. 35’ 2 ½ stories
Neighborhood         UH-4                         propert   stories
                                                  y/ Max. Min. 7.5’
                                                    25’
                                                    Min.
                                                  match    1 story
T4N-O –                                           adjace   Min. 5’/
                                                                                              Max. 35’ to , 2 ½
Neighborhood          OC    14.0-18.0                nt        2+     Min. 5’
                                                                                                   stories
Open                                              propert   stories
                                                  y/ Max. Min. 7.5’
                                                    25’
                                                                                                 Max. 35’ to
T4MS-O – Main        NML,
                                                     0’    Min. 0’    Min. 0’                 eave/parapet, 3
Street Open          NMM
                                                                                                   stories
3-14

          Table 3-4. Residential Zoning Districts and Development Standards
                                      GP             Min/Max       Setbacks
                           GP         Density        . Lot                                             Coverage
                                                                                                                         Max. Bldg. Ht.
                           Land       (du/           Area in       Front      Sides       Rear
                                                                                                       1
District/Purpose           Use        acre)          sq. ft
                                       2.0-3.0 or
T4MS – Main                 NML,
                                      12.0 – 15.0                     0’        Min. 0’     Min. 0’                        Max. 35’ 3 stories
Street                      NMM
                                       with TDC
DSP – Downtown
                             DA       15.0 – 55.0
Specific Plan
                                                                                                                           Min. 2 floors/20’
                                                                     No
    Downtown                            Min. 30                                 Min. 0                      N/A            Max. 3 floors/45’
                                                                   min./M                   None
    Core                                Max. 55
                                                                   ax. 20’
                                                                              Max. 10’                                      4 floors/55’ on
                                                                                                                           designated sites
                                                                                           Min. 15’
                                                                                Min. 5’
                                                                                           Attache
                                        Min. 15                               Increase
                                                                                             d: 5’
    Gateway Plan                        Max. 30                                d 5’ for
                                                                                          Increase
                                      Along First                    Min.       every                       N/A
    Areas (Transit           DA
                                       St. up to                     15’         story
                                                                                           d 5’ for                           3-floors/45’
    & Boulevard)                                                                            every
                                         50 w/                                  above
                                                                                             story
                                          CUP                                    first.
                                                                                            above
                                                                                              first.
   Neighborhood-                        Min. 15        SF: Max
   North and                 DA         No min.      10,000, Min.    20’        Min. 5’    Min. 15’                           3-floors/45’
   South Side                            for SF         5,000
1 “Coverage” is the floor area of the largest story of a building divided by the total site area.
2 Residential uses at an RM density are conditionally permitted.
Source: City of Livermore Development Code, 2010.
Density
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in each residential project is calculated by
multiplying the gross acreage times the maximum allowable density under the General Plan
residential land use designation, rounding down to the nearest whole number. General Plan
policy defines gross acreage to include all the land within the boundaries of the property, as
well as all or a portion of adjacent street frontage. 10
The City’s 2003-2025 General Plan added four new mixed-use land designations to
encourage infill and higher density residential development close to transit, existing services,
and infrastructure. These include: Downtown Area (30-55 du/acre), Neighborhood Mixed Low
(12-15 du/acre), Neighborhood Mixed Medium (15-24 du/acre), and Neighborhood Mixed
High (24-38 du/acre). These new designations, along with the Urban High (UH) categories,
provide a wider range of density and allow for a variety of housing types, compared to the
other residential designations.
10
   For the purpose of calculating density, properties with more than one street frontage may only use the longest street frontage, which is
   considered the area between the street right-of-way boundary and the midline of the adjacent fronting streets (except freeways and
   highways).
                                                                                                                                      3-15

Height Limits and Setbacks
Maximum height and lot coverage regulations are designed to preserve the quality and
ensure the compatibility of residential development in neighborhoods. The typical height limit
in lower density residential zones is 35 feet. This allows for a two-story home with additional
room to incorporate a variety of roof designs. Medium and higher density residential districts
permit varied heights and number of stories depending on the number of units constructed
and/or the setback.
In 2011, the City amended the Development Code to simplify the RG zone height limits, which
was previously dependent upon the size of the setback. The RG zone height limits are now
three stories or 45 feet, and proposed development above 45 feet is subject to a conditional
use permit. While market conditions may affect development of multi-family housing, the City
cannot control market conditions and can only ensure development standards do not
constrain development. The City has reduced development constraints to multi-family
housing by allowing a greater maximum height.
The Core Area of the Downtown Specific Plan, which allows the most intense residential
development (up to 55 dwelling units per acre), permits up to three stories or 45 feet.
Proposals for taller buildings will be allowed with a conditional use permit. The City Council has
considered two requests to exceed the maximum height permitted in the Downtown Core.
Both requests came from developers of two catalyst sites—the former Groth Brothers site and
Livermore Village site. Both requests to increase the height to four floors and 55 feet were
approved.
Small Lot Development
The Downtown Specific Plan Area has a number of small vacant and underdeveloped sites,
particularly in the Downtown Core and Downtown Gateway Plan Areas. Potential constraints
to creating new residential units on small lots in the Downtown, and in particular in the
Downtown Core area, include the existing character and historic nature of buildings, which
may make renovation or new construction more difficult. In the Core area along First Street,
buildings are constructed along property lines, which limit new construction to additional
stories to add square footage. The Downtown also includes a number of Brownfield sites that
could be ripe for redevelopment with site remediation.
To offset the above constraints the City utilizes a variety of measures and tools including
regulatory incentives, and financial subsidies and negotiation/mediation and business
relocation assistance.
Regulatory Incentives
To accomplish the goal of creating new housing in the Downtown through small-lot
redevelopment as well as lot consolidation where possible, the DSP allows densities of a
minimum 30 dwelling units per acre in the Downtown Core. It also allows taller building
heights, especially in the Downtown Core and Transit and Boulevard Plan Areas, which permit
up to three floors/45-feet. The DSP specifically allows greater height (up to four floors/55-feet)
on the Livermore Village and Groth Brothers Catalyst sites in the Core as further incentive for
redevelopment. Development regulations intended to encourage revitalization and increase
opportunities to create housing include:
3-16

•   Alternative Open Space Requirements – the Plan offers flexibility to smaller sites to meet
    their Open Space requirements in the Downtown. Residential or mixed-use sites under 1
    acre in size may meet their requirement on-site, off-site, by in-lieu payment, or through a
    combination of any of these options.
•   Relaxed Parking Standards – Parking standards in the Downtown have been developed
    to address the more urban nature of the Downtown. They are intended to encourage
    redevelopment and also shared parking opportunities via existing or new parking
    structures (in the Core Area).
         o    Parking requirements for renovation, enlargement, or use changes apply only to
              net new floor area and/or the incremental increase in parking demand that
              accompanies a higher intensity use.
         o    Smaller residential units and multi-family (apartments, flats, lofts) require less
              parking: 1-bedroom units require only 1 space, and apartments and flats require
              only 1.75 spaces.
    Throughout the Downtown, no additional parking spaces are required for the conversion
    of existing commercial/office/retail space to mixed-use where residential units are
    provided above (second floor and up).
•   Minimal Setbacks – In the Core Plan Area there are no minimum building setback
    requirements.
•   Flexibility for National Historic Structures or Historic Resources – To allow use conversions of
    historic structures that will promote rehabilitation (including relocation), the Specific Plan
    allows modifications to development standards, subject to review by the Historic
    Preservation Commission.
•   Streamlined Processing for Smaller Projects – Residential projects providing less than 40
    dwelling units can be reviewed and approved administratively at a staff level.
•   HIP Exemption – All new residential development in the Downtown has received
    allocations and therefore is exempt from the competitive HIP process, further streamlining
    the review time.
•   Density Incentives – A 25% density bonus is permitted in the Transit Gateway Plan Area for
    projects located within 2,000 feet of the LAVTA/ACE station (or other planned transit
    station). Also, along First Street near the transit center, up to 50 du/acre projects are
    permitted with a Conditional Use Permit.
Ongoing Development Projects
Applications and recently constructed projects are a good measure as to whether City
incentives and other means of assistance are supporting residential development as well as
facilitating redevelopment of underutilized or small lots or promoting lot consolidation. The
City has received and processed a number of applications that include new residential units
on smaller lots. The prior to being dissolved, the former Redevelopment Agency has also
acquired several smaller lots, one such lot, along First Street, will be redeveloped to create a
3-story, mixed-use building with two floors above the first for residential units affordable to
extremely low-income households. Along Chestnut Avenue, the Agency acquired smaller lots
for consolidation to create a larger affordable housing development. Following are recent
                                                                                                3-17

examples of potential or pending redevelopment of smaller lots in the Downtown to create
housing. These also include examples of projects where lot consolidation is occurring to
facilitate affordable housing:
    •    2047 First Street Building Site – This is a 5,000 square-foot, vacant site nestled between
         two existing buildings along First Street in the Core Plan Area. The former
         Redevelopment Agency acquired the site with the use of City and State affordable
         housing funds and intends to develop a new 3-story building with commercial on the
         ground floor and two floors of residential above that will be affordable to extremely
         low-income households.
    •    Railroad Avenue Housing Sites – The City owns the properties located at 2121 and
         2139 Railroad Avenue. These underutilized, deteriorating commercial properties were
         acquired in 2009 through use of the City’s Housing Trust Fund and a Local Housing Trust
         fund grant from State HCD. In February 2010, the City entered into an Exclusive
         Negotiating Rights Agreement with Eden Housing, a nonprofit housing developer, to
         develop this site and the site adjacent into an affordable housing project that would
         serve as a model for future mixed use infill development in the downtown core area.
         The dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency has since impacted
         development of these and neighboring catalyst sites. The sites will remain reserved for
         affordable housing development upon completion of the RDA dissolution process.
    •    Chestnut Street Property – The City purchased an adjacent office/retail site in 2010
         and assembled the parcels into a 4-acre site through an Inclusionary Housing land
         purchase and a market acquisition in July 2010 using $2,500,000 of City Housing In-Lieu
         funds. The site will be developed by MidPen Housing as mixed income: market rate for
         sale and an estimated 99 affordable units for seniors and families.
    •    Brighton – Construction is underway at Inman and First Street for 104 small lot,
         detached single family homes ranging from 1,870 to 1,960 square feet. The City
         Council recently approved two more phases bringing overall project to 148 homes.
    •    Portola Road – Grading and infrastructure installation as commenced for this project
         located at the corner of Portola and First Streets. The project is 70 attached
         townhomes ranging from 1,594 to 2,056 square feet.
Parking Requirements
In general, parking requirements are intended to provide adequate on-site parking, without
causing parking deficiencies. Requiring too much parking, however, can add costs to
development, which in turn creates a constraint.
The City’s parking requirements for residential districts vary by housing type, the number of
bedrooms, and parking needs. Detached and attached residences, as well as mobile home
parks, are required to provide two on-site spaces per unit for units with two bedrooms or
more. Guest parking must also be provided at a ratio of one additional space for every four
units in multi-family projects. As part of the Development Code update in 2010, the City
investigated reduced parking standards for senior housing and smaller units (studios and one-
bedrooms). As a result, the Code now has reduced parking requirements for studio and one-
bedroom units at one space per unit, which reduces the land costs and improves the
feasibility of these housing types. The City also updated its parking regulations to clarify that
3-18

tandem parking is allowed in all residential and mixed-use zones, when both spaces are for
the same residential unit.
Tandem parking is also permitted in the Downtown Specific Plan (DSP) area to facilitate
higher density housing on infill sites. Within the DSP, parking requirements for detached and
attached residential uses are the same as the rest of the city but vary for multi-family and
senior housing. For example, parking for senior housing is required at 1.25 spaces per dwelling
unit, and parking for multi-family units with two or more bedrooms is required at 1.75 spaces.
        Table 3-5. Parking Requirements
Residential Type                               Required Spaces
Detached and Attached Units
  Studio and 1-bedroom                         1 space per unit (No covered space required)
  2 or more bedroom                            2 spaces per unit (No covered space required)
  Guest Spaces (multiple families)             1 space per 4 units (No covered space required)
Mobile Home Parks
  Each Mobile Home                             2 spaces per unit
  Use in Common                                0.5 space per unit (Within 200’ of each lot)
  Guest Spaces                                 0 spaces per unit if on-street parking is provided within
                                               project or on an adjacent street;
                                               1 space per 5 units if one side of street has parking;
                                               2 spaces per 5 units if no on-street parking exists;
                                               (Determined by street adjacent lot. If corner lot, can use
                                               either street , or both, to determine.
Downtown Specific Plan
  Single-Family, detached/attached
     Studio and 1-bedroom                      1 space per unit (1 covered space required)
     2 or more bedroom                         2 spaces per unit (1 covered space required)
                                               1 space for studios; 1.5 spaces for one bedrooms; 1.75 for
  Multi-Family
                                               two plus bedrooms
     Studio and 1-bedroom                      1 space per dwelling unit (1 covered space required)
     1-bedroom                                 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit (1 covered space required)
     2 or more bedroom                         1.75 spaces per dwelling unit (1 covered space required)
                                               1.25 spaces per unit (1 covered space required)
  Senior Housing                               In-lieu fee payment also possible for on-site or off-site
                                               parking.
Source: Livermore Development Code, 2010 and Livermore Downtown Specific Plan
                                                                                                         3-19

INCLUSIONARY HOUSING ORDINANCE
The City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, adopted originally in 1978 and updated most
recently in 2013, requires that 15 percent of all units in a residential development within
General Plan areas be set aside as affordable (7.5 percent affordable to moderate- and 7.5
percent to low-income households in for-sale projects). Rental projects are exempt from the
Inclusionary Ordinance with the exception of designated neighborhood plan areas. In the
Downtown Specific Plan Area, at least 10 percent of units in each project must be affordable
to low-income households. Residential projects of 10 units or less are not required to construct
affordable housing units, but must pay the affordable housing fee. Housing units produced as
part of the State density bonus requirements are not subject to the City’s inclusionary housing
requirement.
This ordinance effectively helps to overcome market constraints to the provision of affordable
housing by requiring developers to build a percentage of affordable units as part of their
projects. The City will continue to implement the ordinance to facilitate the production of
affordable housing (Program 3.1.1). The remainder of this section provides a detailed
description of the ordinance and an analysis of its effects on housing production and costs.
Must-Build Requirement
The Ordinance has a “must build” requirement that affordable units be constructed on-site.
The must-build requirement is implemented for several reasons; primarily it:
  •   Helps offset past market trends towards constructing more expensive, low-density
      homes on available land;
  •   Augments the City’s affordable housing stock (as almost all residential properties in
      Livermore are under private ownership, and even with the inclusionary housing fees, the
      City and nonprofit agencies have difficulty competing in the private market for land on
      which to develop affordable housing);
  •   Provides opportunity for lower-income households to enter the homeownership market;
  •   Promotes mixed-income housing dispersed throughout the city, rather than
      concentrating affordable housing in certain locations, consistent with goals to achieve
      a balanced community; and
  •   Provides residents within affordable housing units with the same access to public
      services such as parks, transit, and schools that are available in or near market-rate
      subdivisions.
Alternative Means of Compliance with Must Build Requirement
State housing law mandates alternate means for complying with local inclusionary provisions.
Accordingly, Livermore’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance provides options for complying with
all or a portion of the must build requirement, pending approval by City Council (see
“Approval Process for Alternative Compliance Requests” below). The five alternative methods
include:
  •   In-lieu Fee: A developer may satisfy the affordable housing requirement by paying an in-
      lieu fee for each market-priced unit. Per the Residential Financial Feasibility Analysis
      conducted in 2013, the affordable housing in-lieu fee was adjusted to $15,610 per unit
3-20

       through December 2014, after which time the fee will be assessed at $11.65 per square
       foot.
  •    Secondary Units: In a project of more than 50 units, up to 20 percent of the requirement
       for reserved units may be satisfied by including secondary units along with the market-
       priced units. Each secondary unit provides a credit of 20 percent of a required
       affordable unit since secondary units are generally not comparable in size or other
       attributes to the market rate units.
  •    Off-site Construction: The reserved housing may be constructed on a site other than the
       primary project site. Off-site affordable units must meet the same requirements as those
       located on the project site (in terms of comparability to market-rate). In addition, an
       alternative site must already be identified.
  •    Dedication of Land: A developer may dedicate a parcel of land suitable for
       development of housing units equal to or exceeding the number of affordable units
       required to be provided. The General Plan designation and zoning on this parcel must
       be consistent with the intended use, and there must be direct access to improved
       streets and utilities.
  •    Rental Housing: Section 65589.8 of the California Government Code permits developers
       to satisfy inclusionary housing requirements by constructing rental housing at affordable
       monthly rents, as determined by the local government. While the ordinance does not
       specify this alternative, consistent with state legislation, the City does permit this option
       as requested.
The must-build component of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance was adopted in 2000. In
March 2010, the economic conditions prompted the City to temporarily allow developers to
choose one of the alternative means of compliance without discretionary review by the City
Council. This temporary suspension continued until 2013, when the City conducted a
Residential Nexus Analysis that confirmed that the impact of for-sale residential units on the
need for affordable housing is commensurate with the 15 percent inclusionary requirement.
Thus, the City Council adopted Ordinance 1988 returning to the requirement for a residential
developer to obtain City Council approval prior to satisfying the City’s inclusionary
requirement through an alternative means other than building on-site affordable units. To
ensure the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and the must build requirement do not constrain
housing development, the City includes program 3.1.1 to update the Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance feasibility analysis by 2019 to reflect current market conditions. The City will
evaluate the impact of the must build requirement and will continue to monitor the impact of
the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance every five years.
Approval Process for Alternative Compliance Requests
Alternative compliance requests are processed and approved as part of the City’s residential
entitlement process, either through the Housing Implementation Program (HIP), the
Downtown Specific Plan review process or Transferable Development Credit program,
described further below.
The approval process does not increase processing time beyond that conducted for a typical
new residential project. As part of the HIP submittal package, developers provide an
alternative compliance request along with a report outlining their proposed alternative, how
                                                                                                   3-21

the alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the City, and independent data
supporting why it is not feasible for the applicant to construct affordable units within the
proposed project. The City Council reviews this report in approving a request for alternative
compliance. While the City’s Development Code does not provide required findings for
Council approval, all requests are analyzed based on the economic equivalency of the
proposed alternative to constructing the units on-site.
Alternative compliance requests can add a measure of uncertainty to the housing allocation
and project approval process, since they are reviewed by City Council as part of the project
entitlement process. To minimize this uncertainty, Community and Economic Development
Department staff are available to review proposals during the design phase and assist with
exploring options and alternatives to meet both City and developer objectives. Applicants
are encouraged to meet with staff early in the design process to minimize the amount of time
spent in determining a feasible alternative. This pre-application review is intended to facilitate
development of a mutually beneficial alternative that will meet the ordinance requirements
and receive City Council approval. Additionally, to increase predictability, the Housing and
Human Services Division have proposed to include specific findings and criteria for approval
as part of the Development Code Update scheduled to be completed at the end of 2015.
The approval process still offers flexibility and predictability, since the goal of the alternative
compliance process is to allow variation in providing affordable housing. Although requests
have been modified and negotiated to achieve greater feasibility, the City Council has not
yet denied any formal proposal for alternative means of providing the inclusionary units.
For example, in 2010, the 155-unit Arroyo Crossings project met its affordable housing
requirement of eight low- and moderate-income for sale units on-site by providing a two-acre
alternative site in the former Downtown Redevelopment Project Area. This is an example
where the proposed alternative was negotiated and modified to result in a mutually agreed
upon alternative.
Comparability of Units
Affordable units must be constructed concurrently with market-rate units, and must be
“comparable” units, in type, bedroom mix, and exterior appearance, to the market-rate units.
Specific requirements to further this end include:
♦ The affordable units cannot be distinguishable from other units in the project from the
    street.
♦ The average number of bedrooms must equal the average number of bedrooms for all
    other units in the project, up to a limit of three bedrooms per unit.
♦ Minimum unit sizes are required as shown in Table 3-7 below.
♦ The number of bathrooms in affordable units must equal the proportion of bathrooms in
    the market-priced units.
♦ Units must have air-conditioning, enclosed garages, and laundry facilities to the extent
    market-priced units have those amenities.
♦ The mix of product types of reserved units shall reflect the overall mix of market-rate
    product types provided in the project.
♦ Affordable units must be dispersed throughout the project site, rather than concentrated
    in one portion of the development.
3-22

  Table 3-6.        Minimum Gross Floor Area for Affordable Units
Number of Bedrooms                Units Reserved for Rent   Units Reserved for Sale
Studio unit                       600 square feet           600 square feet
One bedroom unit                  750 square feet           750 square feet
Two bedroom unit                  1,000 square feet         900 square feet
Three bedroom unit                1,250 square feet         1,000 square feet
Four bedroom unit                 1,500 square feet         1,250 square feet
Source: City of Livermore Development Code, 2010.
The comparability requirements for the required inclusionary units are consistent with design
requirements applied to market-rate units. Developers are not required to provide additional
external or internal design features or upgrades or amenities in the inclusionary units that
exceed the City’s standard design requirements for adequate housing. However, developers
are required to meet the following requirements:
   The minimum gross floor area required in affordable 2- and 3-bedroom units is less than
     the average floor area being built in market-rate units with the same bedroom count in
     Livermore.
   The “average number of bedrooms requirement” (up to a limit of 3 bedrooms) is
     intended to provide affordable housing to meet the demographic needs of the City
     while limiting developer cost to provide excessively large comparable units. For example,
     about 47 percent of households in Livermore have three or more people.
   Features such as air-conditioning are standard provisions, particularly in hot climates such
     as the Livermore Valley, where extreme temperatures during summer months can pose a
     health hazard, particularly to senior households.
Consistent with a variety of State Initiatives regarding smart growth and climate change, the
comparability requirements are intended to ensure that affordable housing units are not
segregated within residential neighborhoods, or congregated in areas isolated from existing
community services. Combined with the must-build requirement, the comparability
requirement provides residents within affordable housing units with the same access to
amenities such as community parks as market-rate units in the development. The City does
allow variation in housing types, provided that the project does not compromise the intent of
the Ordinance—to blend, not segregate affordable units within neighborhoods and to
provide affordable housing comparable in quality to market-rate housing. A potential
construction impact of the comparability requirement is cost, when compared to the
reduced cost of providing smaller affordable units with less attributes than market-rate units.
Affordability Terms/Restrictions
The Inclusionary Ordinance contains affordability restrictions to ensure that the affordable
units provided remain as such. These restrictions are implemented through a Low-Income
Housing Agreement, which identifies the specific units that will be affordable and the sales
price of the units. It also reiterates the provisions and stipulations of the Ordinance. Developers
                                                                                               3-23

cannot proceed until an agreement is reached. Specific affordability restrictions in the
Inclusionary Ordinance and implemented by the Low-Income Housing Agreement include:
  •   55-year Restriction: The Ordinance assures the affordability of the reserved units by
      requiring a 55-year deed restriction for either rental or for-sale housing. The 55-year
      restriction, however, is a minimum requirement of the Ordinance and, in an effort to
      preserve affordability to the greatest extent possible, the City strives to apply deed
      restrictions for more than the minimum (up to 99 years for rental projects).
  •   For Sale Units: For sale units are encumbered with a silent second mortgage for the
      difference in value between the affordable price and the initial market rate sales price
      for comparable units. If a buyer re-sells the reserved unit within the restricted time period
      for a price in excess of the current affordable purchase price, then the second
      mortgage must be repaid to the City for use in affordable housing programs.
      Additionally, the owner must live in the affordable unit.
  •   Rental Units: The affordability of rental units in a complex is preserved through a deed
      restriction as outlined above, as well as a regulatory agreement that outlines the terms
      and conditions placed on the reserved units, such as term of affordability and maximum
      affordable rents to be charged based on the established household income limits.
      Additionally, the complex must be managed by a management company
      experienced in affordable housing.
  •   Enforcement: Through the various agreements, the City ensures that parties in violation
      of the affordable housing restrictions, such as by selling or renting an affordable unit at a
      price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed or to an ineligible household, is subject to
      various penalties which may include fines, payment of rents, or exercise of options to
      purchase the affordable units by the City.
Inclusionary Viability and Potential Economic Impacts
This ordinance effectively helps to reduce market constraints to the provision of affordable
housing by requiring developers to build a percentage of affordable units as part of their
projects.
The must-build component of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance was adopted in 2000. Since
2000, approximately 2,800 new housing units have been constructed in the City, of which over
250 units were made affordable to lower-income households through the inclusionary
requirement. Table 3-7 shows that requests for housing allocations consistently exceeded the
number available between 2005 and 2007, despite the must build requirement in 2000. The
steady request for allocations that exceed availability indicates that both the must build
requirement and other growth management practices have not inhibited housing
development in the past.
Based upon a Residential Feasibility Analysis conducted in 2013, the City updated the
affordable housing in-lieu fee to $11.65 per square foot. The Residential Feasibility Analysis
confirmed that adjusting the in-lieu fee to this amount would not unreasonably burden
developers. Also in 2013, the City conducted a Residential Nexus Analysis which confirmed
that the impact of for-sale residential units on the need for affordable housing is
commensurate with the 15 percent inclusionary requirement. Thus, the City Council adopted
Ordinance 1988 returning to the requirement for a residential developer to obtain City
3-24

Council approval prior to satisfying the City’s inclusionary requirement through an alternative
means other than building on-site affordable units.
The City’s return to the 15 percent inclusionary requirement and update of the affordable
housing in-lieu fee to $11.65 per square foot are not expected to constrain construction of
housing at the targeted densities. If needed, the City’s growth management policies include
flexibility to adjust future allocations to address the demographic needs of the community
and Livermore’s RHNA (see Program 2.1.1, Housing Implementation Program).
    Table 3-7.          HIP Allocations and Requests, 2005 - 2016
HIP Year                           2005       2006     2007      2008    2009       2010     2012        2013       2014 20151       2016
HIP Allocations (Units)                                           150   150 (net      50      1453         150       150   2504       2504
                                     150       150       150      (net    29)2       (net
                                                                  29)2               28)2
HIP Requests (Units)                 238       238       238       41      0          51        0           26         0    47
Units Requested that                                              +12                 +5
exceed available                     +88       +88       +88
allocation
1 The  Affordable Housing Ordinance was revised in 2005. The 2005 revision increased the inclusionary housing percentage from 10 to 15
percent.
Source: City of Livermore, 2009.
2 Net number accounts for the units borrowed from the 2008-1010 HIP for the 2004-2007 HIP.
Source: City of Livermore, 2008.
3 Net number accounts for the units borrowed from the 2011-1013 HIP for the 2008-2010 HIP.
Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
4 Increase  reflects transfer of 200 annual allocations from the Downtown Specific Plan area to HIP eligible projects.
Source: City of Livermore, 2014
Available Resources to Offset Potential Costs
The City offers programs to assist developers of affordable or special needs housing pay
impact fees. The City regularly defers City Sewer, Storm Drain, Water Connection, and Traffic
Impact fees. As part of this program, the City will also work with other local and regional
agenciesfor which the City collects feesto encourage similar deferral programs for their
development impact fees (see Program 3.2.4, Fee Subsidies).
Existing regulatory incentives that the City utilizes to offset development costs include:
 Waiving the Transferable Development Credit Fee for affordable housing units covered by
     an affordable housing agreement, including units entitled under the Density Bonus
     provisions.
 Waving the Tri-Valley Transportation Development fee for affordable and/or inclusionary
     housing projects.
 Waiving City’s Traffic Impact Fee (TIF), Downtown Revitalization Fee, and Parks Facility Fee
     for secondary units.
 Waiving Parks Facility Fee for certain health facilities, such as residential care, assisting
     living, convalescent care, and skilled nursing facilities.
                                                                                                                                3-25

 Amortizing payment of development fees over time.
 Providing fee credits for existing conditions to residential developers who are building on
   existing sites.
To further offset potential constraints, developers may use affordable units achieved via the
Inclusionary Ordinance provisions towards meeting State density bonus provisions and City
incentives.
PROVISIONS FOR A VARIETY OF HOUSING
Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This
includes single-family housing, multi-family housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes,
housing for the disabled, emergency shelters, and transitional housing, among others. Table 3-
8 summarizes housing types permitted in the City, with required permit.
Livermore offers a diversity of housing types for all economic segments of the community, as
well as the more vulnerable members of the community, including those earning lower
incomes, seniors, disabled persons, students, and the homeless, among others.
3-26

        Table 3-8. Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                   Transect Zones         Non-Transect Zones
                                                   T4M T4                                               OS-
Land Use                           T3         T4N                                             I-             OS-
                                         T4N       S   M  RR  RS     RL   MFR RG CS CNB CO CP    I-2 E  A/
                                   N          -O                                              1              F
                                                   -O  S                                                OS-R
Residential Uses
Dwelling: Carriage House            P      -    -    -  -  -     -    -    -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Dwelling: Secondary Unit             -     -    -    -  -  P    P     P    P   -  -  -   C C   -   -  -    -   -
Dwelling: Single family             P     P1   P1    -  -  P    P     P        P  -  -   C C         P2   P    C
Dwelling: Duplex                    P1    P    P     -  -  -    C1   P1    P   P  -  -   C C          -    -   -
Townhouse                            -    P    P     -  -  -    C1    -    -   -  -  -   C C   -   -  -    -
Bungalow Court/
                                     -    P    P     -  -  -     -    -    -   -  -  -      -  -   -  -    -   -
Fourplex/Sixplex/Courtyard Apt
Multi-family                         -     -    -    -  -  -     -   P1    P   P  -  -   C C          -    -   -
Mixed-Use, residential component     -     -   P     P  P  -     -    -    -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Mobile home parks                    -     -    -    -  -  -     -    -    C   C  -  -   C C          -    -   -
Home Occupation                     H     H    H     H  H  H    H     H    H   H  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Residential Accessory Use or
                                    P     P    P     P  P  -     -    -    -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Structure
Child Day Care Facility (small)     P     P    P     P  P  P    P     P    P   P  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Child Day Care Facility (large)     Z     Z     Z    Z  Z  Z    Z     Z    Z   Z  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Child Day Care Facility (family)    C     C    C     C  C C     C    C     C   C C   P   P  P  P  P   P    -   -
Live/Work                            -     -   P     P  -  -     -    -    -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -    -   -
Special Needs Housing
    Health Facility (≤6 beds)       P     P    P     P  P  P    P     P    P   P  -  -   -  P  -   -  -   P    -
   Health Facility (>6 beds)        C     C    C     C  C  -    C    C     P   C C   -   C C          C   C    -
   Emergency Shelters 3              -     -    -    -  -  P    P     P    P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P    P
   Transitional/ Supportive
                                     -     -    -    -  -  P    P     P    P      -  -   C C   -   -  -    -   -
   Housing 4
   Farm worker (Employee)
                                     -     -    -    -  -  P     -    -    -   -  -  -   -  P  -   -  -   C    -
   Housing
                                                                                                             3-27

        Table 3-8. Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                          Transect Zones              Non-Transect Zones
                                                         T4M     T4                                                                      OS-
Land Use                                  T3         T4N                                                                  I-                     OS-
                                                T4N      S       M    RR  RS     RL   MFR   RG    CS   CNB    CO    CP        I-2    E   A/
                                          N          -O                                                                   1                      F
                                                         -O      S                                                                       OS-R
Notes:
1. Permitted only if legally existing at time of Code adoption, 5/01/10.
2. Accessory to a permitted use.
3. Subject to the provisions of Livermore Development Code Section 6.03.060.
4. The City understands the Development Code is inconsistent with SB2 with regard to transitional and supportive housing. The City includes program
3.3.4 to amend the Development Code at the time of Housing Element adoption to define transitional and supportive housing as a residential use
subject to the same permit requirements of a residential use in the same zone.
3-28
Multi-Family Units
The Development Code permits multi-family housing in the Multiple Family Residential (MFR)
and Suburban Multiple Residential (RG) zones by right. In these districts, densities range from
six units per acre to 18 units per acre. All five plan areas in the Downtown Specific Plan permit
multi-family at density ranges starting at 15 units per acre up to 55 units per acre.
Approximately 18 percent of the Livermore housing stock consists of multi-family residences. 11
Due to the residential infill policies adopted as part of the 2003 General Plan, as well as the
focus to revitalize the Downtown Area and provide higher density residential there to support
revitalization, the development trend over the last few years has been away from single-
family development. Livermore has seen more applications and approvals for multi-family
attached housing on infill sites and in the Downtown Area. Table 4-5 in the next chapter
provides a listing of recent infill projects and the densities they have achieved. Most of these
infill projects have resulted from the policy changes and increased residential densities
permitted with adoption of the 2003 General Plan and Downtown Specific Plan.
Licensed Care Facilities
The Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act Welfare and Institutions Code
(Sections 5115 and 5116) declares that persons with mental and physical disabilities are
entitled to live in normal residential surroundings. The use of property for the care of six or
fewer persons with disabilities is a residential use for the purpose of zoning. State-authorized,
certified, or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer
persons with disabilities or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-a-day basis is
considered a residential use that is permitted in all residential zones. No local agency can
impose stricter zoning or building and safety standards on these homes than otherwise
required for homes in the same district.
Per State Law, the Livermore Development Code permits licensed residential or community
care facilities with six or fewer beds in all residential zones. 12 Community care facilities for
seven or more residents are permitted in the MFR zone by right and permitted with a
conditional use approval in an additional 13 zones (see Table 3-8 above). A total of 66
residential care facilities with 845 beds are located in Livermore.
Secondary Dwelling Units
Secondary dwelling units (SDUs) provide an affordable rental housing opportunity for low-
income and special needs population groups such as the elderly because they are small. As
housing costs typically increase with square footage, smaller units are considered “affordable
by design”.
11
   State Department of Finance 2014. This figure includes duplexes, condominiums and town homes as well as rental apartments.
12
   The Development Code defines “Health facility” as residential and community care facilities for the elderly, alcoholism recovery, and
    homes for mentally disordered, handicapped, dependent and neglected children.
                                                                                                                                  3-29

The Livermore Development Code allows SDUs in every residential zoning district. Units can be
a maximum of 1,200 square feet in size, depending on the size of the lot and primary dwelling,
as well as the underlying zoning standards on lot coverage and floor area ratio (FAR). SDUs
cannot be sold but may be rented. For these reasons, secondary units provide an opportunity
for the development of relatively small and affordable rental units for low- and moderate-
income individuals and families, seniors, and disabled persons. On average, the City has
issued 6 building permits annually for the construction of SDUs.
City approval records from the last five years indicate that the average size of secondary
dwelling units that have been approved is 511 square feet. Most range in size from 400 to 650
square feet, with a few larger 900-1100 square feet attached or detached SDU. Many of the
units are garage conversions, which limits maximum size. The City waives some fees for SDUs
and regularly responds to inquiries from homeowners interested in building SDUs, but the
relatively high fees and construction costs may be barriers to development of SDUs. They are
also more practical on larger lots, which limit the amount of land for this housing type and
may partly explain the relatively low building rates for SDUs.
Mobile/Manufactured Homes
Mobile homes and manufactured homes offer an affordable housing option to many low-
and moderate-income households. Mobile homes and manufactured housing are defined in
the Development Code as a single-family dwelling and are permitted in all residential zoning
districts in Livermore. In addition, the Development Code permits mobile home parks in the
MFR and RG, subject to a Conditional Use Permit, as well as in some PD districts.
Manufactured homes are reviewed for building permit issuance in the same manner as single-
family homes; the City does not impose any additional design standards or requirements.
According to California Department of Finance, 540 manufactured or mobile homes were
located in the city in 2014. 13 The City has not processed any conversions of mobile home
parks over the last two Housing Element cycles. The City’s Building Division processes one to
two permits for manufactured homes annually.
Farmworker Housing
The City is home to agricultural uses, especially vineyards, which may use seasonal labor.
ABAG estimates that there were 211 agriculture jobs in Livermore in 2014. Although ABAG
indicates a low number of agricultural jobs in Livermore, there is potential demand for
seasonal farm worker housing as Livermore is surrounded by agricultural land. By nature of the
profession, it is difficult to determine the number of seasonal farm laborers that may be
working in the agricultural areas surrounding the City.
In anticipation of this potential need, the City of Livermore’s Development Code makes
provisions to allow farm labor housing in districts that permit agricultural uses, such as the Rural
13
   State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State, 2011-2013 with 2010
    Census Benchmark.
3-30

Residential (R-R) and Open Space (OS-A & OS-R) Districts, and in the South Livermore Specific
Plan areas. The Planned Development - Agricultural District (PD-AG), the Planned
Development – South Livermore Valley Specific Plan Area (PD-SLVSP), and the South
Livermore Valley – Agricultural Zone (SLV-AG) all permit the provision of caretaker’s
residences, which are defined as temporary modular dwellings for persons employed in the
agricultural use of the property and the families of those persons, and/or living quarters for
farm workers when necessary for onsite farming operations.
Emergency Shelters, SROs, and Transitional and Supportive Housing
State law requires that a jurisdiction specify the zoning district(s) where emergency shelters for
the homeless, single-room occupancy units (SROs), and transitional and supportive housing
facilities are permitted. As part of the 2010 Livermore Development Code update, the City
changed the definition of “transitional housing” to include supportive housing, single room
occupancy hotels, and shelter housing.
Transitional and supportive housing is permitted in residential non-transect zoning districts (R-R,
R-S, R-L, and MFR) by right, and similar to other residential uses, with a conditional use permit in
the CO and CP districts. In the transect zones, a variety of residential use types are allowed by
right. The City understands that pursuant to SB2, transitional and supportive housing must be
allowed as a residential use subject to the same permit requirements of a residential use in the
same zone. As such, the City includes Program 3.3.4 to amend the Development Code at the
time of Housing Element adoption to add transitional and supportive housing as an allowed
use in the transect zones and other non-transect zones where residential uses are allowed.
Consistent with State law, the City also identified at least one zoning districts where
emergency shelters are explicitly permitted. Emergency shelters are permitted by right in any
non-transect zoning district, subject to the provisions of Section 6.03.060 of the Development
Code (see Table 3-8 above). All non-transect zoning districts includes residential and non-
residential zones. Together non-transect zones include approximately 20 acres of vacant land
(not including vacant land part of a Planned Development or a Neighborhood Plan) with
densities up to 38 units per acre, on 35 sites ranging from 4,500 square feet to 174,000 square
feet that are physically suitable for development. Emergency shelters are not currently listed
as a permitted use in transect zones. However, the City is conducting a comprehensive
Development Code update and intends to add emergency shelters as permitted use in all
zoning districts, including transect zones.
The Alameda Countywide Homeless County & Survey Report 14 (2013) estimates there were
4,264 persons in 2,715 households, homeless in Alameda County. Of the Countywide totals,
Based upon data from the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS), Alameda
County estimates a homeless population of 60 to 80 people in the City of Livermore. However,
based on feedback from agencies operating shelters, there are significantly more persons
14
   Focus Strategies. Alameda Countywide Homeless Count & Survey Report, 2013.
                                                                                               3-31

who experience homeless in the City at any one time. Homeless services available in the
Livermore are outlined in Table 2-22, and include transitional housing, permanent supportive
housing, and three permanent, year round, shelters; the Tri-Valley Haven Sojourner House and
Shiloh House as well as Shepard’s Gate. The City also has a temporary emergency shelter, the
Livermore Homeless Refuge, which operates under a temporary use permit (non-
discretionary) in the winter months. Existing shelters provide approximately 146 15 beds for
homeless. While many shelters target families and women with children, the Livermore
Homeless Refuge has an established winter shelter program that serves single males.
The City has included Programs 3.3.3 (Rental Assistance) which seeks additional section 8
vouchers and funding for rental housing and 3.3.4 (Homelessness Prevention) which includes
the AC Impact program, which assists homeless persons not traditionally served by
emergency or transitional shelters, to address homelessness in Livermore. While continuing to
support existing emergency (temporary) shelters, the City is focused on long-term solutions to
homelessness and reducing overall need for these types of shelters. By working with local
groups and identifying funds for rental assistance the goal is to place more individuals in
permanent housing, instead of temporary shelters.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAM
The purpose of growth management in Livermore is to ensure that public services and
infrastructure are able to keep pace with residential development, while reducing the
impacts of traffic congestion, air pollution, and urban sprawl that have adversely affected so
many communities throughout California. 16 The growth management program essentially
restrains open-ended residential development without an analysis of the availability of
adequate infrastructure.
The City has a history of utilizing its growth management tools to accomplish its housing goals
and address its Regional Housing Needs Determination. The City first adopted growth
management policies in the 1970s. At that time, these policies were required by the federal
government as a condition of accepting funds to expand the City’s wastewater treatment
plant in order to mitigate worsening air quality in the region. The City initially adopted a
residential growth rate of two percent to monitor the level of residential development
activities. Beginning in 1988, this rate was modified to a range between 1.5 percent and 3.5
percent. With adoption of the 2003 General Plan, this rate was further amended to a yearly
growth determination.
The City’s Growth Management system utilizes a variety of tools and programs that work
together to accomplish the City’s housing goals. As further described further below, the
primary programs include the:
15
   City of Livermore, Council Minutes, Feb 10 2014.
16
   City of Livermore, General Plan Amendment #00-21, Part III, Goals and Policies, Section B – Population-Economic Goals and Policies,
   Number 2 – Population Growth Policies.
3-32

      •   Housing Implementation Program (HIP)
      •   Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)
      •   Transferable Development Credits (TDC)
Housing Implementation Program
The primary tool that implements the City’s growth management policies is the annual
Housing Implementation Program (HIP). The purpose of the program is to ensure the provision
of a variety of housing types, along with adequate services and site improvements. The HIP
establishes guidelines for the allocation of housing units over a three-year period. The General
Plan specifies that the Housing Element must be used as a guide to develop the three-year
Plan. As defined in the General Plan, a yearly growth determination is established for a three-
period. This annual growth determination must be within the range of 140 to 700 units.
The HIP program is the first step in the City’s residential entitlement process. All residential
developments of five or more units are subject to the HIP. Smaller projects with four units or
less are exempt from both the HIP and the adopted growth rate. The allocation of units each
year is a competitive process when the number of housing allocations is less than those
requested by applicants. The HIP establishes specific housing needs or criteria that projects
must address when allocations are competitive. Past criteria has included the provision of
very-low or low-income housing and use of universal design features, among other
considerations.
The HIP can further influence the production of affordable housing through its ability to
“target” or “emphasize” both geographic areas, as well as specific types of units that will be
given preference for permit allocation. For example, infill projects, projects providing
affordable housing that meets the City’s General Plan density incentives, and projects
providing 80 percent of the project with smaller units (under 1,300 square feet) have been
included in the emphasized category of the HIP and, therefore, were given higher priority
than those that did not meet these criteria.
By targeting or emphasizing types of units and areas, the HIP provides incentives for the
production of low and moderate-income housing, which would not normally be provided
through traditional market mechanisms.
If allocations exceed requests, no competitive HIP is undertaken. Due to the economic
downturn and reduction of residential development applications from 2008-2013, the City
suspended the competitive process for HIP allocations covering the 2008-2010 and 2011-2013
HIP cycles. Instead of targeted categories and criteria, the competition was on a first-come-
first-serve basis; projects approved first received HIP allocations until HIP allocations were
spent.
The 2014-2016 HIP is also on a first-come-first-serve basis. However, on June 23, 2014, the City
discontinued reserving 200 annual allocations for the Downtown Specific Plan Area and
added 200 allocations to the 50 allocations available for areas outside of the Downtown
Specific Plan and Transferable Development Credit Program. Thus, 250 annual allocations are
now available for areas outside of the Downtown Specific Plan and Transferable
Development Credit Program.
The current HIP also requires applicants to design and construct as part of the project one of
two alternatives:
                                                                                            3-33

Alternative One: A photovoltaic system(s) which provides for a minimum of 10% of the total
anticipated energy demand of the project: (1) In a single-family/detached project, solar shall
be provided on at least 20% of units, providing approximately 50% of each unit’s household’s
anticipated energy demand, and (2) in a multi-family/ attached project solar may be
provided for individual units or across the project as a whole to provide the required 10%.
Alternative Two: Achieve Tier 2 California Green Building Code Energy Conservation
Compliance for the entire project.
HIP Exemptions and Flexibility
In order to facilitate affordable housing and diverse housing choice for all income levels,
General Plan policy also exempts specific types of units or geographic areas, such as Specific
Plan areas, from competing in the HIP for allocations.
    •  Very-Low Income Allocations - Projects that include at least 35 percent of the total
       units for very low-income residents are exempt from the HIP.
    •  Transferable Development Credits Allocations (TDC) - General Plan policy sets aside
       2000 housing allocations over a 13 year period (2004 through 2016) to projects that
       comply with the City’s Transferable Development Credits (TDC) program, which is
       described in detail below. Units assigned and distributed through the TDC program are
       not subject to HIP competition.
    •  Specific Plans- Yearly allocations may be awarded through specific plans to
       encourage and support residential development and allow phased or larger projects
       to move forward. Examples of successful implementation of this provision are the
       Downtown Specific Plan and the South Livermore Valley Specific Plan. Both of these
       areas have had a specific, significant number of allocations set-aside over a
       designated time period that can be or have been used at any time during the
       specified period. This provision provides predictability to developers by guaranteeing
       that allocations will be available to phased and/or large projects in these areas.
           o    Downtown Specific Plan Allocations - To promote development and
                redevelopment in the Downtown area, 2000 housing allocations (200 per
                year), from 2004 through 2013, were set aside for residential projects in the
                Downtown Specific Plan Area as well. As with the TDC allocations, projects
                could draw from the total number of allocations at any time during this 10-year
                timeframe. Of the 2,000 allocations available for the Downtown Specific Plan,
                261 have been allocated through May 2014, leaving 1,739 available for
                residential development projects. As of May 2014, there are no DSP residential
                project applications in a stage of entitlement application review. When
                residential development proposed for the Downtown approaches the level of
                remaining allocations, the City has the discretion and flexibility to evaluate the
                HIP and return allocations to the Downtown Specific Plan area.
    •  Health Facilities - Congregate care, assisted living, and skilled nursing facilities are
       defined as health care facilities for growth management purposes and are not
       subject to growth management policies. These provisions allowed the Heritage Estates
       Senior Housing development to be constructed in two phases. Phase I is a 250-unit
       senior continuum care facility also known as Heritage Estates and Phase II consists of
3-34

          130 senior apartments in a four-story building over sub-grade parking adjacent to
          Phase I.
The HIP affords the City a great deal of flexibility to accommodate residential growth. The
program permits units to be borrowed from or transferred to future years depending on the
opportunities or constraints in any year of the typical three-year program. In fact, all units for
the three-year program may be allocated in just one year of the cycle. Alternately, fewer
units may be allocated in one year and more in another to allow time for the City to address
infrastructure and environmental constraints. Finally, all unallocated units or expired
allocations for the Transferable Development Program and Downtown Specific Plan return to
the program for allocation in future years, in addition to the annual allocations. General Plan
policy also provides flexibility to reallocate units to different programs areas to meet the City’s
allotted Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).
General Plan policy and the HIP program also provide flexibility in various ways to award
allocations to phased or large-scale projects to facilitate the residential approval and
development. Allocations can be borrowed from future years to accommodate larger
projects or phased development and the allocation amount can vary, plus or minus, up to 10
units to allow flexibility. In order to exceed the established allocation, a project must receive a
“good” or better rating in the HIP.
These measures allow flexibility and provide certainty to developers that larger scale or
phased projects will have the allocations necessary to develop either immediately (with
sufficient allocations) or over time without subsequent HIP approval.
Consistency with the RHNA
The 3-year HIP currently underway is for 2014-2016. The growth determination for the 2014-2016
HIP is 1,350 (450 per year). Of these 1,350 allocations, 200 per year are “reserved” for the
Transferable Developments Program (200 for each year).
Table 3-9, provides an estimate of potential available allocations to meet the City’s 2015-2022
RHNA, using the minimum growth determination permitted and total established allocations
for the TDC program and Downtown Area.
         Table 3-9. Residential Allocations
Program          2004      2005       2006     2007     2008     2009     2010    2011     2012     2013     2014  2015  2016 Total
DSP               200        200       200      200       200     200      200      200     200       200       0    0     0   2,000
         Used                                                                                                                 (-261)
   Remaining                                                                                                                  1,739
TDC               100        100       100      100       100     100      200      200     200       200      200  200   200 2,000
         Used                                                                                                                 (-647)
    Remaining                                                                                                                 1,353
HIP –                                                     150     150       50
                                                          (net    (net     (net     50      50        50       250  250   250 986
                                                         29)*     29)*     28)*
Total Units                                               450     450      450
(Annually)        300        300       300      300       (net     (net    (net     450     450       450      450  450   450 4,078
                                                         329)*   329)*    428)*
* Net number accounts for the units committed in the 2004-2007 HIP (2008-2010 Housing Implementation Program).
                                                                                                                        3-35

The table shows there are 4,078 total allocations available to accommodate the City’s RHNA
of 2,729 units. Consistent with General Plan policy, Program 2.1.1 (Housing Implementation
Program) states that future HIP programs shall establish allocations sufficient to
accommodate the Regional Housing Needs Assessment through 2022 and shall address the
need to provide very low- and low-income housing units
The HIP provides incentives for the production of low- and moderate-income housing, which
would not normally be provided by developers through traditional market mechanisms,
including the Senior Citizen Incentive Program and the Very-Low Income Housing Incentive
Program.
Urban Growth Boundary
The intent of Livermore’s UGB is to protect existing agricultural uses and natural resources
outside the City from urban development while promoting infill development near available
services. The UGB was completed in two phases. The South Livermore Urban Growth Boundary
Initiative was passed by local voters in March 2000 and established the boundary along the
southern edge of the city. The North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative was passed
in December 2002 and completed the UGB around the northern edge of the city. The Land
Use Element of the General Plan includes the policies associated with both initiatives, while
the exact language of each Initiative is contained in the General Plan Appendix.
While the UGB limits urban development to within city limits, the North Livermore UGB Initiative
contains a “State Housing Requirement” provision that would permit the development of
affordable housing outside the UGB to meet State housing requirements, so long as there is no
land available within the City boundary to meet the requirement through new development,
more intensive development, or redevelopment.
The City’s Urban Growth Boundary is not considered a constraint to housing development as
it does not affect the total number of units permitted in Livermore, only the location of units.
Transferable Development Credits (TDC) Program
The Transferable Development Credits (TDC) Program was developed as part of the North
Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, adopted in December 2002. The program
implements the UGB as another way to preserve agricultural land outside the City’s UGB,
curtail sprawl, and provide opportunities for higher density infill residential development near
existing infrastructure and transportation services within the UGB. The program reduces the
pressure to develop on property outside the UGB in North Livermore by enabling rural
property owners to sell credits to builders seeking residential density within the City boundary.
General Plan policy outlines the basic objectives and parameters of the program, while the
TDC Ordinance outlines the implementation details of the program. The program assigns
development credits to properties beyond the UGB, as well as residential receiver sites within
the UGB. Developers may purchase development credits from willing sellers beyond the UGB
to achieve greater residential density on the receiver sites within the UGB. Existing TDC
receiver sites were established during the 2003 General Plan update and were selected
based on their suitability for higher density, infill residential development. In most cases, the
developer and/or property owner requested the change.
3-36

Each receiver site has a dual general plan designation. The baseline density is achievable
without the need to comply with the City’s TDC Ordinance. Applicants who wish to exceed
the baseline density must comply with the City’s TDC Ordinance by purchasing TDCs from
owners in North Livermore or by paying an in-lieu fee to the City. Development on the
receiver site is limited to the maximum density allowed under the General Plan designation
and is subject to the development standards of the corresponding, underlying zoning district.
Projects may also utilize the Planned Development District for greater flexibility in achieving
higher density. An example of a receiver site is the 29-acre Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan
site, which has a base general plan land use designation of light industrial and a dual
designation of Urban High – 3 Residential (which permits 14-18 du/acre). 17
Participation in the program is voluntary; participants may purchase TDC’s and achieve the
higher density. However, the TDC In-Lieu Fee Ordinance does provide an alternative to
purchasing TDC’s and provides exemptions for certain projects.
The TDC Ordinance establishes exemptions from the TDC or in-lieu fee requirement to support
the provision of affordable units and use of density bonus incentives. Projects exempt from
purchasing TDC’s or paying an in-lieu fee include residential projects in the Downtown
Specific Plan Area and housing units covered by an affordable housing agreement, provided
through density bonus for affordable or senior housing consistent with the State law, and units
provided consistent with the City’s inclusionary housing requirements.
As noted above, TDC units are allocated as part of the City’s growth rate; however, they are
not subject to the HIP (in other words they do not need to compete with other projects for
housing allocations). The Housing Implementation Program (Adopted June 2014) exempts 200
TDC units per year for a three-year period 2014-2016. These TDC units, plus any unused
allocation from previous years, are available at any time during the three-year period,
permitting the availability of at least 600 units during this period (through 2016).
To conclude, the TDC program provides an alternative to achieving more intense residential
development on certain sites, as well as a means of procuring residential allocations without
competing in HIP. It does not preclude or constrain higher density residential development on
receiver sites and has no demonstrable impact on accommodating the City’s RHNA.
Growth Management Impacts
The growth management program can increase the uncertainty associated with the
development process, thus affecting the value of land and the developer’s return on
investment.
17
   Under the approved Neighborhood Plan, the site can be developed with approximately 495 multi-family residential units. Neighborhood
   plans are not typically required for the development of TDC receiver sites.
                                                                                                                                 3-37

Timeframe, Cost, and Predictability
The only potential uncertainty to the approval process of the City’s Growth Management
program is the HIP. Since the current HIP is not competitive, it does not add any processing
time and projects are approved as outlined in Table 3-10. When the HIP is competitive, the HIP
process typically takes approximately three to four months. Even though the HIP is an
additional step in the entitlement process, it does not necessarily add additional time to the
overall entitlement process. Since residential projects that receive allocations have already
addressed substantial design issues and city regulations, they can expect the normal
entitlement process to proceed expeditiously. This partly offsets the impact of the HIP process
since the City typically resolves major substantive issues earlier on, rather than at later stages
when changes or alterations may substantially increase costs and/or overall processing time.
Therefore, the additional time factored for the HIP and entitlement processes is somewhat
comparable to the review and entitlement timeframe for noncompeting residential projects
as these projects are likely to still require project alterations to meet City standards and
guidelines.
Once projects have received allocations under the HIP, they cannot be substantially
changed, which also increases the predictability of the subsequent entitlement process. For
projects that have received allocations, remaining review and entitlement would be limited
to consistency with their original proposal and also review of any proposed subdivision of
land.
To reduce uncertainly as to how the program is run, staff prepares a yearly HIP submittal
pamphlet (Dated June 23, 2014 for 2014-2016 HIP), which explicitly outlines the required
submittal information. When competitive, the HIP pamphlet provides necessary information
for applicants to clarify entitlement procedures and help reduce uncertainty in project
approval and timeframe.
Potential Conflicts with other City Policies
The Growth Management program and associated HIP and TDC’s work in conjunction with
other City policies and regulations, such as mixed-income inclusionary provisions and Density
Bonus, to encourage high-quality infill development in appropriate locations, meet the City’s
housing needs, and reduce constraints to affordable housing. For example, projects that
provide 35 percent of the units as affordable to very-low income units, which would exempt
them from the HIP process, would not be required to provide additional inclusionary units. The
affordable housing proposals are reviewed as part of the HIP application process and
program, not separately.
Housing Production and Consistency with the RHNA
The City’s Growth Management Policies, as discussed above, have not affected the City’s
ability to meet its Regional Housing Need Assessment (RHNA) over the last four housing
element cycles. To ensure the City’s continued ability to meet future RHNA’s, the City has
included provisions in Program 2.1.1 (Housing Implementation Program) to establish
allocations sufficient to accommodate any remaining RHNA through 2022. The program also
addresses the specific need to provide very low- and low-income housing units.
3-38

To ensure sufficient development of housing to meet regional needs, the program has always
included specific factors that must be considered when establishing the growth
determination. These include:
      1. The need to provide very low- and low-income housing consistent with ABAG’s
           Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA);
      2. ABAG population growth estimates and the community’s fair share of all types of
           housing;
      3. City-implemented housing programs to support the development and preservation of
           very low- and low-income housing consistent with the goals of the Housing Element;
      4. Proposed development must be in the best interest of the community, which includes
           providing more very-low and low-income housing.
As noted in the sections above, the growth management program includes a number of
exemptions, as well as a variety of methods for allocating units, to further mitigate potential
negative impacts to housing development.
With these measures, the City’s growth management program still ensures sufficient housing
can be provided to meet the regional need. As demonstrated through Livermore’s previous
Housing Element accomplishments discussed in Chapter 5, growth management tools have
not significantly constrained housing production in Livermore, but rather targeted
development in a manner that promotes City goals for a high quality living environment.
Cost of Housing
Studies of Livermore and other cities with growth management programs have revealed that
growth management programs do little if anything to raise the cost of housing within a
community or a region. 18 The median home price in Livermore between June and July of
2014 was $622,000, lower than many other cities in eastern Alameda County that do not have
growth management policies. In fact, Tables 2-27 and 2-28 show that for every unit size and
type the median price, average price, and price per square foot are all consistently lower in
Livermore than in the Tri-Valley as a whole. The City’s Growth Management policies and
programs have not constrained overall housing development nor significantly raised costs in
comparison to other cities in the Tri-Valley. Rather, the policies have ensured that housing is
adequately served by public services and infrastructure and have promoted the
development of a wider range of housing options that are relatively affordable to lower
incomes.
18
   John Landis, “What are the Actual Effects of Local Growth Controls in California? – Case Study.” Department of City and Regional
   Planning, University of California, Berkeley. Additional data presented at “Evaluating Local and State Growth Management Programs:
   What Can We Learn from Experience?” A conference of the Lincoln Institute and UCLA Extension presented in Oakland on April 19,
   1991.
                                                                                                                                3-39

DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER INCENTIVES
The City provides several other mechanisms to facilitate the provision of a diversity of housing
types to address needs in the community. These mechanisms include density bonuses, senior
housing incentives, and very-low income housing incentives.
Density Bonus
In accordance with State law, the City provides density bonuses to qualified new housing
projects. The State's density bonus law (Government Code section 65915 – 65918) was
significantly modified in 2004 by SB1818 (effective January 1, 2005). The changes reduced the
proportion of affordable units needed to obtain a density bonus, increased the maximum
bonus from 20 to 35 percent, required local governments to grant additional concessions,
and added a bonus for land donation.
An example of a project using a density bonus is Orchid Ranch, which was approved in 2014.
To further facilitate the development of affordable housing for seniors and very low-income
households, the City also offers density incentives, which are outlined or concession may be
granted if a higher percentage of units are included in the General Plan and summarized
below.
Senior Citizen Housing Incentive Program
This program provides up to a 45 percent density increase for senior citizen rental housing
meeting the following criteria:
     •   The project will serve low and/or very low income senior citizen rental housing needs;
     •   The dwelling units will not exceed 700 square feet each, plus common facilities;
     •   The project will be located in an area with adequate public facilities and uses, or the
         project will otherwise supply these needs.
Very-Low Income Housing Incentive Program
This program provides a density bonus of up to 50 percent for a project that includes at least
25 percent of its units as affordable to very-low income households. Consistent with State
density bonus law, as periodically amended, the density bonus units shall not be included
when calculating the required number of very-low income units.
A development which meets the criteria for both the Senior Citizen Incentive and the Very-
Low Income Incentive may use both for a potential density bonus of up to 95 percent. Two
projects have utilized these density bonus provisions since 2000: the 30-unit affordable housing
development, Carmen Avenue apartments on South Livermore Avenue, and the 40-unit
senior housing development, Vandenburg Villas on Gardella Plaza (Table 3-10). Another
project, the Chestnut/P Street housing project, will likely utilize one or both of the density
bonuses.
3-40

        Table 3-10. Housing Developments Utilizing Density Bonus Provisions
                                           Permitted Density/
Project                     GP Designation                          Proposed Units Units Gained
                                           Total Units
Orchid Ranch                ULM            2 – 3 du/acre (15 units) 18             +3
Carmen Avenue                              18 – 22 du/acre (22
                            UH-4                                    30             +8
Apts                                       units)
Vandenburgh Villas          UH-1           6 – 8 du/acre (20 units) 40             +20
Total                                                               88             31
Source: City of Livermore, 2009.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
The City Community & Economic Development Department is responsible for performing
development review to implement policies that direct the physical development of the City.
Policy implementation and project analysis include establishing conformance to local goals
for development, adopted growth management goals, open space and agricultural
preservation, and identifying environmental consequences.
The development review process has potential to add time and uncertainty to projects,
which can increase costs above direct expenses related to design and construction.
However, the City has added certainty to the development review process by providing
opportunities for comprehensive pre-application meetings, adopted Design Standards and
Guidelines, and in some cases, simultaneous review of development review and construction
permits. Project applicants may request and attend Advance Team meetings that provide
real time, comprehensive feedback from all City Departments before submitting formal
development applications. The City’s adopted Design Standards and Guidelines provide
clear written and illustrative examples of site design components and architectural features
that are required and/or recommended. Increasing certainty in the Development Review
process often results in shorter review times and lower indirect costs for applicants. The City
has reviewed and issued grading permits in advance of final subdivision map approval in
order to accommodate aggressive construction schedules. The following sections describe
the process:
Streamlined Development Review
The City has worked to streamline the development review process to minimize costs
associated with delay (initially borne by developers but ultimately consumers), while also
ensuring that development complies with City goals and standards and providing enough
time for the public and decision-makers to provide input.
Tables 3-11 and 3-12 summarize approximate timeframes for various approval processes that
apply to residential projects of varying sizes and types. Environmental analysis, including
Environmental Impact Reports and Negative Declarations, are processed concurrently with
other development applications.
The estimated timeframe to process projects of five or more units and/or that require tentative
map review (either parcel or tract) can range from six to 18 months (including final map
review and also building permit plan check) depending on the complexity and size of the
                                                                                              3-41

project. Smaller projects (4 units are less) are processed the most expeditiously, typically under
six months. They usually can be reviewed administratively by staff and are exempt from HIP,
reducing the planning entitlement timeframe by three to four months compared to larger
projects. If proposed in a developed area with existing infrastructure, they can also be
processed with a parcel map waiver, further reducing the processing time.
The Design Review process established for the Downtown Area permits larger projects (up to
and including 39 units) to be reviewed administratively by staff, provided they are not
proposing a new parcel or tract map.
   Table 3-11. Development Review Timeframes / General Plan Areas (outside Downtown
        Specific Plan)
                                          Design
Permit/Approv                             Review/Site                    Final Map    Building
                     Application                            Planning                             Total
al Type                                   Plan                           Review       Permits
                     Review
                                          Approval
1 Single-family
                             n/a               n/a                n/a          n/a    4 – 6 wks.  4 – 6 wks.
unit/1 lot
2-4 units,
single- or multi-                            1-2 mos.         2 – 3 mos.       n/a    4 – 6 wks. 3 – 4½ mos.
                      Up to 30 days
family
   w/ Parcel
                                             1-2 mos.         2 – 3 mos.       n/a    4 – 6 wks. 3 – 4½ mos.
   map waiver         Up to 30 days
   w/ Parcel                                                                                        6½–9½
                                            2½-3 mos.        2½ - 3 mos.   3 – 5 mos. 4 – 6 wks.
   map                Up to 30 days                                                                  mos.
5+ units, Single-                                                                                   6 – 8½
                                             2-3 mos.         5 – 7 mos.       n/a    4 – 6 wks.
or Multi-family       Up to 30 days                                                                  mos.
   w/ Parcel                                                                                        6 – 8½
                                             1-2 mos.         5 – 7 mos.       n/a    4 – 6 wks.
   map waiver         Up to 30 days                                                                  mos.
   w/ Parcel                                                                                      10½ –14½
                                            2½-3 mos.        6½ –8mos.     3 – 5 mos. 4 – 6 wks.
   map                Up to 30 days                                                                  mos.
   w/ Tract                               2½-3 mos. PC         8½ – 11                              14 – 19
                                                                           4 – 6 mos. 6 – 8 wks.
   map                Up to 30 days        2-3 mo. CC            mos.                                mos.
1 Estimated  planning entitlement time frames are best case scenario
based upon a deemed “complete” application/submittal package
during the application review period as well as consistency with city
development regulations. Incomplete, inconsistent and/or complex
residential projects may warrant additional processing time.
Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
3-42

        Table 3-12. Development Review Timeframes / Downtown Specific Plan Areas
                                    Design
Permit/Approv                       Review/Site               Final Map      Building
                     Application                 Planning                               Total
al Type                             Plan                      Review         Permits
                     Review
                                    Approval
1 Single-family             n/a           n/a     2 – 6 wks.        n/a      4 – 6 wks.  1½ - 3 mos.
unit/1 lot
39 or less units      Up to 30 days    1 -2 mos. 2 – 3½mos.         n/a      4 – 6 wks.   3 – 5 mos.
w/ Parcel map
                      Up to 30 days    1 -2 mos. 2 – 3½ mos.        n/a      4 – 6 wks.   3- 5 mos.
waiver
                                                                                           6½ - 10½
w/ Parcel map         Up to 30 days   2½-3 mos.  2½– 4 mos.     3 – 5 mos.   4 – 6 wks.
                                                                                             mos.
                                    2½-3 mos. PC                                           10– 14½
w/ Tract map          Up to 30 days               5 – 7 mos.    4 – 6 mos.   4 – 6 wks.
                                     2-3 mos. CC                                             mos.
40 or more            Up to 30 days   2½-3 mos.  3½ – 4 mos.        n/a      6 – 8 wks.   5 – 6mos.
units
Parcel map            Up to 30 days   2½-3 mos.     3½ – 4          n/a      6 – 8 wks.   5 – 6 mos.
waiver                                               mos.
                      Up to 30 days   2½-3 mos.     3½ – 4      3 – 5 mos.   6 – 8 wks.   8- 11 mos.
w/ Parcel map
                                                     mos.
                      Up to 30 days   2½-3 mos.  5½ - 7 mos.    4 – 6 mos.   6 – 8 wks.     11 – 15
w/ Tract map
                                       2-3 mos.                                              mos.
Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
Design Guidelines
City staff evaluates proposed residential development projects against Residential Design
Standards and Guidelines (2004). The Design Guidelines are used to promote high quality
architecture and encourage the compatibility of residential development with the
surroundings. The Design Guidelines are flexible and encourage housing that uses a variety of
materials, drought tolerant plants, and energy efficient designs. The guidelines also emphasize
pedestrian-oriented environments.
The City’s implementation of the Design Guidelines has worked to mitigate the visual impacts
of higher density affordable projects, which has led to greater community support for
affordable housing than in many other cities. The Design Guidelines do not require specific
architecture, site design, or materials that add substantial cost or hinder the production of
affordable housing.
Fees and Exactions
The City collects fees and exactions from developments to cover the costs of processing
permits and providing the necessary services and infrastructure related to new development
(see discussion on Public Improvements below). The passage of proposition 13 in 1978, which
capped property tax revenue, along with subsequent tax revenue shifts away from cities
during the early 1990’s, have eroded the ability of local government entities to finance public
improvements to accommodate new development with general funds. Development impact
                                                                                              3-43

fees related to public improvements (such as storm drainage, sewer, water, parks, and traffic)
ensure that infrastructure has adequate capacity to accommodate new residential
development, as discussed further under “Site Improvements” below. Similarly, the City’s
affordable housing fees contribute to the production of affordable housing and its long-term
availability, despite fluctuating economic and market conditions.
Planning fees are calculated based on the average cost of processing a particular type of
case and are charged at the time an application for development is received. Development
impact fees are collected as part of the building permit issuance process and are typically
based on the project type and square footage. Table 3-13 lists the planning, development,
and other fees charged for residential development.
Livermore’s fees are comparable to nearby jurisdictions with similar markets, such as the City
of Fremont. For example, Livermore’s development fees for a typical single family residence
are approximately $5,000 per unit less than the City of Fremont, while fees for a typical multi-
family unit in Livermore are approximately $5,000 per unit higher than the City of Fremont. The
Housing Plan includes Goal 1.2.5 to monitor the City’s development fees annually to ensure
they are not a constraint to development.
There are some fees associated with residential development listed in Table 3-13 that the City
does not control. For example, the Tri-Valley Transportation Development Fee is used to
finance transportation improvement projects needed to accommodate new development
and reduce traffic-related impacts in the Tri-Valley Development Area, including the City of
Livermore. The Tri-Valley Transportation Commission (TVTC) is a Joint Powers Agreement
consisting of one representative of each of the following entities: Alameda County, Contra
Costa County, Cities of Dublin, Livermore, Pleasanton, San Ramon, and the Town of
Danville. The TVTC periodically evaluates the impacts of projected land uses on regional
transportation infrastructure in the Tri-Valley area and establishes a cost nexus between land
use projections and impacts to the regional transportation infrastructure.
Potential Impacts on Cost and Supply of Housing
The potential impact of development fees on the overall cost and supply of housing,
particularly of affordable housing, rests on a variety of factors. As described in Market
Constraints, in addition to fees, other contributing factors to housing cost and production
include the cost of land, labor, materials, and financing, as well as the availability of
financing. While impact fees add to the overall cost to produce housing, it has not been
shown that a reduction in impact fees decreases the cost to the home purchaser, nor
increases the production of affordable housing within a community. In other words, a
reduction in fees would reduce costs to developers, but it does not guarantee that this cost
savings would be passed on to the consumer.
The City of Livermore has not seen a significant decrease in housing production or residential
allocation requests, despite incremental increases in fees. Fees have increased since the 2009
Housing Element but still appear to be within the range of fees charged by neighboring
jurisdictions. Furthermore, the City uses various practices and procedures to offset the
potential negative effects that development impact fees may have on housing development
and cost. These include:
     •   Residential development projects involving multiple planning applications can have
         their planning fees reduced by 10 percent.
3-44

     •    The City also provides incentives and planning assistance for developers of affordable
          or special needs housing, including reduced fees, exemption from growth
          management programs, shorter review timelines, and pre-application meetings.
     •    The City waives the Transferable Development Credit Fee for affordable housing units
          identified in residential developments.
     •    Developers may amortize the payment of development fees over time to meet
          affordable housing goals.
     •    The City provides fee credits to residential developers who are building on existing infill
          sites. The amount of credit given to a particular fee is based upon existing conditions
          and improvements on or to the site, such as utility connections and building square
          footage. The previous use of the site is also considered in determining whether traffic
          impact fee credits are warranted.
  Table 3-13.      Planning and Development Fees
Development Fees                                                     Fee Charged
                                           Admin Review
Planning Entitlements1                                               Committee Review (Public Hearing)
                                             (Staff Level)
  Design Review                                $0-$6,710                          $6,710-$11,870
  Site Plan Review and Approval                $0-$6,710                          $9,810-$11,870
  Parcel Map Waiver                                                      $4,280
  Parcel Map                                                         $3,082-$8,730
  Tentative Tract Map2                                      $5,710 – $15,220 + $75 per lot
  Planned Development Fee                                           $12,910-$14,960
Environmental Review Fees
  Negative Declaration                                                   $4,270
  Environmental Impact Report                                $7,150 + time and materials
Building Permits                                          Fees Vary According to Valuation
Public Services/Public Works                Single Family                          Multi-Family
  Water Connection (City Fee)3                $3,954/unit               depends on required meter size
                                              $0.30/sq ft
  Storm Drainage (City Fee)                                               $0.30/sq impervious surface
                                        impervious surface
  Tri-Valley Transportation
                                              $2,433/unit                           $1,549/unit
  Development Fee (Regional Fee)4
                                            Up to max. of
  In-lieu Low Income Housing Fee5                                          Up to max. of $15,610/unit
                                             $15,610/unit
  Social and Human Service Facility
                                              $1,677/unit                           $1,298/unit
  Fee
                                         0.33% total project
  Art in Public Places6                                                  0.33% total project valuation
                                               valuation
                                                                                   Multi-Family
                                            Single Family
                                                                 Studi                   2         3       4
                                                                           1 brm
                                                                   o                  bdrm      bdrm    bdrm
                                                                 $7,142    $7,994    $10,330  $11,722  $13,472
Park Facilities Fee                          $13,472/unit
                                                                  /unit     /unit      /unit     /unit   /unit
                                                                 $2,745    $3,073     $3.197    $4,507  $5,180
Sewer Connection                              $5,180/unit
                                                                  /unit     /unit      /unit     /unit   /unit
                                                                 $2,274    $2,547     $3,291    $3,848  $3,848
Traffic Impact Fee (Downtown only)                n/a
                                                                  /unit     /unit      /unit     /unit   /unit
                                                                                                            3-45

   Table 3-13.     Planning and Development Fees
Development Fees                                                         Fee Charged
Traffic Impact Fee (Citywide except                                  $3,705    $4,148    $5,360      $6,268    $6,268
                                                    $7,950/unit
Downtown)                                                             /unit     /unit     /unit       /unit     /unit
General Plan Cost Recovery                                                  $0.39/sq ft
DSP Cost Recovery (only if located
                                                                            $0.31/sq ft
in downtown)
1 Applications involving multiple entitlements can be reduced by 10%
2 Base fee plus $75/unit.
3 Areas within Cal Water Service Area, Greenville/Vasco Assessment District, or Triad Park do not pay a City water
connection fee.
4. Affordable and/or inclusionary housing exempt from Tri-Valley Transportation Development (TVTD) Fee (TVTC). The
TVTD Fee is a fee collected to fund regional transportation improvements, while the City’s Traffic Impact Fee is to
fund transportation projects within the City of Livermore.
5. See discussion of Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and alternative compliance.
6 Residential projects of 4 or more.
Source: Community and Economic Development Department Development Fees, City of Livermore, dated July 1,
2014
Impacts by Housing Type
Table 3-14 provides a hypothetical comparison between fees charged to develop a single-
family detached dwelling, a 10-unit townhome development, and a 30-unit rental apartment
building. Fees for multi-family for-sale projects are lower than single-family attached or
detached projects, with the greatest difference in fees issued at a “per unit” or “per square
foot” rate, such as the storm drainage fee. Programs 3.2.1 and 3.2.5 are proposed to reduce
governmental constraints to projects with an affordable component by: exploring additional
funding sources for affordable housing, providing subsidies to affordable housing projects,
allowing developers to amortize payment of fees over time, and meeting with developers to
discuss other incentives for the provision of affordable housing.
It should be noted that the per-unit totals shown by housing type do not include fees charged
by other government agencies such as the school district or county or state fees. Other
agency fees can add approximately $15,000 to $30,000 dollars to the per-unit cost,
depending on the type and size of the proposed units and the amount of existing or added
impervious surface area. In addition, the per unit costs shown for each development scenario
do not reflect fee credits that may be applicable to the site or project based upon existing
improvements such as existing utility connections and/or existing impervious surface area (i.e.
existing paving and buildings).
One of the development challenges for smaller housing products is the current structure of
the City’s fee program. As many of the fees are charged on a per unit basis, fees represent a
significantly higher proportion of overall development costs for smaller units. The City has
proposed Program 1.2.1 to evaluate barriers to development on small properties as well as
consider Development Code amendments to expand opportunities for smaller unit types,
such as apartments, studios, and cottages.
3-46

         Table 3-14. Fee Comparison/Single Family vs. Multi-Family Rental Units
Type of City Fees                     1 Single-Family      10-Unit Townhome          30-Unit Apartment
                                      Dwelling             Building                  Building
Building                                     $4,778                 $13,000                       $16,500
Tax on Residential
                                            $4,122.65                 $2,089                     $2,398.73
Construction*
Fire                                           $640                   $1,280                        $3,840
City Storm**                                 $1,800                   $6,534                        $6,534
Sanitary Sewer                               $5,180                   $4,507                        $4,507
Park Fee                                    $13,472                 $11,722                       $11,722
City Water Connection ***                    $9,474                   $9,474                        $9,474
Fire Sprinkler Plan Review                     $600                    $400                           $400
Fire Alarm System                                  0                   $870                           $870
Traffic Impact                               $7,950                   $6,268                        $4,268
In-Lieu Low Income
                                            $23,300                 $17,475                               0
Housing****
Tri-Valley Transportation
                                             $2,433                   $1,549                        $1,549
Fee
General Plan Cost
                                               $780                    $585                           $390
Recovery Fee
Art in Public Place Fee                       $777.41                 $529.75                         $390
Social & Human Services
                                             $1,677                   $1,415                        $1,298
Facility Fee
Waste Management Plan
                                                 0.00                  $67.12                         $67.12
Fee
Administrative Design
                                               $510                      $51                           $17
Review
Administrative Site Plan
                                                 0.00                  $652                           $208
Approval
CEQA Filing Fee                                $50.00                   $5.00                          $5.00
Total Fee Per Unit                         $77,544.06              $79,93.15                    $64,500.18
*1.75% of total cost: single family home 2,000 @ $117.79 per sq. ft. Town Home 1,500 sq. ft. @ $107.02 per sq
ft. and Apartment 1,000 S.F. @ 137.07 per sq.ft
** $0.30 per sq. ft. of imperious surface @ 50% lot coverage: Single Family 6,000 sq. ft. lot, Multi-Family 1 acre.
*** Single Family home = 5/8” meter, Townhome = 1-1/2” meter, Apartment = 2” meter
**** Per Ordinance rentals are exempt from Fee. Assumed Apartments are rentals
Source: City of Livermore, 2015.
                                                                                                                    3-47

BUILDING CODES AND THEIR ENFORCEMENT
Building standards are essential to ensure safe housing, though excessive standards can
constrain the development of housing. Livermore has adopted the Uniform Building Code
and the Uniform Housing Code, which establish basic standards and require inspections at
various stages of construction of buildings and homes to ensure code compliance. The City
has not adopted any additional local codes to the Uniform Building Code. The City’s building
code also requires new residential construction to comply with the federal American with
Disabilities Act, which regulates accessibility for persons with disabilities. Although these
standards and the time required for inspections increase housing rehabilitation or production
costs, the intent of the codes is to provide structurally sound, safe, and energy-efficient
housing and to address housing needs of all residents in the community.
The City’s Neighborhood Preservation staff is responsible for enforcing both State and City
regulations governing maintenance of all buildings and property. Neighborhood Preservation
staff primarily address property maintenance issues and implement the Neighborhood
Nuisance Abatement Program. To facilitate the correction of code violations or deficiencies,
Neighborhood Preservation staff refers owners to rehabilitation loan and grant programs
offered through the City’s Housing and Human Services Division.
The City also coordinates internally between city staff from various departments and divisions
including Neighborhood Preservation staff, Building, the Police Department, and Housing and
Human Services, to identify areas with building problems, code enforcement, and other issues
and to focus strategies and resources into targeted neighborhood revitalization efforts.
The adopted building codes and code enforcement ensure the safety and welfare of
residents and do not hinder residential development.
HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
The City actively promotes the development of housing that meets the needs of persons with
disabilities including physical, mental and cognitive disabilities. The following sections provide
an evaluation of the potential for City processes to impede housing opportunities for persons
with disabilities.
Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
Pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, the California Fair Employment
and Housing Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the City shall provide
individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, and
procedures. A Reasonable Accommodation is typically an adjustment to physical design
standards (e.g. setbacks) to accommodate the placement of wheelchair ramps or other
exterior modifications to a dwelling in response to the needs of a disabled resident. Requests
for Reasonable Accommodation in development standards are reviewed and approved at
the staff level (Development Code Chapter 9.06).
The Community and Economic Development Department regularly responds to requests for
reasonable accommodation in existing residences through the building permit process and in
new residential construction through the development review process (Program 5.1.2). For
example, the City approved and participated in the development of the Carmen Avenue
apartments, which includes universal design features for accessibility in the units. ECHO
Housing has also completed fair housing tests for reasonable accommodations in multi-family
rental properties and provides regular training for all landlords on this requirement.
3-48

Building Code
The City has adopted California Building Code, as amended. Chapter 11 of the 2013 Building
Code provides guidance for accessibility improvements. The City has not adopted any
amendments that would impede a person with a disability from improving their home to
make it more accessible.
In order to maintain an independent lifestyle, a home may need to be modified to increase
accessibility through universal design features. Universal design is also known as “design for
all” and “lifespan design.” The objective is to improve the accessibility of homes not only for
residents of all ages and abilities, but visitors as well. Examples of universal design features
include wheelchair ramps.
The City has not adopted an ordinance governing the construction or modification of houses
to incorporate universal design, which is intended to allow individuals to remain in their homes
as their physical needs and capabilities change. However, the City does encourage the use
of universal design, as listed in Program 1.3.2 in Chapter 5.
Recent projects in Livermore that have incorporated universal design include Savannah
Terrace and most recently Carmen Avenue Apartments, which incorporated “visitability”
standards (i.e. zero thresholds). Visitability enables mobility impaired residents/visitors to
access every unit in the complex.
Zoning and Land-Use Policies and Practices
The City has not identified any zoning or other land-use regulatory practices that could
discriminate against persons with disabilities and impede the availability of such housing for
these individuals. Examples of the ways in which the City facilitates housing for persons with
disabilities through its regulatory and permitting processes are:
  •   As previously discussed under “Licensed Care Facilities”, the City’s Development Code
      provides for the development of group care facilities for persons with disabilities.
  •   The City does not restrict occupancy of unrelated individuals in group homes and does
      not have a restrictive or narrow definition of family in its Development Code.
      Occupancy restrictions are limited to provisions deemed necessary to ensure public
      health, safety, and welfare, and do not conflict with regulations of the California
      Building Code, the Fair Housing Act, or the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.
  •   The City permits housing for special needs groups, including individuals with disabilities,
      without regard to distances between such uses or the number of uses in any part of the
      City.
  •   The City actively works with non-profits developers to secure financing for special needs
      housing including Prop 63-Mental Health Services Act funding opportunities.
  •   The City has included a program (Program 1.3.5) to ensure ongoing compliance with
      Fair Housing Laws.
  •   During the next eight year planning period, the City will be reviewing and revising its
      parking standards as appropriate for persons with disabilities.
Based on this review, the City did not identify any governmental constraints that may impede
the development and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities, as the main
                                                                                             3-49

challenge is the high cost of housing. To offset this constraint and encourage development of
housing for persons with special needs, the City offers the following incentives (Program 1.3.3).
      •    Monetary Subsidies – The City uses its Affordable Housing Fund and other available
           sources to provide monetary assistance to developers and non-profits to create
           special needs housing and make accessibility modifications to existing properties. The
           City has provided subsidies to developers for the payment of fees, project
           construction, and land costs.
      •    Flexibility in Development Standards – The City has allowed variations in parking, open
           space and setback standards to facilitate special needs housing.
      •    Value Engineering – The City provides “value engineering” during the plan check
           process by allowing for different construction materials that achieve cost savings while
           still meeting minimum code requirements.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Public improvements for new residential development are integral to the planning and
development process. The City requires developers to provide public improvements to ensure
the health, welfare and safety of the community and future residents of new developments,
consistent with General Plan policies.
The City applies minimum improvement standards to ensure that public improvements are
adequate to serve new development. The City also has specific construction standards and
details regarding how they are built. The City’s Subdivision Ordinance requires specific
improvements and design standards as part of every subdivision approval, in accordance
with established Engineering Standard Specifications and Construction Details. Required
improvements include: storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water supply, utilities, undergrounding
utilities, street, access, and frontage improvements such as street lighting, fire hydrants, signs,
street trees, and landscaping.
As part of each subdivision approval, the City also requires improvement plans that
demonstrate conformance with the Standard Engineering Specifications and Details, as well
as a signed subdivision improvement agreement assuring the completion of improvements
within a specified time and payment for them.
The City updates and amends its Engineering Standard Specifications and Details every two
to three years to address: changes in existing conditions, new legislation, environmental and
conservation issues, technological advancement, and/or other improvements related to
health, safety, cost, or efficiency.
While the cost of providing public improvements and meeting City requirements may
influence the cost of housing, they are a necessary component of providing quality and
sustainable residential development. Livermore’s Engineering Standard Specifications and
Construction Details for each of these improvement areas are consistent with and no more
onerous than public improvement specifications of other jurisdictions in Alameda County. In
many instances, the standards are governed by state or federal regulations, such as the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) for accessibility, the Clean Water Act for stormwater
treatment measures, and Caltrans for highway design specifications. Table 3-15 provides
detail on the specific public improvement standards, as well as the regulating ordinance or
legislation.
3-50

Street Improvements
The City of Livermore requires basic street and access improvements for new residential
development. Requirements include curbs, gutters and sidewalks at a minimum width of 5-
feet. Street right-of-way and travel lane widths vary depending on the proposed street
classification. Table 3-15 depicts the required widths based on each street classification.
Private residential streets and local streets vary in minimum width from 15 feet to 40 feet
(travel way, not total right of way), depending on the presence and location of street
parking. As would be expected due to their larger traffic volume, major and collector streets
are considerably wider; collector streets are 52 feet wide and major streets vary between 34
and 46 feet in each direction, as their width is based on the number of travel lanes. Sidewalks
and other pedestrian paths have a minimum paved width requirement of 5 feet.
Storm Drainage and Sanitary Sewer
The City of Livermore requires residential developers to provide a hydrology/hydraulic study in
accordance with the City’s Facilities Planning Guidelines and also consistency of the
proposed system with the City’s storm drain master plan. The City also requires residential
developers to provide a sewer study based upon the City’s Facilities Planning Guidelines and
is consistent with the City’s Sewer Master Plan.
Water Supply
The proposed water system of any new residential development must be consistent with the
City’s Water Master Plan. Additionally, comments from the City’s Water Resources Division
regarding the design and sizing of the system must be incorporated into the site design, as
well as comments from the Fire Marshall concerning the location of fire hydrants and
minimum fire flow requirements to address fire suppression. New projects that are in Cal
Water’s service area must be approved by that agency.
        Table 3-15. Public Improvement Standards
Required
                   Development Guidelines    Comments                 Governing Legislation
Improvement(s)
Streets            Travel       Total ROW    Approved Tentative Map   City Engineering Standard
                   Way           (including  determines actual street Details
                                curb &       widths. The following
                                sidewalk)    street dimensions are
                                             intended as guidelines
                                             only.
   Major           34’ to 46’   104’ to 140’ Dimensions are provided  City Engineering Standard
                                             for comparison; Final    Details
                                             widths depend on no. of
                                             lanes. No new major
                                             streets are planned in
                                             conjunction with new
                                             residential.
   Collector       52’          72’          Total ROW includes 5’    City Engineering Standard
                                             bike lane each way       Details
   Local           40’          60’          Serving 50+ units each   City Engineering Standard
                                             direction                Details
   Local           32’          52’          No homes fronting on     City Engineering Standard
   Street/Parking                            one side of street       Details
   One Side
                                                                                             3-51

         Table 3-15. Public Improvement Standards
Required
                   Development Guidelines       Comments                    Governing Legislation
Improvement(s)
   Minor Local     36’           52’            Serving 20 to 50 units      City Engineering Standard
   Street,                                      each direction              Details
   Cul-De-Sac,
   and Loops
   Short Cul-De-   32’           52’            Serving less than 20 units  City Engineering Standard
   Sac                                                                      Details
   Curb, Gutters,  Min. 5’       10’ each       Sidewalks can be            City Engineering Standard
   Sidewalks       wide          side of street monolithic or separated.    Details
                   paved
                   sidewalk
Curb                                                                        Caltrans and Americans
Ramps/Return                                                                with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Bus Turnouts                                    Provided on collector or    Livermore Valley Transit
                                                major street when           Authority (LAVTA)
                                                required by the local
                                                transit authority
Required
                   Development Guidelines       Comments                    Governing Legislation
Improvement(s)
Private                                         Private street dimensions
Residential                                     are commonly used in
Streets                                         Residential Planned
                                                Developments to allow
                                                flexibility to address site
                                                constraints on residential
                                                infill properties/projects.
   Parking both    Min. width 36’                                           City Engineering Standard
   sides                                                                    Details
   Parking one     Min. width 33’                                           City Engineering Standard
   side                                                                     Details; Livermore
                                                                            Development Code
   No street       Min. width, one-way 15’                                  City Engineering Standard
   parking                                                                  Details; Livermore
                                                                            Development Code
                   Min. width, two-way 26’                                  City Engineering Standard
                                                                            Details; Livermore
                                                                            Development Code
   Private         Minimum width 5’                                         City Engineering Standard
   sidewalks and                                                            Details; Livermore
   pedestrian                                                               Development Code
   pathways
Public             One tree per single          Min. street tree size 24”   City Engineering Standard
Landscaping        frontage lot                 box; Min.shrub size 5 gal.  Details
                   No written standard for      Typically, these are
                   multi-family development     zoned as Planned
                   projects.                    Developments and the
                                                location and number of
                                                street trees would be
                                                determined based on
                                                the proposed site layout
                                                and final street width
                                                determinations.
Signs/Striping     Street name signs at all                                 CalTrans/City of Livermore
3-52

        Table 3-15. Public Improvement Standards
Required
                  Development Guidelines       Comments                    Governing Legislation
Improvement(s)
                  intersections
                  Speed limit signs where                                  CalTrans/City of Livermore
                  appropriate
                  One-way signs shown in                                   CalTrans/City of Livermore
                  median and streets where
                  appropriate
                  Stop signs provided where                                CalTrans/City of Livermore
                  required by City Engineer
                  Centerline striping where                                CalTrans/City of Livermore
                  appropriate
Sanitary Sewer    Min./typical new line size:  Each unit or lot within the
                  8”                           subdivision shall be
                                               served by an approved
                                               sanitary sewer system,
                                               designed for ultimate
                                               development of the area
                  All lines must have min. 5’
                  of cover from grade
                  Sewer laterals/residential –
                  4” two-way cast iron
                  cleanout behind curb
                  No curved sewers
                  All lines end at
                  maintenance hole; holes
                  spaced max. 400’ apart
                  Sewer lines extended to
                  all tract boundaries
                  System can be easily
                  extended to serve future
                  development
Water Supply      Water service and meter
                  provided to all lots,
                  medians and other public
                  or private landscaped
                  areas; All new
                  construction requires
                  sprinklers
  Single family   Min. 5/8” line for domestic
  units           service; Typical size
                  implemented is 1” to
                  include adequate water
                  for fire suppression.
  Multi-family                                 Size is determined in
  development                                  coordination with Water
                                               Resources Department
                                               and Fire Marshall to
                                               ensure adequate water
                                               supply for domestic and
                                               fire suppression uses.
Stormwater        Minimum pipe size: 12”
Drainage
                                                                                                   3-53

          Table 3-15. Public Improvement Standards
Required
                        Development Guidelines      Comments                     Governing Legislation
Improvement(s)
                        Maximum distance
                        between storm
                        maintenance holes or
                        inlets 500’
                        Storm lines extended to all
                        tract boundaries
                        System can be easily
                        extended to serve future
                        development
Stormwater              Soil based (bio-swales,     NPDES Permit requires        Federal Clean Water Act –
Treatment               bio-retention areas or      permanent, post-             Regional Water Quality
Measures                landscaped areas) or        construction stormwater      Control Board
                        Mechanical                  quality control measures     requirements consistent
                                                    as part of development       with National Pollutant
                                                    projects. Measures can       Discharge Elimination
                                                    be natural (soil or          System (NPDES) State
                                                    landscape based) or          Permit requirements for
                                                    mechanical.                  Alameda County
                                                                                 jurisdictions.
Utilities               Each unit or lot within a                                Livermore Municipal Code,
                        subdivision shall be served                              Subdivision Ordinance
                        by gas, electric,
                        telephone or cable
                        All existing and proposed   Exemptions to                Livermore Development
                        utilities within the        undergrounding:              Code.
                        subdivision shall be        Single-family subdivisions
                        placed underground          of 4-lots or less or single-
                        except those exempted       family development
                        by City Council adopted     projects of 4-units or less;
                        ordinance or resolution.    Multiple-family residential
                        Each subdivider is          developments of 4-units
                        responsible for making the  or less;
                        necessary arrangements      Partial reconstruction of
                        with each utility company   existing buildings where
                        for installation of the     the addition is less than
                        facilities                  50% of the floor area of
                                                    the existing building or
                                                    the addition amounts to
                                                    less than 10,000 sq. ft.
Parkland                1.4 acres for each 100      Applicable to residential    Livermore Municipal Code,
Dedication              dwelling units.             subdivisions of more than    Subdivision Ordinance
                                                    50 parcels. Does not
                                                    apply to industrial and
                                                    commercial.
Source: City of Livermore, 2014.
3-54

4        HOUSING RESOURCES
This chapter analyzes the physical, administrative and financial resources available for
the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Livermore. Section 4.1
evaluates the availability of residential land (vacant and underdeveloped) within
Livermore, as well as progress to date in meeting the City’s share of regional housing. The
remainder of the chapter discusses the resources available to assist in implementing the
Housing Plan discussed in Chapter 5, including programs related to energy conservation.
The resources build upon the opportunities for reducing barriers to residential
development identified in Chapter 3.
4.1      AVAILABILITY OF SITES FOR HOUSING
State law requires communities to demonstrate that an adequate amount of
developable land is available to accommodate their share of the projected regional
need. The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is responsible for developing the
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) (see Chapter 2). The RHNA assigns a share of
the region’s projected future housing unit production need to each community in the
ABAG region. The current RHNA plans for an 8.8-year housing unit production period,
from January 31, 2014 through October 31, 2022. For the current planning period, ABAG
has determined that Livermore’s share of the RHNA is 2,729 new housing units (Table 4-1).
    Table 4-1.     Livermore’s RHNA, 2015 – 2022
  Income Group                 Housing Units
  Very Low                     839
  Low                          474
  Moderate                     496
  Above Moderate               920
  Total                        2,729
HOUSING UNITS BUILT SINCE JANUARY 2014
Housing units permitted, built, or that have received Certificates of Occupancy since
January 1, 2014 can also count toward the City’s current RHNA cycle. Table 4-2
summarizes the housing units that have been built between January 1, 2014 and October
1, 2014. During this time, a total of 141 housing units were permitted or constructed within
Livermore, based on the City’s building permit data. This comprises approximately 5
percent of the total RHNA to be accommodated during the current planning period.
                                                                                         4-1

   Table 4-2.      City of Livermore Housing Development, January 2014 – October 2014
                                                Income Levels
                                                                             Total
                                                               Above
                                Very Low   Low      Moderate
                                                               Moderate
 RHNA (2015 – 2023)                839       474       496           920           2,729
 Units Constructed
    Secondary                                                                        0
    Single Family                                                     73             73
    Multi-family                    6                   62                           68
 Total Units Constructed            6                   62            73            141
 Remaining Need                    833       474       434           847           2,588
RESIDENTIAL SITE INVENTORY
The State Housing Element Law (Government Code Section 65583.2) requires cities to
develop an inventory of available land suitable for residential development. The
inventory must include the following types of sites:
    •    Vacant sites that are zoned for residential use;
    •    Vacant sites zoned for nonresidential use that allow residential development;
    •    Residentially zoned sites that are capable of being developed at a higher
         density;
    •    Sites zoned for nonresidential use that can be redeveloped or, as necessary,
         rezoned for residential use.
The State Housing Element Law also requires that cities provide detailed information
regarding the sites in their inventory, including:
    •    A listing of identified properties by parcel number;
    •    The size, general plan designation and zoning of each property;
    •    For non-vacant sites, a description of the existing use of each property; and
    •    A general description of existing or planned infrastructure improvements and also
         any environmental or governmental constraints that may preclude residential
         development.
Government Code Section 65863 restricts local governments from reducing the density
on residential sites below the density accounted for in the Housing Element inventory,
without making the finding that:
    1. The reduction is consistent with the adopted general plan, including the housing
         element; and
    2. The remaining sites and development potential identified in the housing element
         are adequate to accommodate the jurisdiction’s share of the regional housing
         need pursuant to Section 65584.
4-2

The statute defines a reduction in density or “lower residential density” as fewer units for a
site than were projected to be developed on the site in the housing element program.
Furthermore, if the proposed density reduction decreases the number of available units
below that which was required to meet the City’s RHNA during the housing element
period, then the City must identify available, additional sites with equal or greater
residential density sufficient to meet the RHNA.
The City of Livermore’s land inventory for the 2015 – 2022 Housing Element timeframe is
shown in Table 4-3. It is divided into the Downtown Specific Plan Area (DSP) and all other
vacant and underdeveloped residentially zoned parcels located outside the DSP,
denoted as General Plan Areas. The DSP is analyzed separately, as the zoning districts in
the DSP only apply to the downtown area of the City. The sections below provide detail
on the General Plan and DSP land inventory categories. Appendix A includes parcel
data on General Plan Areas and Appendix B on the Downtown Specific Plan Area.
Appendix B also shows the boundary of the Downtown Specific Plan Area.
The City will maintain the inventory and continue to identify feasible sites to meet and/or
exceed the City’s RHNA in the affordable income categories (see Program 1.1.1 in
Chapter 5).
   Table 4-3. Summary of Land Inventory and Residential Capacity
                                                                    Affordability
                Land Inventory             Viable Extremely Low/                         Above
                                                                   Low      Moderate
                                            Units    Very Low                          Moderate
General Plan Areas
Vacant Sites (Appendix Table A-1)           900         482          1            89       328
Vacant Neighborhood Plan Sites
                                            960          0         171           391       398
(Appendix Table A-2)
Vacant Sites with Entitled/Under
                                            547          0           0           546        1
Construction Projects (Appendix Table A-3)
Underdeveloped Sites (Appendix Table A-4)   231          0           0            92       139
Underdeveloped Mixed-Use Sites
                                             95          0           4            4         87
(Appendix Table A-5)
General Plan Area Subtotal                 2,733        482        176          1,122      953
Downtown Specific Plan Area
Vacant Parcels (Appendix Table B-1)         109          3          21            85        0
Underdeveloped Mixed-Use Area
                                             65          0          65            0         0
(Appendix Table B-2)
Catalyst Sites (Appendix Table B-3)         485          0         335           150        0
Residential Redevelopment Sites
                                           1,033        747          7           279        0
(Appendix Table B-4)
DSP Area Subtotal                          1,692        750        428           514        0
Total                                      4,425       1,232       604          1,636      953
                                                                                           4-3

REMAINING REGIONAL NEED
Overall, the City has enough development capacity through vacant infill and
underdeveloped sites to meet its Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) during the
planning period. (Table 4-4)
     Table 4-4. Remaining Regional Need
                                            Extremely
                               Total                                             Above
                                            Low/Very      Low      Moderate
                                                                                 Moderate
                                            Low
 2015 – 2022 Remaining RHNA       2,588          833        474         434           847
 Vacant Land Inventory            4,425         1,232       604        1,636          953
 Remaining Need                     0             0          0           0             0
 Excess Capacity                 +1,837          +399       +130      +1,202          +106
GENERAL PLAN AREAS
The analysis of General Plan residential site inventory (Table 4-3) includes the following
categories:
    •   Vacant Sites (Table A-1 in Appendix A) – This table includes parcels that are
        vacant and have General Plan and zoning designations that permit residential
        development. Only parcels that meet the minimum standards for development in
        the applicable zoning district and that have no significant environmental or
        governmental constraints, which would preclude residential development, were
        calculated as having additional unit capacity.
        For informational purposes, this category also includes vacant sites that are part
        of the two Priority Development Areas (PDA) near proposed BART stations.
        Residential development in these locations is predicated on the construction of
        new BART stations. The City is undergoing a station area planning effort for the
        Isabel PDA, but for purposes of this Housing Element, development on these sites
        is not foreseeable during the 2015 – 2022 cycle. Therefore, the potential capacity
        of these sites was not included in the land inventory calculation. Although not
        needed for the City to provide adequate sites for this Housing Element cycle,
        Chapter 5 includes a program (Program 1.1.6) to review and revise the
        designations to allow for transit-oriented, high-density, mixed-use development
        when a BART station is identified in Livermore.
    •   Vacant Sites with Approved Neighborhood Plans (Table A-2 in Appendix A) –
        This table summarizes the residential development assumptions in the Arroyo Vista
        and Brisa Neighborhood Plans, which were adopted by City Council in 2007. The
        Plans allow for residential uses in areas otherwise zoned for industrial use, address
        compatibility with surrounding uses, and establish a basic framework for
        circulation, land use, building, signage, and landscaping that will permit orderly
        growth. As part of the adoption of the Plans, both sites were analyzed to identify
        potential deficiencies in infrastructure and site improvements and potential
        environmental impacts. As noted in the general infrastructure analysis discussion
4-4

         in this Chapter, both sites are located in urbanized areas and have adequate
         water and sewer availability.
    •    Vacant Sites with Entitled Projects or Under Construction (Table A-3 in Appendix
         A) – This table includes sites or parcels that are vacant, designated, and zoned
         for residential use, and where residential development is either already underway
         or development entitlements are in place that will allow them to proceed with
         building permits and construction. Projects include, but are not limited to, the
         Shea/Southeast Multi-Family Residential project approved in July 2014 and a 70
         unit townhome project approved in 2010.
    •    Underdeveloped Parcels with Additional Development Capacity (Table A-4 in
         Appendix A) – This table includes sites that have existing uses (either residential or
         non-residential) but are designated and zoned to allow more intense residential
         development. Only sites that can realistically accommodate additional
         development were calculated as having additional unit capacity.
    •    Underdeveloped Parcels with Mixed-Use Development Capacity (Table A-5 in
         Appendix A) – The inventory includes three non-residential sites identified as
         feasible and appropriate for redevelopment with residential uses. The Vasco
         Rd/East Ave is an underutilized vacant site, while the Nob Hill and Rincon sites are
         both economically underperforming commercial centers with a consistent rate of
         vacancy. As strip commercial centers, they have been designed to
         accommodate a large number of parking spaces. Given the high vacancy rate
         of these centers, these parking areas are largely empty and invite overnight
         parking. All of the above conditions make these sites suitable and ready for
         redevelopment to residential. See Chapter 3 for discussion on mixed-use zoning
         and suitability of sites for redevelopment, including land use controls and recent
         development trends.
The sites listed above are all located in urbanized areas within the City, have utilities
adjacent or nearby, and have no environmental constraints that would preclude
development within the Housing Element timeframe.
DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN (DSP) AREA
In 2004, the Downtown Area of the City was re-designated as part of the General Plan
Update and concurrently rezoned with adoption of the Downtown Specific Plan (DSP).
All of the Plan Areas within the Downtown Specific Plan permit residential development
at differing minimum densities. The DSP Area suitability for residential development is
supported by the DSP strategies and policies, which encourage residential development
as a vital part of revitalization. Detailed discussion of DSP density, allowed residential
uses, and affordability estimates used to determine land inventory to accommodate
RHNA is provided in Chapter 3.
The analysis of additional unit capacity in the Downtown Area (Table 4-3) of the City
includes:
    •    Vacant Sites by DSP Plan Area (Table B-1 in Appendix B) – Similar to Table A-1
         mentioned above, this category includes sites or parcels that are vacant and
         zoned to allow residential development.
                                                                                           4-5

    • Underdeveloped Mixed-Use Sites (Table B-2 in Appendix B) – This table lists
      underdeveloped mixed-use sites located along First Street in the Core Area. This
      area is described in the Downtown Specific Plan as the highest priority area for
      downtown revitalization. In order to facilitate that revitalization, the Core Area
      permits the most intense residential development in the downtown (requiring a
      minimum density of 30 dwelling units per acre and allowing up to 55 as well as 4-
      stories). Core Area requirements also stipulate that new buildings fronting First
      Street must be mixed-use.
    • Underdeveloped Catalyst Sites (Table B-3 in Appendix B) – The DSP identifies
      several key sites intended for immediate investment to facilitate revitalization of
      the City’s Downtown. Two of these sites have plans for major housing projects
      (Livermore Village and Groth Brothers sites) intended to demonstrate the viability
      of downtown housing. These sites are located in the Downtown Core Area of the
      Specific Plan where higher density residential development is desired to support
      and enhance downtown revitalization.
      Livermore Village, also known as the Lucky’s site, has already been entitled for
      development(but the entitlement has since expired) with an approved Tentative
      Tract Map and Design Review. The uses and configuration of the site have been
      modified however, rendering the approval infeasible. Despite this modification, it
      is anticipated that the residential component will still develop with approximately
      the same number of units (250). The City has made the site ready for
      development by demolishing one of the buildings and assisted the few remaining
      commercial tenants to relocate them to another more viable location. The City
      anticipates issuing an RFP to develop the site in 2015.
    • Underdeveloped Residential Redevelopment Sites (Table B-4 in Appendix B) –
      This category lists underutilized sites surrounding the Downtown Core that have
      been targeted for significant residential redevelopment to support revitalization
      of the Core, referred to as a Large Scale Redevelopment Zone. Areas identified in
      this zone are underutilized and/or vacant and offer potential to be obtained and
      assembled in the near term for residential redevelopment. Two large sites
      identified within this zone, Station Square on Railroad Avenue and Palasage on
      First Street, have already redeveloped with new higher density residential units.
      In addition to the sites intended for large-scale development, smaller individual
      sites that have proposed redevelopment are also included in this category, such
      as the Chestnut/P Street project, a 4+/- acre commercial site proposed for a
      mixed income housing project with a large affordable component. Market
      conditions have improved enough to allow the project to move forward in early
      2015. Although more intensified residential development on small sites may be
      considered constrained in some locations, adopted policies and regulations
      outlined in the Downtown Specific Plan, and described in Chapter 3, have
      increased the feasibility of creating new housing on smaller lots.
4-6

Examples of projects with potential for redevelopment are listed below in Table 4-5.
      Table 4-5.Examples of Redeveloped/Redeveloping Sites
                           Application                                  Lot Size
                                       Status          Zoning                          Units
                           Status                                       (No. of Lots)
      Mixed-use and
                  Small-
                       Lot
             First Street                 Proposal                       .34 acres (1)   3
                                                           Boulevard
             First Street               Application                      .34 acres (1)   10
                                                           Gateway
                                                             Transit
        Old First Street                Application                       .5 acres (1)   28
                                                           Gateway
                                                        Neighborhood
           Tofino Row        SUB06-002  Constructed                         .34 acres    8
                                                             North
                                                        Neighborhood
        Positano Villas      SUB06-023    Entitled                          .57 acres    10
                                                             North
                                                        Neighborhood
  Savannah Terrace           SUB05-010  Constructed                         .34 acres    8
                                                             South
         Catalyst Sites
                                                          Downtown
        Groth Brothers                  Application                        4 acres (2)  250
                                                              Core
                                                          Downtown
   Livermore Village                                                                    281
                                                              Core
          Large-Scale
 “Likely” Residential
     Redevelopment
                                                        Neighborhood
       Station Square        SUB04-005  Constructed                      5.2 acres (2)  110
                                                             North
                                                             Transit
             Palasage        SUB02-005  Constructed                      4.8 acres (3)   90
                                                           Gateway
                                                             Transit
               Brighton      SUB14-003 Commenced                           2 acres (3)  148
                                                           Gateway
         Portola Road        SUB05-007 Commenced        PD Residential   3.2 acres (3)   70
Brisa Neighborhood
                             SUB05-007 Commenced        PD Residential    34 acres (3)  465
                     Plan
DENSITY
To estimate reasonable additional residential potential on individual parcels in the land
inventory, the following guidelines were used in both the General Plan Areas and also in
the Downtown Specific Plan Area (DSPA):
      •    Low Density Designations/Zones – In low density designations (generally between
           1 and 7 dwelling units per acre), the minimum required in the density range was
           applied, as many of the sites are infill lots that could only provide one additional
           unit.
      •    Medium and High Density Designations/Zones – In medium and higher density
           designations/zones (generally above 8 dwelling units per acre), a mid-range
           density was applied to derive the number of potential residential units, unless a
                                                                                             4-7

        particular site already has a pending or proposed development application
        which uses a higher density that is still within the parameters of the designation.
        The mid-range density is consistent with typical densities that have been utilized in
        existing residential developments throughout the City over the last 10 years.
    •   Mixed-Use Designations/Zones and TDC Sites – Sites with mixed-use designations
        and zoning (both in General Plan areas and Downtown) have been calculated
        at the low range of the permitted residential density unless a more detailed
        development application and site plan demonstrates the feasibility of a higher
        density on a particular site. TDC receiver sites in General Plan areas have been
        calculated at the base density, unless there is a development proposal or
        application underway, in which case it has been calculated based on the
        proposed number of units.
Minimum Density for Affordable Housing
As indicated in Table 4-6, Density and Affordability, the General Plan designations and
zoning districts that will encourage housing for lower-income households include primarily
the:
   Downtown Specific Plan Areas;
   Neighborhood Mixed-Use designations; and
   Urban High 4 to 6 Residential Designations
The Urban High 4 – 6 General Plan designation and Downtown Core Plan Area both
specify density at or above a minimum of 30 dwelling units per acre. Therefore, they
have already been deemed appropriate to accommodate low-income households
(Government Code §65583.2(c)(3)(B)).
Both the Neighborhood Mixed-Use designations and Downtown Specific Plan Areas are
relatively recent additions to the City’s land use options, resulting from 2003 General Plan
policy to increase higher density residential infill opportunities within City boundaries.
Since the designations and development standards are newer, there has not been much
opportunity for the City to develop a track record of implementation, particularly since
the residential market has slowed dramatically. Nonetheless, these are areas, along with
the Urban High 4 - 6 designation, which have seen the most recent development and/or
entitlement activity in Livermore.
AFFORDABILITY ASSUMPTIONS
The presumed capacity and affordability of anticipated units is based upon the density
range in the underlying General Plan or DSP designation, unless a specific site had an
applicable site proposal or development application underway. In these cases, capacity
and affordability is based on the number of proposed units.
Affordability was determined by applying inclusionary provisions for affordable units or
using the corresponding affordability category based upon density. In general, housing
units on low density sites (approximately 1 to 8 dwelling units per acre) permitting single-
family detached and small-lot units are assumed to be affordable at the above
moderate income level. Medium density sites (approximately 8 to 20 dwelling units per
acre) permitting townhomes, duplexes, and condominiums are assumed to
accommodate housing primarily at the moderate-income level, although there may be
4-8

some units in the affordable category in designations with a wide density range. Higher
density designations providing stacked flats and/or rental units are considered
affordable at low or very low income levels.
Consistent with State Housing provisions, areas with zoning that require a minimum
density of 30 dwelling units per acre are considered adequate for meeting the low-,very
low-, and extremely low-income level need. The 2009 Housing Element found that, over
time, the City of Livermore has been able to produce units or projects affordable to very-
low and extremely low-income households at a density of 30 dwelling units per acre and,
in some cases, at densities lower than this.
                                                                                       4-9
     Table 4-6.Density and Affordability
                                                Affordability
                                                Above
                                                                           Very Extremel
Zoning Designation          Density Range       Moderat       Moderate Low
                                                                           Low  y Low
                                                e
Low Density (Single-family     1 – 8 du/acre
detached, & single-family
detached, small lot)
Rural Residential (RR)      1 unit per 5 acres;
                               Min. lot size 1      X
                                    acre
Urban Low Residential (UL)     1 – 2 du/acre        X
Urban Low Medium (ULM)         2 -3 du/acre         X
Urban Medium (UM)             3 – 4.5 du/acre       X
Urban Medium High (UMH)       4.5 – 6 du/acre       X
Urban High – 1 (UH-1)          6 – 8 du/acre        X
Medium Density                 8-30 du/acre
(Townhomes, duplexes,
condominiums)
Urban High – 2 (UH-2)         8 – 14 du/acre        X            X
Urban High -3 (UH-3)         14 – 18 du/acre                     X
Neighborhood Mixed Low       12 – 15 du/acre                     X
Neighborhood Mixed           15 – 24 du/acre
Medium
DSP/Neighborhood Plan        15 – 24 du/acre
                                                                 X
Areas
DSP/Gateway Plan Areas       15 – 30 du/acre                     X       X
High Density Designations     18-55 du/acre
(Apartments, stacked flats)
DSP Transit Node (25%        18 – 37 du/acre
density bonus in Gateway                                         X       X
Transit Plan Area)
Urban High – 4 (UH-4)        18 – 22 du/acre                     X       X
Urban High – 5               22 – 38 du/acre                             X   X      X
Neighborhood Mixed High      24 – 38 du/acre                             X   X      X
DSP/Neighborhood Plan        24 – 50 du/acre
Area (along Railroad             (w/ CUP)                                    X      X
Avenue)
DSP/Gateway Plan Areas       30 – 50 du/acre
                                                                             X      X
(along First Street)             (w/ CUP)
DSP/Core Plan Area           30 – 55 du/acre                                 X      X
Urban High – 6               38 – 55 du/acre                                 X      X
4-10

ADEQUATE ALLOCATIONS TO MEET RHNA
Table 4-7 compares the identified residential sites inventory to the available allocation
through the City’s HIP program.
Table 4-7 indicates that additional HIP and TDC allocations may be needed to
accommodate development on inventory sites that would fit into the HIP and TDC
allocation categories. The table shows a need for potentially 145 HIP and 248 additional
allocations in the TDC program area. However, as mentioned in Chapter 3, the HIP
program allows flexibility to borrow from upcoming years, to reallocate unused
allocations within the 3-year period, and to reprogram units from one program area to
another as needed. Additionally, not all available sites are needed to meet the City’s
RHNA. The City has excess capacity of 1,843 units (Table 4-4). Even without allocation of
an additional 730 units, the City has enough HIP allocations (4,078 units) to meet the
City’s remaining RHNA (2,588 units).
To ensure that any program area shortfalls are addressed, Program 2.1.1 stipulates that
the City will reprogram allocations to different program areas as needed in order to
meet the City’s regional housing need.
         Table 4-7.     Sites Inventory in Relation to Available Allocations
                 Available Allocations By   HIP             TDC              DSP
                            Program Area
                                            986             1,353            1,739
 Land Inventory/ General Plan Areas
   A-1Vacant Sites
                                                 900
   A-2 Neighborhood Plans                                          960
   A-3 Vacant Sites with Approved
                                                                   547
 Projects
   A-4 Underdeveloped
                                                 231
   A-5 Underdeveloped/Mixed-use                                     94
             General Plan Area Subtotal         1,131             1,601
 Land Inventory/ DSP Plan Areas
   B-1 Vacant                                                                       109
   B-2 Underdeveloped                                                                65
   B-3 Catalyst Sites                                                               485
   B-4 Redevelopment Sites                                                         1,033
         Downtown Specific Plan Subtotal                                           1,692
           Total Sites Potential Capacity:      1,131             1,601            1,692
                                                                                         4-11

INFRASTRUCTURE ANALYSIS TO ACCOMMODATE RHNA
Sewer Capacity
In November 2005, the residents of the City of Livermore approved a ballot measure to
participate in purchasing additional capacity in the Livermore Amador Valley Water
Management Agency (LAVWMA) wastewater export pipeline. Approval of this measure
increased the City’s allocated capacity in the expanded LAVWMA system up to a peak
wet weather flow capacity of 12.4 mgd, sufficient to provide enough disposal capacity
to meet the City’s projected need.
The City’s Sewer Master Plan further identifies infrastructure improvements that are
needed at the Wastewater Treatment plant to address the additional disposal capacity.
Identified improvements have been programmed into the City’s Capital Improvement
Program (CIP) based on priority and necessity. Programmed improvements will address
upgrades to provide sufficient capacity in areas where infill residential development is
anticipated, such as in the Downtown Specific Plan Area as well as in the East Side
Transition Area bounding Vasco Road. The Master
Water Capacity
Zone 7 is the wholesale water provider for the entire Livermore-Amador Valley. Zone 7
distributes to the Livermore Municipal Water (LMW) as well as the California Water Service
Company (Cal Water), both retail providers to Livermore residents.
Delta water supply issues and the current drought in California, long-term water supply is
a potential growth-limiting factor, however the City currently does have the capacity to
achieve General Plan build-out. This determination is based on the City having a Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance in place for several years and which will apply to all new
residential development; making reclaimed water available for landscape irrigation in
much of the west end of the City including the Las Positas Golf Course; and working with
partner agencies in establishing appropriate conservation measures.
The City is working in concert with water retailers and Zone 7 to develop an appropriately
reliable and sustainable water supply that meets the needs of current development and
accommodates build out of the region. The City currently utilizes recycled water for
irrigation purposes in the eastern part of the City and is exploring system expansion. Other
strategies to expand and/or stabilize the region’s water supply include implementing
indirect potable reuse through groundwater injection to increase the groundwater basin
storage, accelerating surface water storage in reclaimed aggregate quarries, and
acquiring water rights in the Los Vaqueros Reservoir.
Storm Drain Capacity
The City’s Storm Drain Master Plan identifies low, medium, and high priority improvements
needed to adequately handle stormwater flows within and through the City. Areas
identified as priority for improvements include the Downtown Area and also the East Side
Transition Area, east of Vasco Road. These are areas where new residential development
is anticipated. High priority improvements have been programmed into the City’s CIP to
address future capacity.
4-12

There are no major infrastructure deficiencies that would inhibit or preclude residential
development or more intense residential development on parcels identified in the City’s
land use inventory.
4.2     HOUSING RESOURCES
LIVERMORE HOUSING AUTHORITY
The Housing Authority of the City of Livermore (LHA) is responsible for managing one
public housing development (Leahy Square), three scattered site affordable
developments, and for administering the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program.
The housing developments include: the 125 unit low-income Leahy Square housing
development, Chestnut Apartments (six units including two that are market rate), Las
Posadas Apartments (nine units targeted to larger households), and Bluebell Apartments
(27 units with nine transitional housing units). The transitional housing units are for
households graduating from homeless and/or domestic violence shelters. The scattered
site complexes were acquired and rehabilitated using a variety of affordable housing
funds from the City.
As of 2014, the LHA provides approximately 723 tenant-based vouchers to low-income
households, including project-based vouchers for the disabled and households with
social service needs.
THE HOUSING AND HUMAN SERVICES DIVISION
Housing and Human Services (HHS) is a division of the City’s Community and Economic
Development Department. HHS works with the community, developers, and a wide
variety of local, state and federal agencies to maintain and expand affordable housing
opportunities for lower- and moderate-income households. In addition to affordable
housing services, HHS provides referrals and grant support to agencies that provide social
services to low-income residents. In this capacity, HHS is responsible for managing the
administration of the City’s Affordable Housing Fund, Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG), HOME program funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development and two local funding sources (Human Services Facility Fee and Social
Opportunity Endowment). Working with the other divisions in the Community and
Economic Development Department, HHS also supports the revitalization and
preservation of residential neighborhoods.
 Multi-Service Center
The City continues to operate and subsidize the only Multi-Service Center in the Tri-Valley
for agencies that primarily serve low-income individuals. Agencies with permanent space
at the Center or that use space on an on-going basis include Alameda County Social
Services, Axis Community Health Clinic, Community Resources for Independent Living
(CRIL), State of California Department of Rehabilitation, East Bay Innovations, ECHO, Tri-
City Health Center Valley AIDS Project and Tri-Valley Community Foundation.
NON PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
There are a number of non-profit organizations whose activities are related to the
provision of affordable housing and human service programs in the City of Livermore. The
City actively works with each of the groups listed below:
                                                                                      4-13

•   Alameda County Food Bank                  •   Interfaith Housing Kaleidoscope/Easter
                                                  Seals
•   Alameda County Health Care Services
    Agency                                    •   Kidango (Formerly Tri-Cities Children’s
                                                  Center)
•   Alameda       County       Housing  and
    Community Development Department          •   Law Center for Families
•   Alameda County Social Services            •   Legal Assistance for Seniors
•   Abode Services                            •   Livermore Area Recreation and Park
                                                  District (LARPD)
•   Anthropos Counseling Center
                                              •   Livermore Homeless Refuge
•   Axis Community Health
                                              •   Livermore Valley Joint Unified School
•   Bridge Housing
                                                  District (LVJUSD)
•   CALICO Center
                                              •   MidPen Housing Corporation
•   Child Care Links
                                              •   National    Alliance  for  Mental Illness
•   City Serve of the Tri-Valley                  (NAMI)
•   Community Association for Preschool       •   Open Heart Kitchen
    Education (CAPE)
                                              •   Senior Support of the Tri-Valley
•   CRIL     (Community       Resources  for
                                              •   Shepherd’s Gate
    Independent Living)
                                              •   Spectrum Community Service
•   East Bay Innovations
                                              •   Tri-City Health Center
•   ECHO Housing
                                              •   Tri-Valley Haven
•   Eden Housing
                                              •   Tri-Valley Housing Opportunity Center
•   Habitat for Humanity
                                                  (TVHOC)
•   Hello Housing
                                              •   Twin Valley Learning Center
•   Tri-Valley REACH
•   Housing Consortium of the East Bay
The following are examples of non-profit projects and programs operating in Livermore:
ECHO
Since 1979, ECHO has provided fair housing counseling, education, and other housing-
related services to residents of Livermore. ECHO operates in the City’s Multi-Service
Center, located adjacent to City Hall. The City provides grant funding to their Homeless
Prevention and Rapid Re-housing program, which provides services to renters that are
about to lose their housing.
Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity (“Habitat) is a non-profit agency dedicated to building affordable
housing and rehabilitating homes for lower income families. Habitat builds and repairs
homes with the help of volunteers, partner families, churches, businesses, and other
4-14

groups. Habitat homes are then sold to partner families at no profit with affordable or no-
interest loans. Government agencies or individuals usually donate land for the new
homes.
Between 2004 and 2006, the City worked with Habitat to construct 22 three- and four-unit
affordable for-sale duets. The City recently partnered with Habitat on a single-family unit
acquisition/rehabilitation program targeted to low-income veteran households. In 2013,
The City established a revolving loan fund with the East Bay/Silicon Valley chapter of
Habitat for Humanity, for the acquisition and rehabilitation of distressed single-family
properties to be sold at an affordable price to low-income veterans of the U.S. military.
These homes will have a 55-year affordability resale restriction.
MidPen Housing Corporation
MidPen Housing Corp, a non-profit housing developer, is currently in the predevelopment
phase for the 4-acre housing site assembled by the City and located at the corner of
Chestnut and P Street in Downtown Livermore. The Chestnut/P Street Housing Site is 4+/-
acre commercial site was assembled through an Inclusionary Housing land dedication
and a market acquisition in July 2010 using $2,500,000 of the City’s Affordable Housing
Fund. MidPen was selected by the City in late 2010 to develop the site into a mixed
ownership/rental, mixed income housing project with a large affordable component.
The project is expected to move forward to entitlement in spring 2015. This project will
include 35 market-rate units and 99 affordable units targeted to families and seniors at
30-60% of Area Median Income. MidPen will develop and administer the affordable units.
 4.3     FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Livermore has access to a variety of existing and potential funding sources available for
affordable housing activities. The following section describes the key housing funding
sources currently used in Livermore:
    •   Federal: Community Development Block Grants (CDBG), HOME, and Section 8.
    •   State: CalHome Program
    •   Local: In-Lieu Fee and Low-Income Housing Impact Fee (Affordable Housing
        Fund)
With the loss of Redevelopment funding, the City will continue to explore other
mechanisms to facilitate the development of affordable housing, including means for
acquiring land to reduce the cost of development to affordable housing developers and
to ensure the units remain affordable over time.
Table 4-8 provides a summary of federal, state, local, private, and non-profit financial
resources available to support housing activities in the City of Livermore. Below, key local
funding sources are described in greater detail.
                                                                                        4-15

     Table 4-8.     Financial Resources for Housing Activities
Program Name             Description                                       Eligible Activities
Federal Programs
Community                Grants awarded to the City on a formula basis     Acquisition
Development Block        for housing and community development             Rehabilitation
Grant (CDBG)             activities.                                       Home Buyer Assistance
                                                                           Economic
                                                                           Development
                                                                           Homeless Assistance
                                                                           Public Services
Capital Funds            Funds to Public Housing Agencies (PHAs) for the   Construction of Housing
(Formerly CIAP funds)    development, financing, and modernization of      Rehabilitation
                         public housing developments and for               Modernization
                         management improvements.
HOME Investment          Flexible grant program allocated to City          Acquisition
Partnership Act          through the Alameda HOME Consortium.              Rehabilitation
Program (HOME)                                                             Home Buyer Assistance
                                                                           Rental Assistance
Housing Opportunities    Grants to local communities, States, and          Acquisition
for Persons with AIDS    nonprofit organizations for projects that benefit Rehabilitation
(HOPWA)                  low income persons medically diagnosed with       Construction of Housing
                         HIV/AIDS and their families.                      Rental Assistance
                                                                           Support Services
HUD Section 8            Rental assistance payments to owners of           Rental Assistance
Rental Assistance        private market rate units on behalf of very low-
Program                  income tenants.
Low-income Housing       Tax credits are available to persons and          Construction of Housing
Tax Credit (LIHTC)       corporations that invest in low-income rental
                         housing. Proceeds from the sale are typically
                         used to create housing.
Supportive Housing       Grants for development of supportive housing      Transitional Housing
Program (SHP)            and support services to assist homeless persons   Housing for the
                         in the transition from homelessness. This is a    Disabled
                         competitive program authorized under the          Supportive Housing
                         McKinney/Vento Act.                               Support Services
Section 202              Grants to non-profit developers of supportive     Acquisition
                         housing for the elderly.                          Rehabilitation
                                                                           New Construction
Section 811              Grants to non-profit developers of supportive     Acquisition
                         housing for persons with disabilities, including  Rehabilitation
                         group homes, independent living facilities and    New Construction
                         intermediate care facilities.                     Rental Assistance
4-16
      Table 4-8.     Financial Resources for Housing Activities
 Program Name             Description                                        Eligible Activities
Section 108 Loan          Provides loan guarantee to CDBG entitlement        Acquisition
Guarantee                 jurisdictions for capital improvement projects.    Rehabilitation
                          Maximum loan amount can be up to five times        Home Buyer Assistance
                          the jurisdiction’s recent annual allocation.       Economic
                          Maximum loan term is 20 years.                     Development
                                                                             Homeless Assistance
                                                                             Public Services
 State Programs
 Building Equity and      Grants to cities, counties, or cities and counties Home Buyer Assistance
 Growth in                to make deferred-payment second mortgage
 Neighborhoods            loans to qualified buyers of new homes,
 Program (BEGIN)          including manufactured homes on permanent
                          foundations, in projects with affordability
                          enhanced by local regulatory incentives or
                          barrier reductions.
 Housing Enabled by       Low interest rate loans administered by Cal HFA    Acquisition
 Local Partnerships       to local government entities for their locally     New Construction
 (HELP) Program           determined affordable housing activities and       Rehabilitation
                          priorities.
 Local Housing Trust      Provides matching grants to local housing trust    New Construction
 Fund Matching Grant      funds that are funded on an ongoing basis from     Home Buyer Assistance
 Program – Proposition    private contributions or public sources that are
 46                       not otherwise restricted in use for housing
                          programs.
 Mortgage Revenue         Tax-exempt bonds that state and local              Home Buyer Assistance
 Bonds (MRBs)             governments issue through housing finance
                          agencies (HFAs) to help fund below-market-
                          interest-rate mortgages for first-time qualifying
                          homebuyers.
 Mortgage Credit          Provides qualified first time homebuyers with a    Home Buyer Assistance
 Certificates (MCC)       federal income tax credit that reduces the
                          borrower’s federal tax liability, providing
                          additional income, which can be used for
                          mortgage payments.
 Prop 63 Mental Health    Funding for capital improvements and               Acquisition
 Services Act Funds       operating subsidies for supportive housing for     Rehabilitation New
                          formerly homeless or at-risk individuals with      Construction
                          mental disabilities.
 CalHome Program          Grant to make deferred-payment second              Homebuyer Assistance
                          mortgage loans to low-income qualified first-
                          time homebuyers.
 Local Programs
                                                                                                 4-17

      Table 4-8.     Financial Resources for Housing Activities
Program Name              Description                                      Eligible Activities
General Funds                                                              Support Services
                          Funds to subsidize rents and operations for the
                          Livermore Multi-Service Center.
In-lieu Low Income                                                         Acquisition
                          A per unit fee for residential developments that
Housing Fund /                                                             Homeless Assistance
                          do not provide affordable housing, generated
Commercial linkage                                                         New Construction
                          from the Inclusionary Housing ordinance and
fee (Housing Trust                                                         Rehabilitation
                          fee     per    square foot      for commercial
Fund)                                                                      Support Services
                          construction.
Low Income Housing                                                         Acquisition,
                          A fee assessed on commercial and industrial
Impact Fee                                                                 conservation,
                          development, to help offset cost of affordable
                                                                           construction of
                          housing for employees. Fee varies depending
                                                                           affordable housing for
                          on intensity of development and projected
                                                                           lower-income
                          low-income employees. Fees are deposited
                                                                           employees
                          into city Affordable Housing Fund.
Social Opportunity        Fund to provide a long- term, stable funding     Acquisition
Endowment                 source for the delivery of quality human         Economic
                          services to low income city residents.           Development
                                                                           Home Buyer Assistance
                                                                           Homeless Assistance
                                                                           New Construction
                                                                           Rehabilitation
                                                                           Support Services
                                                                           Public Services
Private Resources
Housing Incentives for    Provide assistance to individuals who do not     Home Buyer Assistance
the Recruitment and       currently own a home and do not qualify for
Retention of              traditional down payment assistance.
Employees (HIRE)          Households will have income up to 140% of
                          median.
Non-Profit Institutions
Bay Area Local            Bay Area LISC provides recoverable grants and    Acquisition
Initiatives Support       debt financing on favorable terms to support a   New Construction
Corporation (LISC)        variety of community development activities
                          including affordable housing.
 Low-Income Housing       LIHF provides loan financing for all phases of   Acquisition
 Fund (LIHF)              affordable housing development and/or            Rehabilitation
                          rehabilitation.                                  New Construction
Source: City of Livermore, 2014; Alameda County HOME Consortium: Livermore Action Plan, FY2014-
2015; LWC; 2014.
4-18
LOCAL FUNDING SOURCES
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance
As part of the City’s inclusionary requirements, up to 15 percent of the units in every for-
sale residential development must be affordable to lower income households. 19 At least
7.5 percent must be reserved for low-income households, with the other 7.5 percent set
aside for moderate-income households. A developer may satisfy the affordable housing
requirement by paying a fee “in-lieu” of building an affordable unit with approval by City
Council. In-lieu fees are deposited into the Affordable Housing Fund to assist in the
development of lower income housing and fund-related programs that assist lower
income residents with their housing needs.
The Inclusionary Ordinance also contains a provision, which encumbers for-sale units with
a silent second mortgage for the difference in value between the affordable price and
the initial market rate sales price for comparable units. If a buyer re-sells the reserved unit
within the restricted time period for a price in excess of the current affordable purchase
price, then the second mortgage must be repaid to the City for use in affordable housing
programs via the Affordable Housing Fund.
Low-Income Housing Impact Fees
The City assesses an impact fee on commercial and industrial developments. The fee is
designed to provide affordable housing for lower-income employees, reducing the
impacts associated with the need to commute from outside the city. The fee varies
according to the intensity of commercial and industrial use, based on the estimated
number of low-income jobs and households associated with the development type.
The City expects to generate an average of $500,000 annually from the impact fee.
These fees are placed in the Affordable Housing Fund to be used for acquisition,
preservation and construction of additional units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND
The City maintains an Affordable Housing Fund, also referred to as the Housing Trust Fund,
to assist in the development and preservation of affordable housing and to help fund
other housing-related programs that assist lower income residents (Program 3.2.1). These
programs are described further in Section 4.4 below and are listed in Chapter 5, Housing
Plan. The two primary sources of revenue into the Affordable Housing Fund include the In
Lieu Fee (Inclusionary Housing Ordinance) and the Low Income Housing Impact Fee.
As described in Section 3.2, a developer may comply with the City’s Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance by paying an “in-lieu” fee, with approval by City Council. The Inclusionary
Ordinance also contains a provision, which encumbers for-sale units with a silent second
19
   In the Downtown Specific Plan Area, a minimum of 10 percent of the units in each project are reserved at a price affordable to low-
income households.
                                                                                                                                4-19

mortgage for the difference in value between the affordable price and the initial market
rate sales price for comparable units. If a buyer re-sells the reserved unit within the
restricted time period for a price in excess of the current affordable purchase price, then
the second mortgage must be repaid to the City for use in affordable housing programs
via the Affordable Housing Fund.
The City also assesses the Low Income Housing Impact Fee on commercial and industrial
developments. The fee is intended to help provide affordable housing for lower-income
employees, reducing the impacts associated with the need to commute from outside
the city. The fee varies according to the intensity of commercial and industrial use, based
on the estimated number of low-income jobs and households associated with the
development type. The City expects to generate an average of $500,000 annually from
the impact fee.
In the recent past, the Affordable Housing Fund has been used to directly fund or assist
other organizations in funding affordable housing projects and housing for special needs
groups. Organizations which have received financial support from the City’s Affordable
Housing Fund include:
Abode Services – Receives funding from the City to implement three programs: $85,000
of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development’s HOME program to implement Project Independence and
another program to rehouse people that are homeless, $79,815 to implement a Homeless
Outreach Team to help stabilize the lives of the chronically homeless to obtain housing,
and $25,000 to provide support services to the clients of AC Impact, a program that
provides permanent supportive housing to chronically homeless individuals.
ECHO Housing – received $30,000 in FY2014 to support fair housing counseling and other
related housing services. The agency also has been the recipient of an ongoing
allocation of $50,000 of HOME and $30,000 of CDBG to provide homeless prevention
services to renters that are about to lose their housing.
Habitat East Bay/Silicon Valley – Received a $300,000 loan fund commitment to
purchase and rehabilitate single-family homes for resale to low income Veteran’s
households.
Hello Housing – Received a $1,300,000 acquisition and construction loan commitment to
purchase and rehabilitate a 5-unit apartment building to be reserved for special needs
households with mental health related disabilities.
Housing Consortium of the East Bay – In 2011, received a $60,000 “gap” loan to acquire a
Below Market Rate unit used as shared housing for individuals with developmental
disabilities.
Homeless and Domestic Violence Housing Services – The Tri-Valley Haven receives
funding to support these important services including: domestic abuse consulting, classes
and shelter. Funding includes, Housing In-Lieu and the Social Opportunity Endowment
funds.
Land Acquisition/Banking – Housing Trust Funds have been used to purchase sites
targeted for affordable housing within the downtown, including the Railroad Avenue,
First Street and Chestnut sites. The City is currently negotiating development agreements
with non-profit developers (Eden Housing and MidPen Housing) for those sites.
4-20

City of Livermore, Neighborhood Preservation Division – Receives CDBG to support code
enforcement activities in several low-income census tracts.
Neighborhood Solutions – Receives $50,000 to provide loans and small grant to help low
income homeowners rehabilitate their homes.
The City will continue to work with other developers to identify opportunities to acquire
and rehabilitate other blighted residential properties which present significant issues for
community preservation efforts.
 4.4      PROGRAMS
The City of Livermore uses the Affordable Housing Fund and other funding sources to
provide a range of housing programs, either directly or through partnering with non-profit
organizations in the region. These programs are summarized below and listed in Chapter
5, Housing Plan.
LAND ACQUISITION (PROGRAM 3.2.2)
One program for supporting the production of affordable housing is the acquisition ofof
property. For example, the City has purchased several sites within the Downtown area,
including the Railroad Avenue, First Street and Chestnut sites. The City is currently
working with MidPen Housing Corp is currently in the predevelopment phase for the 4-
acre housing site assembled by the City and located at the corner of Chestnut and P
Street in Downtown Livermore. This project will be a mixed-income project, with
approximately 35 market-rate units and 99 affordable units targeted to families and
seniors at 30-60% of Area Median Income. In partnership with MidPen and the market-
rate developer, the City will develop a master plan for the project, which will likely be
developed in two phases. MidPen will develop and administer the affordable units.
PARTNER WITH AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPERS (PROGRAM 3.2.3)
Affordable housing developers, particularly nonprofit developers, are key players in the
production, preservation, and maintenance of affordable housing. These agencies have
access to a range of public and private funds for housing activities. The City regularly
meets with affordable housing developers to discuss a variety of future affordable
housing opportunities in Livermore.
CONVERSION OF MARKET-RATE TO AFFORDABLE UNITS (PROGRAM 3.2.4)
The City has also increased the existing affordable housing stock by converting market
rate units to affordable units. Utilizing the Affordable Housing Fund, the City provides
financial assistance to non-profit organizations to purchase existing housing units, which
could be upgraded to provide accessibility to households with special needs.
For example, in 2013, the City established a revolving loan fund with Habitat for Humanity
East Bay/Silicon Valley for acquisition and rehabilitation of distressed single-family
properties to be sold at an affordable price to low-income U.S. military Veterans. These
homes will have a 55-year affordability resale restriction.
In addition, the City recently provided Hello Housing, a non-profit housing developer with
two loans for the acquisition and rehabilitation of a five-unit multi-family property. These
                                                                                         4-21

units will be affordable to very-low income households, earning less than 50 percent of
the AMI.
SUBSIDIES AND INCENTIVES (PROGRAM 3.2.5)
The City utilizes a variety of its funding sources to subsidize and incentivize affordable
housing development in Livermore. The subsidies are based on the project’s ability to
provide the greatest level of affordability and serve special needs households. Examples
of potential subsidies include:
     •   fee waivers for affordable units in a development such as the Transferrable
         Development Credit Fee;
     •   direct subsidy through the City’s Affordable Housing Fund;
     •   utilization of land assets reserved for affordable housing; and
     •   Option to amortize the payment of development fees over time.
The City also provides financial incentives to landlords who agree to continue to provide
affordable units (Program 4.2.1, Preservation of Affordable Housing).
FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER DOWN PAYMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (PROGRAM
3.3.1)
The City provides mortgage assistance for down payment, closing costs, and secondary
financing to assist low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers. The program
targets persons with disabilities. To reach potential homebuyers and inform the public,
the City coordinates with lenders, realtors, and homebuyer counseling agencies to
distribute information about the program.
RENTAL ASSISTANCE (PROGRAM 3.3.2)
The primary form of rental assistance to low-income and/or special needs households is
the federally-funded Section 8 program, administered through the Livermore Housing
Authority, the City includes referral information on the Section 8 program on their website
and identifies projects with Section-8 designated units in the Tri-Valley Affordable Housing
Rental Directory brochure.
The City’s Housing and Human Services Division has worked with the Livermore Housing
Authority to offer the program to developers of new rental housing with a focus on
providing housing opportunities for special needs population. Examples of this
collaboration include Carmen Avenue and Savannah Terrace.
HOMELESSNESS PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION (PROGRAM 3.3.4)
The City also provides funding to Adobe Services (formerly Allied Housing), which serves
low-income families, emancipated youth, and homeless individuals. In addition to
affordable housing, their services include job training, employment, and other supportive
services to help households at risk of homelessness to achieve stability and self-
sufficiency. The City coordinates with Adobe Services to implement Project
Independence and AC Impact.
Project Independence provides a rent subsidy and intensive case management for
young adults emancipating out of foster care, often to homelessness, at the age of
eighteen. This program provides a safety net through life skills training, education,
4-22

counseling, and stable housing for two years. Between 2009 and 2013, the program
assisted 34 young adults in Livermore.
AC Impact provides permanent housing vouchers coupled with services to individuals
experiencing chronic homelessness. Livermore has received up to 10 permanent housing
vouchers. This program is being initially targeted to outreach to individuals with high
levels of contact with local law enforcement. Livermore received up to 10 permanent
housing vouchers to address long term homeless in our community.
In addition, the City provides support to ECHO’s Homeless Prevention program, which
supports households that are at risk of becoming homeless.
MINOR HOME REPAIR PROGRAM (PROGRAM 4.1.1)
This program provides grants of up to $5,000 to lower income homeowners to cover the
cost of minor repairs. Example repairs include plumbing, weather stripping, electrical
work, and accessibility upgrades per the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The City
promotes all of its Housing Rehabilitation programs on the website, provides brochures at
the City’s public counters, conducts targeted mailings, and disseminates information
through Neighborhood Preservation staff. The City receives about 25 applications to the
program and about 75 to 100 inquiries annually.
OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAM (PROGRAM 4.1.2)
This program aids low income homeowners by providing deferred payment loans of up
to $35,000 for major repairs such as roof, furnace, and major electrical and plumbing
repairs. The program also provides for installation of special amenities such as wheelchair
ramps, support rail systems, and security/safety devices in housing occupied by elderly
and disabled.
The City advertises this program in tandem with the Minor Home Repair Program. The
loan program serves about three to four homeowners every year. The amount of repairs
needed by homeowners is consistently at the loan maximum and the total program
budget has not increased. Demand for the program exceeds the amount of funding
available for loans; therefore, the City assists homeowners with the most urgent health
and safety repair needs.
Through this program, the City has offered solar photovoltaic system installations in
coordination with GRID Alternatives, a non-profit whose mission is to renewable energy
and energy efficiency services to low-income homeowners. Utilizing a variety of rebates
and volunteer labor, GRID is able to install solar systems for $7,000 (a similar system would
cost a homeowner up to $30,000). The City has completed four of these installations.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX CREDITS - MILLS ACT (PROGRAM 4.1.3)
Enacted in 1972, the Mills Act (specifically the Mills Act Property Tax Abatement Program)
grants participating cities the authority to enter into contracts with owners of qualified
historic properties who actively participate in the restoration and maintenance of their
properties while receiving property tax relief. The Mills Act allows local governments to
design preservation programs to accommodate specific community needs and priorities
such as rehabilitating entire neighborhoods, encouraging seismic safety programs,
contributing to affordable housing, promoting heritage tourism, and/or fostering pride of
ownership.
                                                                                         4-23

The City of Livermore currently does not participate in the Mills Act Property Tax
Abatement Program but will investigate the feasibility of participation over the next five
years.
NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT (PROGRAM 4.1.4)
An important component of preserving the existing affordable housing stock is
maintaining and enhancing the residential environment. The City has an aggressive two-
year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) that includes various infrastructure upgrades
that will benefit neighborhoods across the city. These include a sidewalk repair program,
ADA compliance, upgrades and construction of public safety facilities (i.e., fire stations),
street improvements such as slurry sealing, and major transportation projects.
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PROGRAM (PROGRAM 4.1.5)
The Neighborhood Preservation section identifies health and safety issues associated with
residential structures and responds to building and zoning code violations reported to the
City. Neighborhood Preservation staff coordinates their investigations with other divisions
to provide a link between the identification of structures needing repair (Building) and
homeowners needing financial assistance to make necessary repairs (Housing and
Human Services). The City also conducts bi-annual Housing Quality Inspections of multi-
family complexes that have received US Department of Housing and Urban
Development CDBG and HOME funding.
FAIR HOUSING SERVICES AND SERVICES TO THE DISABLED (PROGRAM 5.1.1)
The City provides financial assistance and administrative support to local non-profit
organizations that specialize in addressing discriminatory housing practices. These
organizations include the Eden Council for Hope and Opportunity (ECHO), Community
Resources for Independent Living (CRIL), East Bay Innovations (EBI), and Bay Area
Community Services (BACS). Services provided by these organizations include: fair
housing counseling services, tenant/landlord mediation, community education/outreach
to local schools, rental assistance, and housing support services.
In addition to providing services to residents, ECHO receives assistance from the City to
conduct annual fair housing audits to tests landlords within the City for discriminatory
practices. Over the past six years, ECHO has tested for discrimination based on source of
income, race, disability, and national origin. The audits have indicated that housing
discrimination is an issue in the city and countywide. The results of the audits are
presented to the City and rental housing associations. Landlords who have been found
to discriminate during the audit are provided with their results and offered follow-up
education on fair housing laws. To further promote equal housing opportunity, the City
distributes fair housing brochures at public locations including City offices, public libraries,
community/senior centers, service providers, and on the City’s website. Brochures are
available in English and Spanish, with other translation available.
TRI-VALLEY AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMITTEE (PROGRAM 6.1.1)
The City of Livermore participates in the Tri-Valley Affordable Housing Committee. The
committee is composed of staff and elected public officials from Danville, Pleasanton,
Livermore, Dublin, San Ramon and Alameda and Contra Costa County. The purpose of
4-24

the committee is to identify regional housing issues and to develop multi-jurisdictional
approaches to solving affordable housing problems.
EMERGENCY AND TRANSITIONAL AND SUPPORTIVE HOUSING (PROGRAM 6.1.2)
The City coordinates with Pleasanton, Dublin and Alameda County to provide financing
for the acquisition, rehabilitation, and operation of emergency housing for families.
Specifically, the City coordinates supports the Tri-Valley Haven, which provides outreach,
social services, and referrals to people with disabilities, survivors of domestic violence,
and homeless people or those at risk of being homeless. Tri-Valley Haven and other
emergency, transitional, and supportive facilities are described in Chapter 2.
The City is currently partnering with nine other government agencies and community
stakeholders to plan and implement the county-wide housing plan EveryOne Home
Initiative. The plan centers on activities to address the housing needs of the homeless,
persons with serious mental illness, and those living with HIV/AIDS. EveryOne Home
envision a system of care in Alameda County that by 2020, ensures all extremely low-
income residents have a safe, supportive and permanent place to call home with
services available to help them stay housed and improve the quality of their lives. The
plan reflects a “housing first” model, in which all funded programs prioritize finding clients
permanent housing as quickly as possible before resolving any pre-conditions (e.g.,
sobriety, medication compliance, or utilizing a shelter or transitional housing program
first).
The City is also a member of the HOPE Partnership. This partnership oversees the HOPE
Mobile Services Unit, which provides medical, mental health, and case management
services to help people break the cycle of homelessness and develop the skills to help
them obtain and maintain housing.
REGIONAL HOME OWNERSHIP EDUCATION AND COUNSELING (PROGRAM 6.1.3)
The City of Livermore partners with all of the cities in the Tri-Valley including Danville, San
Ramon, Dublin, and Pleasanton to support first-time homebuyer education services
targeted to low and moderate income households through a number of local agencies
including, the Tri-Valley Housing Opportunity Center and Hello Housing. These agencies
coordinate first time homebuyer assistance programs and provide existing homeowners
with foreclosure intervention services, education/counseling, and screening for the City’s
Affordable Homeownership Programs.
4.5      OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
California law (Government Code Section 65583 [a][7]) requires local governments to
address energy conservation issues when updating a Housing Element. According to the
California Department of Housing and Community Development, these elements should
                                                                                           4-25

contain an analysis of opportunities for residential energy conservation. It is the intent of
this requirement to promote energy efficient housing systems and building design, as well
as the use of energy saving features and materials during construction.
RESIDENTIAL ENERGY USE AND CONSERVATION
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the residential sector accounts for 21
percent of the country’s annual energy use. 20 Within the home, 43 percent of residential
energy is used for space heating and cooling; 13 percent for appliances; 12 percent is
used for water heating; 11 percent is used for lighting. 21
Energy conservation provides the dual benefits of promoting environmental sustainability
and reducing monthly energy costs, which is a component of long-term housing
affordability.
Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all scales, from individual home
appliances to city design. Constructing new homes with energy-conserving features, as
well as retrofitting existing energy-inefficient structures, can result in lower monthly utility
costs. In addition to building design and construction techniques, street layouts and
zoning patterns also affect energy consumption and can therefore support its reduction.
Specific examples of energy conservation opportunities include:
     •    Sealing a home’s building envelope (doors, windows, walls, foundation, roof, and
          insulation) to prevent energy leaks that increase heating and cooling costs;
     •    Installing energy efficient appliances, LED lighting, and mechanical systems
          (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning);
     •    Installing a “cool roof” that reflects solar radiation to lower heating costs;
     •    Designing and orienting buildings to take advantage of natural systems such as
          sun, shade, and wind, which can provide heating, cooling, and energy
          generation opportunities;
     •    Supporting attached housing design, which reduces the number of exterior walls
          per unit and results in lower per-unit heating and cooling costs; and
     •    Promoting infill development to use existing infrastructure and services.
STATE PROGRAMS
The State of California has two major initiatives that encourage and require energy
conservation in the housing sector, described below. Pacific Gas and Electric Company
(PG&E) and the City of Livermore also offer programs that provide opportunities for
residential energy conservation.
20
     Source: U.S. Department of Energy at http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/aer/pdf/pages/sec2_4.pdf
21
     Source: U.S. Department of Energy, http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/docs/1.2.3.pdf.
4-26

State Energy Efficiency Requirements For New Construction (Title 24)
All new construction in Livermore is subject to the requirements of the California Energy
Commission’s Title 24 energy efficiency standards, which are designed to reduce heat
loss and energy consumption. Each city and county must enforce these standards as
part of its review of building plans and issuance of building permits, including new
development and major remodeling projects including home additions. These standards
apply to building components such as wall and ceiling insulation, thermal mass, and
window to floor area ratios.
Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction (Assembly Bill 32)
The California Legislature adopted the California Global Warming Solutions Act
(Assembly Bill [AB] 32) in 2006. The purpose of the act is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 (25 percent reduction over current levels) and then to
further reduce GHG emissions to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.
    •    The California Air Pollution Control Officers Association (CAPCOA), which
         represents local air districts, produced a report on steps that cities and counties
         can take to contribute to the goals of AB 32. CAPCOA recommended the
         adoption of General Plan policies and implementation measures that encourage
         energy conservation through community layout and design. The City
         incorporated many of the recommended strategies for residential energy
         conservation in the City’s Climate Change Element and Climate Action Plan,
         discussed below.
ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) offers several programs to promote energy
conservation and assist lower income residential customers with their home energy costs.
Energy conservation programs include rebate programs for old appliances, free energy
audits, and public education and outreach programs that teach energy saving tips. The
programs serving lower income households include the following:
    •    California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) is PG&E’s discount program for low-
         income households and housing facilities. CARE provides a 20 percent discount
         on monthly energy bills and waives recent surcharges for low-income households.
         The program applies to single family homeowners, tenants who are metered or
         billed by landlords, and group-living facilities.
    •    Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) is a discount program for low- to moderate-
         income families of three or more people. The program is available to both single
         family and multi-family residential customers.
    •    Energy Partners Program is one of PG&E’s financial assistance programs that
         provides qualified low-income customers free weatherization measures and
         energy-efficient appliances to reduce gas and electricity usage. The work usually
         involves attic insulation, door replacement, door weather-stripping, and minor
         home repair.
    •    Relief for Energy Assistance for Community Help (REACH) is a one-time energy
         assistance program for low-income homeowners who cannot pay their utility bill
         because of a sudden financial hardship. The program is targeted to the elderly,
                                                                                       4-27

         disabled, sick, working poor, and unemployed. Eligibility is determined by the
         Salvation Army and requires a household income that does not exceed 200
         percent of the federal poverty level.
PG&E also offers reduced rates for residential customers that are dependent on life
support equipment or have special heating and cooling needs caused by certain
medical conditions. The utility also offers a balanced payment plan for customers who
experience higher heating or cooling costs during the extreme weather months.
In addition to the programs above, the California Department of Community Services
and Development has a Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). The
LIHEAP provides free weatherization services such as attic insulation, caulking, water
heater blanket, heating/cooling system repair, and other conservation measures. LIHEAP
also provides payments for weather-related or energy-related emergencies and
financial assistance to eligible households for energy bills.
THE CITY OF LIVERMORE POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Goal 7 in Chapter 5 of this Housing Element contains one policy and two programs
aimed at promoting energy efficiency in existing and new development as a means of
reducing housing costs. This policy encourages the use of energy conservation features
in design and siting of new residential structures and in the retrofitting of existing
structures. The programs listed in this Housing Element that provide the means to achieve
this policy are the State Energy Code (previously discussed), the Housing Implementation
Program (HIP), and the Green Building Ordinance.
The City of Livermore includes criteria for solar access and energy efficiency in the HIP.
This provides an advantage to potential residential developments that include energy
efficient design features that exceed State requirements in their residential project
design. Furthermore, projects competing in the 2014-2016 HIP must demonstrate
compliance with the City’s Green Building Ordinance. This Ordinance, adopted in 2007,
requires new residential development to incorporate Green Building measures and to
achieve a minimum Green Point rating of 50 points. In addition to the Green Building
Ordinance, City has adopted the California Green Building Standard (Cal-Green) and
requires Tier 1 compliance on electrical.
The City of Livermore adopted a Climate Change Element (as an amendment to the
General Plan). Policies from the Climate Change Element are referenced in this Housing
Element in order to reinforce the City’s goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions within
the community consistent with the targets of AB 32. In November 2012, the City adopted
and has begun implementation of a Climate Action Plan. For example, the City’s
WattzOn initiative provides residents with a free home energy consultation to help
reduce monthly home energy bills.
4-28

5      HOUSING PLAN
This Housing Plan is a statement of Livermore’s commitment to maintaining, preserving,
improving, and developing housing opportunities for all segments of the community. The
Plan contains the goals, policies, objectives, and implementation programs to achieve a
high quality, balanced housing stock that accommodates the needs of existing and
future Livermore residents. The Housing Plan must achieve the following:
    •   Ensure continued availability and adequacy of sites to accommodate the
        Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), including appropriate zoning and
        development standards and with access to public services and facilities to meet
        the needs of all income levels.
    •   Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low-and
        moderate-income households.
    •   Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental
        constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
    •   Conserve and improve the condition of existing affordable housing stock.
    •   Preserve subsidized housing developments at-risk of conversion to market-rate.
    •   Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race/ethnicity, religion,
        sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, familial status, disability, or source of
        income.
5.1       ACCOMPLISHMENTS UNDER THE 2009-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
To update the housing plan, the City must evaluate the following:
    •   Appropriateness of the existing housing goals, objectives and policies in
        contributing to the local, regional, and statewide housing goals.
    •   Effectiveness of the 2009-2014 Housing Element in attainment of Livermore’s
        housing goals and objectives.
    •   The City’s progress with implementation of the 2009-2014 Housing Element.
The following discussion summarizes the City’s major accomplishments under each of the
seven housing goals in the 2009 – 2014 Housing Element:
    1.  Diversity of Housing Choice
    2.  Well Managed Growth
    3.  Production of Affordable Housing
    4.  Preservation and Improvement of Affordable Housing
    5.  Provision of Equal Housing Opportunity
    6.  Regional Cooperation to Produce Affordable Housing and Housing for Special
        Needs Groups
    7.  Energy Efficiency
Appendix C contains a detailed review of accomplishments under each Housing
Element program.
                                                                                              5-1

DIVERSITY OF HOUSING CHOICE
In order to address the diverse housing needs of the Livermore community and provide a
range of housing choices by type, price, and density, the City of Livermore
accomplished the following during the 2009 – 2014 Housing Element period:
     •   Comprehensive Update of Zoning Code (Program 1.2.1) – In February 2010, the
         City adopted a new Livermore Development Code. This update included new
         form-based regulations and smart growth principles to promote mixed-use
         development, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle travel, and encourage
         sustainable and infill development.
     •   Amendment of Neighborhood Mixed-Use Designation (Program 1.1.5) – As part
         of the new Livermore Development Code, the City amended the Neighborhood
         Mixed-Use (NM) designation in the General Plan. This designation previously
         permitted projects to be entirely commercial, whereas the amendment now
         requires mixed-use on these sites.
     •   Identified Transit Oriented Development Site (Program 2.2.2) – In 2012, the City
         established two Priority Development Areas (PDAs) that are intended for Transit
         Oriented Development (TOD) in support of the planned BART extension to
         Livermore. The City is currently in the process of developing a Specific Plan for
         the Isabel/BART PDA.
     •   Amendment to the Downtown Specific Plan (Program 1.1.1) – The City adopted
         the Downtown Specific Plan in 2004 with the goal of increasing development
         density and housing opportunities. In 2013, the City approved an amendment to
         allow for a density range of 30 to 36 dwelling units per acre within the
         Neighborhood North Side subarea.
     •   Adopted Ordinance for development within the Brisa Neighborhood Plan
         (Program 1.1.2) – In January 2014, the City adopted an ordinance approving the
         development agreement between the City of Livermore and Summer Hill Brisa,
         LLC for the Brisa Neighborhood Plan Project. The project consists of 465
         residential units, including a mix of small lot detached single-family homes, row
         townhouses, and apartments (with 30 units designated for low- and very low-
         income households).
     •   Amendment to the General Plan (Program 1.1.2) - In 2013, the City adopted a
         General Plan Amendment to create two land use designations: Urban High-5a
         (22-30 dwelling units/acre) and Urban High-5b (30-38 dwelling units /acre) and
         changed land use designations on three vacant parcels (two sites) to a dual
         designation of Industrial/Urban High-5b Residential.
     •   Amended Zoning Map (Program 1.1.2) – In 2013, the City adopted an
         amendment to the Zoning Map to change the zoning on one of the parcels
         mentioned above to Planned Development (PD) consistent with the new
         General Plan land use designations;
     •   Development of Housing for Special Needs Groups (Program 1.3.3, 3.3.1, and
         3.3.2) –In 2013, the City established a revolving loan fund for acquisition and
         rehabilitation of distressed single-family properties. These homes will be sold at a
5-2

        price affordable to low-income U.S. military Veterans. The City will also provide
        secondary mortgage assistance. The two homes that have been purchased
        through the program will receive ADA accessibility modifications. Finally, the City
        established a voucher based Section 8 program, received funding for 5 MHSA
        units and provided down payment assistance to for single-family shared housing.
    •   Emergency Shelters, SRO’s, and Transitional and Supportive Housing (Program
        1.3.4) As part of the 2010 Livermore Development Code update, the City
        developed specific definitions, consistent with State law, for emergency shelters
        and transitional and supportive housing. The City also identified zoning districts
        where these uses are explicitly permitted. The Development Code permits
        community care facilities, including emergency shelters, transitional housing and
        supportive housing facilities, in the Rural Residential (R-R), Suburban Residential
        (S-R), Residential Low Density (R-L), Multi-Family Residential (MFR) zones.
    •   Utilized the City’s Density Bonus Programs (Program 3.1.4) – The City continues to
        use the additional density bonuses for senior and very-low income housing.
        Recent projects during the last housing element cycle that have utilized these
        provisions include 30-unit Carmen Avenue Apartments and the 40-unit senior
        housing development, Vandenburg Villas.
WELL MANAGED GROWTH
Through its growth management policies, the City ensures high quality residential design
and the adequate provision of infrastructure, public facilities, and services. The following
describes Livermore’s major accomplishments towards well managed growth during the
2009–2014 Housing Element period:
    •   2011-2013 and 2014-2016 HIP (Program 2.1.1 and 3.1.2) – The City continues to
        utilize the Housing Implementation Plan (HIP) to manage residential growth
        commensurate with the availability of public services and infrastructure. There
        was no competitive process for the 2011-2013 HIP. The 2014-2016 HIP will require
        minimum energy efficiency measures in order to qualify for allocations and no
        competitive process.
    •   HIP Exemptions (Program 2.1.1) – The HIP process continues to offset potential
        negative effects of growth management by allowing exemptions to the
        competitive process to encourage a variety of housing for all income levels.
        Projects of four units or less as well as projects that provide 35 to 50 percent of
        the units as affordable are exempt. The 2011-2013 HIP exempted 600 units in the
        Downtown Specific Plan Area.
    •   Adoption of Climate Action Plan (Program 2.2.1) – In November 2012, the City
        adopted and has begun implementation of a Climate Action Plan. For example,
        the City participated in the “Cities for Climate Protection” campaign
        administered by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability.
PRODUCTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
The Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) is the state-mandated process to identify
the total number of housing units (by affordability level) that each jurisdiction must
accommodate in its Housing Element. For the 2009-2014 Housing Element cycle, the City
                                                                                         5-3

was assigned a Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) of 3,394 units, at the following
income distribution:
                  o     Very Low Income – 1,038 units
                  o     Low Income – 660 units
                  o     Moderate Income – 683 units
                  o     Above Moderate Income – 1,013 units
The following describes Livermore’s major accomplishments towards the production of
affordable housing during the 2009–2014 Housing Element period:
       •     Increased the City’s Inventory of Land for Affordable Housing (Program 1.1.1) –
             During the previous RHNA cycle, the City’s land inventory included sufficient sites
             to accommodate low-income, moderate, and above-moderate dwelling units.
             However, the inventory did not meet the RHNA obligations for the very low-
             income category. The City’s 2009-2014 Housing Element certification was
             contingent upon completing a program to re-designate and rezone sufficient
             sites for very-low income households. Accordingly, the City took the following
             actions to rezone approximately 33 acres of land at a minimum density of 30
             dwelling units per acre to accommodate 966 dwelling units in the Very Low-
             Income category:
                  1. Approved a General Plan Amendment to create two land use
                        designations: Urban High-5a (22-30 du/acre) and Urban High-5b (30-38
                        du/acre).
                  2. Changed the land use designations to a dual designation of
                        Industrial/Urban High-5b Residential on three vacant parcels adjacent to
                        the Brisa and Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plans.
                  3. Approved a Downtown Specific Plan Amendment to establish a density
                        range of 30 to 36 dwelling units per acre in the Neighborhood North Side
                        subarea.
       •     Revised Inclusionary Housing Ordinance (Program 3.1.1) – In 2013, the City
             conducted a Residential Nexus Analysis and a Residential Feasibility Analysis to
             inform an update of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance to reflect current
             market conditions. Subsequently, the City adjusted the affordable housing in-lieu
             fee to $11.65 per square foot. The City also reinstated the “must build“
             requirements, meaning that development must include on-site affordable units,
             unless they obtain special approval from City Council to use a different method
             for satisfying the ordinance, such as payment of the in-lieu fee. 22
       •      Provision of Subsidies to Facilitate Affordable Housing Development (Program
              3.2.4) – The City offers financial subsidies from a variety of sources to facilitate
22
   Also in 2013, the City amended the ordinance to exempt rental housing projects from the inclusionary housing requirement, except
   for projects that are located within designated Plan Areas and include mixed-product types
5-4

         affordable housing production. In 2013, the City provided Hello Housing with
         funding for the acquisition and rehabilitation of a 5-unit multi-family property.
         Projects underway with Eden and Mid-Pen Housing in Downtown are expected
         to provide an additional 135 units to low and very low-income households
         including families, seniors, and persons with disabilities.
     •   First Time Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance (Program 3.3.1) – Through this
         program, the City assisted 10 households from 2009 through 2014. Also in 2012,
         the City received a $1,000,000 CalHome Grant from HCD, which will be used to
         expand the First-Time Homebuyer Down payment Assistance Program. The
         program is expected to assist 25 households.
     •   HIP Targeted Categories (Program 3.1.2) – The City continues to use HIP to
         encourage the development of affordable units through exemptions. The City
         will continue to use targeted categories to encourage infill in future competitive
         HIP programs.
     •   Converted Market Rate Units to Affordable (Program 4.2.1) – There are numerous
         challenges to converting market rate units to affordable units such as covering
         the high cost of units with limited resources. Overcoming these obstacles, the
         City was able to convert six units from market rate to below market rate for at
         least 55 years in 2013.
PRESERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Preserving and improving existing affordable housing is a critical component of the City’s
overall housing strategy. The City has many programs to facilitate housing improvement
and has accomplished numerous objectives during the 2009 – 2014 Housing Element
period through these programs, including:
     •   Minor Home Repair (Program 4.1.1) – The City’s Minor Home Repair Program
         provides grants to lower income homeowners to cover the cost of minor
         necessary repairs. Between 2010 and 2013, the City assisted 25 households
         through this program, averaging about six households per year.
     •   Owner-Occupied Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (Program 4.1.2) – This
         program aids lower- and moderate-income homeowners by providing non-
         payment loans for major repairs or the installation of amenities for seniors and
         persons with disabilities,. Between 2010 and 2013, the City assisted 11 households
         through this program, averaging about three households per year.
     •   Home Improvement Rebate Program (Program 4.1.2) – This program focuses on
         façade improvements for low-income homeowners. City staff continues to
         market the program in areas with older housing stock and a significant number
         of code violations. In 2012 and 2013, the City assisted a total of 26 households
         through this program.
     •   Preservation of At-Risk Units (Program 4.2.1) – Housing developed wholly or
         partially with public funds should remain affordable to the maximum extent
         feasible. With that in mind, the Housing and Human Services Division continues to
         monitor affordable projects at-risk of conversion to market rate. The City
                                                                                        5-5

          continues to reach out to nonprofit developers, collaborate with project owners
          and pursue state funding opportunities for support in preserving affordable units.
PROVISION OF EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
Provision of a range of housing choices must be matched by the equal opportunity to
access such housing regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital
status, national origin, ancestry, familial status, disability, or source of income. To promote
equal housing opportunities in Livermore, the City accomplished the following during the
2009 – 2014 Housing Element period:
     •   Fair Housing Outreach and Education (Program 5.1.1) – The City continues to
         contract with ECHO Housing to conduct fair housing outreach and education,
         as well as to investigate complaints of housing discrimination and conduct yearly
         Fair Housing Audits. In 2012, ECHO tested 10 properties in Livermore for
         reasonable accommodations for disabled persons. All owners and managers of
         these properties were offered free fair housing training. The City also continues to
         operate and subsidize the City’s Multi-Service Center for agencies that primarily
         serve low-income individuals. Livermore is the only City in the Tri-Valley with a
         Multi-Service Center. Agencies with permanent space at the Center or that use
         space on an on-going basis include Alameda County Social Services, Axis
         Community Health Clinic, CRIL, State of California Department of Rehabilitation,
         East Bay Innovations, ECHO Housing, Tri-City Health Center Valley AIDS Project
         and Tri-Valley Community Foundation.
     •   Housing for the Disabled (Program 5.1.1 ) – The City continues to refer complaints
         to Community Resources for Independent Living (CRIL)and provides them with
         funding support for case management for disabled Livermore residents and
         community education and outreach to local schools. In 2013, ECHO also
         provided housing related services to 131 persons with disabilities.
REGIONAL COOPERATION TO PRODUCE AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND HOUSING
FOR SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
Livermore understands that affordable housing and special needs groups are not unique
to the City. Therefore, the City continues to work cooperatively with communities in the
region to effectively address affordable housing needs and housing for persons with
special needs through the following programs:
     •   Tri-Valley Affordable Housing Committee (TVAHC) (Program 6.1.2) – Through the
         TVAHC, the City and other Tri-Valley jurisdictions (Dublin, Pleasanton, San Ramon
         and Danville) collaborate on programs and regional policies that improve the
         provision of affordable housing. Joint initiatives through this committee included
         establishing the Tri-Valley Housing Opportunity Center (TVHOC). In 2013, the City
         provided a variety of support to TVHOC to assist them in completing five
         workshops addressing financial education, homebuyers counseling, education
         workshops and foreclosure counseling. The City recently utilized a Section 108
         loan from HUD to purchase the TVHOC’s headquarters with the intent to secure
         a permanent, local and accessible location for housing services in Livermore.
     •   Tri-Valley Housing Scholarship Program (Program 6.1.4) – The Housing Scholarship
         Program provides a rent subsidy to individuals in need of affordable housing
5-6

          while in vocational training to become self-sufficient. Between 2010 and 2013, a
          total of 23 households were assisted, an average of about six households
          annually.
     •    Project Independence (Program 6.1.5) – The City collaborates with the Tri-City
          Homeless Coalition to operate “Project Independence,” a program for youth
          transitioning out of foster care to reside in Livermore. The program assisted a total
          of 5 youths between 2012 and 2014. Typically, the City assists an average of
          about eight youths annually.
     •    Regional Collaboration for Special Needs Groups (Program 6.1.2) – The City
          provides grant funding and works closely with a variety of non-profit agencies
          that provide housing services and advocacy for special needs groups, including
          East Bay innovations and Community Resources for Independent Living. In 2008,
          these agencies provided assistance to over 100 persons. The City also
          collaborates with REACH (formerly HOUSE Inc.), Housing Consortium of the East
          Bay, and Bay Area Community Services to provide supportive housing to 30
          persons with developmental disabilities.
     •    Homeless Prevention and Rapid Re-housing Program (HPRP) (Program 6.1.2) –
          HPRP provided housing relocation and stabilization services to individuals and
          families who were homeless. The program concluded in September 2012, having
          provided services to 702 persons and 256 households. The City now provides
          funding to ECHO for these services.
     •    Developmentally Disabled Homeownership (Program 1.3.3) – In 2010, the City
          sold the second of two units in the Savannah Terrace development which were
          reserved for purchase by developmentally disabled households. These
          opportunities were supported through the Livermore Housing Authority’s Section
          8 Housing Choice Voucher program in which rental vouchers are converted for
          use towards payment of a mortgage.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Through the Uniform Building Code and State Energy Code, the City continues to
facilitate the construction of energy-efficient housing. The City also continues to include
the evaluation of energy efficiency as criteria in the HIP evaluation procedure. Other
accomplishments furthering energy efficiency include:
       • GRID Alternatives (Program 4.1.2) – GRID Alternatives is a nonprofit organization
          that brings the benefits of solar technology to communities that would not
          otherwise have access. Through the Owner Rehabilitation Program, the City
          continues to offer low-cost installation of solar panels with GRID Alternatives. In
          2012, solar panel installations were completed on five single family homes,
          resulting in an average of $20,000 in energy savings per homeowner over a 30-
          year period.
     • Green Building Ordinance (Program 7.1.2) – In 2013, the City amended the
          commercial and residential Green Building Ordinance. The City currently requires
          new structures to exceed the requirements of the California Building Energy
          Efficiency Standards by 15 percent.
                                                                                            5-7

5.2      HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
The goals, policies, and programs in this 2015-2022 Housing Plan are based upon those in
the 2009-2014 Housing Element, with modifications to reflect the current and projected
needs, the effectiveness and relevancy of existing programs, potential constraints and
opportunities, and public input.
The Housing Plan includes the following goals:
     1. Diversity of Housing Choice:
     2. Well Managed Growth:
     3. Production of Affordable Housing
     4. Preservation and Improvement of Affordable Housing
     5. Provision of Equal Housing Opportunity
     6. Regional Cooperation to Address Housing Needs
     7. Energy Efficiency
Each goal has a set of measurable objectives, policies, programs, and actions. These
implementing actions, however, generally address multiple goals and build upon each
other, creating a comprehensive approach to meeting the community’s housing needs.
For example, policies in support of transit-oriented development support Goals 1, 2 and 7
related to increasing housing choices, encouraging the efficient use of existing
infrastructure, and reducing energy consumption.
Table 5-1 summarizes the quantified objectives over this Housing Element period.
5-8

         Table 5-1.               Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2015 - 2022
             Extremely                                              Above
                Low         Very Low         Low   Moderate       Moderate
Program       Income         Income       Income     Income        Income         Total
Total
RHNA                   839                   474       496           920          2,729
Housing Production (units)
Program
1.2.3                       40 units                                                40
Program
3.2.1                    10 - 15/year                                            80-120
Housing Rehabilitation (units)
Program
4.1.1               24-32 total + 6 - 8/year                                      72-96
Program
4.1.2                      3 - 4/year                                             24-32
Housing Conservation/Preservation (units)
Program
3.2.4                      2 - 3/year                                             16-24
Program
4.1.5                       10/year                                                 80
Program
4.2.1                       36 units                                                36
Total Units                 348-428                     0             0         348-428
Housing Assistance (individuals served)
Program
3.3.1                    10 - 15/year             10 - 15/year                  160-240
Program
3.3.4                          208                                                 208
Policy 6.1                     450                                                 450
                                                                                        5-9
GOAL 1: DIVERSITY OF HOUSING CHOICE
Address the diverse housing needs of all economic segments of the community by
allowing for a range of housing types, price levels, and density.
Policy 1.1: Develop and maintain an inventory of land with adequate densities and
development standards to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) in
all income categories.
Program 1.1.1: Land Inventory
Actions:                                 Timeframe:    Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                    Objective:
    Develop a land inventory that       Completed for Community &         General  n/a
     provides sufficient sites to meet   the 2015-2022 Economic            Fund
     the Regional Housing Needs          Cycle         Development
     Allocation (RHNA) of 2,729 units                  Department
     (839 very-low, 474 low, 496
     moderate-income, and 920
     above moderate).
    In the event that a site included   Ongoing       Community &         General  n/a
     in the City’s land inventory is                   Economic            Fund
     developed commercially or with                    Development
     other non-residential uses,                       Department
     identify an additional site with
     the same or more capacity as
     the previous site.
    Should a proposed density           Ongoing       Community &         General  n/a
     reduction decrease the number                     Economic            Fund
     of units below the City’s RHNA                    Development
     for the Housing Element period,                   Department
     identify additional sites/units to
     ensure the RHNA can still be
     met.
    Maintain a file in the Planning     Ongoing       Community &         General  n/a
     Division of vacant residential                    Economic            Fund
     acreage to assist developers in                   Development
     identifying land suitable for                     Department
     single-family and multi-family
     residential development.
    Maintain maps indicating            Ongoing       Community &         General  n/a
     current zoning as well as public                  Economic            Fund
     facilities and services to these                  Development
     sites.                                            Department
    Monitor on an annual basis the      Annually      Community &         General  n/a
     development of underutilized or                   Economic            Fund
     vacant residential sites identified               Development
     to meet the RHNA.                                 Department
    Following future amendments to      As needed     Community &         General  n/a
     the General Plan’s Safety                         Economic            Fund
     Element, ensure consistency with                  Development
     the Housing Element, including                    Department
     the land inventory.
5-10

Policy 1.2: Facilitate the development of a range of housing types through area
planning efforts and the Development Code.
Program 1.2.1: Implementation of the General Plan, Downtown Specific Plan, and
Development Code
Actions:                               Timeframe       Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                    Objectives:
 Continue to update and amend         As projects are Community &         General  n/a
    the General Plan as needed         proposed;       Economic
    and appropriate to provide a       reviewed        Development
    range of housing types, densities, annually        Department
    and affordability levels.
 Continue to update and amend         As projects are Community &         General  n/a
    the Downtown Specific Plan as      proposed;       Economic            Fund
    needed and appropriate to          reviewed        Development
    facilitate downtown                annually        Department
    revitalization, the provision of
    affordable housing, and mixed-
    use development.
 Analyze potential Development        By 2017         Community &         General  n/a
    Code updates that would                            Economic            Fund
    expand opportunities for                           Development
    attached housing (e.g., small                      Department
    apartment complexes) and
    smaller unit types (e.g., studios
    and cottages).
 Evaluate specific barriers to        By 2017         Community &         General  n/a
    residential development of small                   Economic            Fund
    properties                                         Development
                                                       Department
Program 1.2.2: Isabel BART Station Specific Plan
Actions:                               Timeframe       Responsible Agency: Funding:  Quantified
                                                                                     Objectives:
 Develop a Specific Plan for the      By 2017         Community &         General   n/a
    area surrounding the future                        Economic            Fund
    Isabel BART Station, and revise                    Development
    the General Plan and Zoning                        Department
    designations accordingly to
    allow for residential transit-
    oriented development.
Program 1.2.3: Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Actions:                               Timeframe:      Responsible Agency: Funding:  Quantified
                                                                                     Objectives:
   Continue to allow mobile and       Ongoing         Community &         General   40 new
    manufactured homes that meet                       Economic            Fund      mobile or
    State and City codes, as well as                   Development                   manufactur
    the City’s design review                           Department                    ed homes
    requirements, in all residential                                                 over the
    districts.                                                                       next 8 years
                                                                                           5-11

Program 1.2.4: Secondary Dwelling Units
Actions                                  Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                     Objectives:
 Continue to encourage the              Ongoing        Community and       General  n/a
    development of secondary                            Economic            Fund
    dwelling units by exempting                         Development
    them from certain development
    impact fees.
Program 1.2.5: Reduce Governmental Constraints
Actions                                  Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                     Objectives:
 The City of Livermore facilitates      Ongoing; as    Community and       General  n/a
    and encourages the                   changes are    Economic            Fund
    development of a variety of          made to        Development
    housing in the community. The        development
    City will monitor its development    fees. Make
    fees to ensure they are              changes as
    reasonable and do not unduly         needed
    constrain development, while
    protecting the quality, health,
    and public safety of the
    community.
Policy 1.3:        Encourage the development of housing for individuals with disabilities.
Program 1.3.1: Licensed Community Residential Care Facilities
Actions:                                 Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding:  Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
 Consistent with State law,             Ongoing        Community &         None      n/a
    continue to allow licensed                          Economic            required
    community residential care                          Development
    facilities serving 6 or fewer                       Department
    persons in all residential districts
    as a means of providing housing
    for these special needs groups.
Program 1.3.2: Universal Design
Actions:                                 Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                     Objectives:
   Continue to include universal         2017-2019 HIP Community           General  n/a
    design features as project           Program        Development         Fund
    specific criteria to achieve a                      Department
    higher project-specific rating
    during competitive years of the
    Housing Implementation
    Program (HIP).
   Update the City’s residential        By 2018        Community &         General  n/a
    design guidelines and standards                     Economic            Fund
    to encourage “visitability” and                     Development
    universal design features in new                    Department
    homes.
5-12

    Expand consumer awareness by          By 2018              Community &                General        n/a
     providing information on                                   Economic                   Fund
     universal design features at the                           Development
     City’s Permit Center and                                   Department
     develop resource information for
     the City’s Permit Center website.
Program 1.3.3: Development of Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Actions:                                  Timeframe:            Responsible Agency:        Funding:       Quantified
                                                                                                          Objectives:
    Continue to provide monetary         As projects are       Community &                Affordable     n/a
     subsidies to market-rate             proposed or           Economic                   Housing
     developers and non-profits to        through annual        Development                Fund
     encourage the development of         Housing & Human       Department
     new housing for persons with         Services Grant
     disabilities, including              allocation
     developmental disabilities, and      process
     for the improvement of existing
     housing.
                                          Ongoing
     -     Seek state and federal         monitoring*
           funding to increase
           resources available for this
           program.
    Consider regulatory incentives       Annually, or as       Community &                General        n/a
     for projects targeted for persons    projects are          Economic                   Fund
     with disabilities, including         proposed              Development
     persons with developmental                                 Department
     disabilities.
    Support “aging in place”             Annual renewal        Community &                Affordable     n/a
     through community design,            of Housing &          Economic                   Housing
     partnering with organizations        Human Services        Development                Fund
     that provide support services,       Grant funding         Department
     and encouraging accessibility        agreements and
     improvements to rental housing.      as projects are
                                          proposed
* Staff looks out for funding opportunities on a daily basis. For example, our subscription to the California Office
of Planning Research (OPR) list serves made us aware of the Strategic Growth Council’s Affordable Housing and
Sustainable Communities Program. Other sources that staff monitors on at least a monthly basis include:
Alameda County Housing and Community Development Department, State Housing and Community
Development Department (HCD) Office of Financial Assistance, and federal sources through outreach to
Congressional district staff.
                                                                                                                5-13

GOAL 2:             WELL MANAGED GROWTH
Manage residential growth to promote (1) the production of housing to meet local
and regional housing needs; (2) a growth rate balanced with the provision of
infrastructure capacity and public services; (3) a balanced relationship between
residential and non-residential development; (4) the highest quality design for all
residential units and neighborhoods; and (5) open space preservation.
Policy 2.1: Encourage the provision of lower income housing, infill development,
and mixed-use projects in locations served by existing infrastructure, particularly
transit services.
Program 2.1.1: Housing Implementation Program (HIP)
Actions:                                Timeframe: Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                Objectives:
   Ensure that future HIP programs      Ongoing   Community &         General  n/a
    address the need to provide                    Economic            Fund
    very low- and low-income                       Development
    housing units (according to the                Department
    City’s RHNA) by establishing
    sufficient allocations for
    development of sites identified in
    the land inventory.
   Re-evaluate and continue HIP        Ongoing    Community &         General  n/a
    exemptions as needed to                        Economic            Fund
    facilitate housing construction,               Development
    redevelopment, and large scale                 Department
    catalyst projects in the
    Downtown area.
   Continue to allow exemptions        Ongoing    Community &         General  n/a
    from the HIP in conjunction with               Economic            Fund
    the TDC Program to encourage                   Development
    infill development.                            Department
   Continue to use emphasized          Ongoing    Community &         General  n/a
    categories during competitive                  Economic            Fund
    years as a mechanism to                        Development
    encourage infill development,                  Department
    mixed-use
    (commercial/residential)
    projects, and lot consolidation
    for larger projects.
   Provide information on the HIP      Ongoing    Community &         General  n/a
    on the Community and                           Economic            Fund
    Economic Development website                   Development
    and conduct outreach to local                  Department
    developers.
    -       Conduct 2-3 developer
            workshops during the 2015-
            2022 period.
    -       Conduct outreach at the
            yearly Real Estate Roundup.
5-14

Program 2.1.2: Monitor Infrastructure Needs
Actions:                                   Timeframe:        Responsible Agency Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                           Objectives:
   Continue to analyze                    Every three       Community &        General    n/a
    infrastructure needs and               years, as part of Economic           Fund
    capacity to guide HIP                  HIP process       Development
    allocations in a manner that                             Department
    balances residential growth with
    the provision of adequate
    infrastructure and services.
   Review infrastructure needs to         Bi-annually, as   Community &        General    n/a
    support intensified development        part of CIP       Economic           Fund
    on infill sites within City limits and updates           Development
    in the Downtown area; program                            Department
    improvements and upgrades
    into the City’s CIP.
   Work with the City’s water and         Ongoing; as       Community &        General    n/a
    sewer provider in order to ensure      projects are      Economic           Fund
    the availability and adequate          proposed          Development
    capacity of water and                                    Department, Public
    wastewater systems to                                    Works Department
    accommodate the housing
    needs during the planning
    period.
    -
    -     Prioritize proposed              As needed         Community &        General    n/a
          developments that include                          Economic           Fund
          housing affordable to                              Development
          lower-income households.                           Department, Public
                                                             Works Department
    -     Provide a copy of the            After adoption of Community &        General    n/a
          Housing Element and any          the Housing       Economic           Fund
          future amendments to the         Element and as    Development
          utility providers immediately    needed            Department
          after adoption.
Program 2.1.3: Support Mixed-Use and Transit-Oriented Development
Actions:                                   Timeframe:        Responsible Agency Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                            Objectives:
   Promote lot consolidation to           Ongoing           Community &        Affordable  n/a
    increase opportunities for mixed-                        Economic           Housing
    use development.                                         Development        Fund
                                                             Department
   Continue to require minimum            Underway          Community &        General     n/a
    residential densities in areas                           Economic           Fund
    designated for transit-oriented,                         Development
    mixed-use development to                                 Department
    ensure higher density in these
    areas.
                                                                                                5-15

   Continue to use existing density   Ongoing           Community &         General  n/a
    incentives and develop                               Economic            Fund
    additional incentives to promote                     Development
    mixed-use and more intense                           Department
    residential development near
    transit.
    -     Identify additional areas
          served by transit where
          density incentives should be
          encouraged.
GOAL 3:           PRODUCTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Encourage the provision and long-term availability of housing affordable to all
economic segments of the community, and dispersed and integrated throughout
the community.
Policy 3.1: Facilitate the production of affordable housing through the regulation
of and incentives to new development.
Program 3.1.1: Inclusionary Housing Ordinance
Actions:                               Timeframe:        Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
   Continue to implement the          Ongoing; review   Community &         General  n/a
    inclusionary housing ordinance.    every 5 years for Economic            Fund
                                       adjustment to     Development
                                       market            Department
                                       conditions or as
                                       needed/required
   Continue to require developers     Ongoing           Community &         General  n/a
    to identify the location of                          Economic            Fund
    inclusionary units.                                  Development
                                                         Department
   Update feasibility analysis of     By 2019; review   Community &         General  n/a
    inclusionary housing ordinance     every 5 years for Economic            Fund
    to reflect current market          adjustment to     Development
    conditions. As part of feasibility market            Department
    study the City will evaluate the   conditions or as
    must-build component of the        needed/require
    inclusionary Housing Ordinance
    to allow developers to choose
    one of the alternative means of
    compliance without
    discretionary review by the City
    Council.
5-16

Program 3.1.2: Density Bonuses and Incentives
Actions:                              Timeframe:    Responsible Agency:   Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
 Continue to ensure new              Ongoing.      Community &           General     n/a
    residential projects are                        Economic              Fund
    consistent with current State                   Development
    Density Bonus regulations.                      Department
   Continue to encourage the use     Ongoing       Community &           General     n/a
    of both the State Density Bonus                 Economic              Fund
    Program and the City’s density                  Development
    incentives for senior and very-                 Department
    low income housing.
Policy 3.2: Actively pursue and utilize a variety of funding resources and
public/private partnerships in the development or purchase of housing affordable
to lower and moderate-income households.
Measurable Objectives:
        Assist in the development of an average of 10 to 15 lower-income units annually over
         the 2015 – 2022 period
     Assist in the conversion of 2 to 3 units from market-rate to affordable per year over the
         2015 – 2022 period
Program 3.2.1: Affordable Housing Fund
Actions:                              Timeframe:    Responsible Agency:   Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
   Continue to use the Affordable    Ongoing       Community &           Affordable   Assist in the
    Housing Fund to provide                         Economic              Housing      developme
    affordable housing opportunities                Development           Fund         nt of an
    for lower income households.                    Department                         average of
                                                                                       10 to 15
                                                                                       lower-
                                                                                       income
                                                                                       units
                                                                                       annually
   Continue to apply the Low-        Ongoing; as   Community &           General
    Income Housing Impact fee to      projects are  Economic              Fund (staff
    generate funds for the            proposed      Development           time to
    Affordable Housing Fund.                        Department            administer)
   Continue to allow the payment     Ongoing; as   Community &           General
    of In-lieu fees as an alternative projects are  Economic              Fund (staff
    compliance method under the       proposed      Development           time to
    Inclusionary Housing Ordinance                  Department            administer)
    (with City Council approval).
                                                                                              5-17

    Review the In lieu and Low           By 2018,             Community &               General
     Income Housing Impact fees as        ongoing, monitor     Economic                  Fund
     major changes occur in the           the feasibility of   Development
     housing market and adjust if         reinstituting an     Department
     warranted.                           impact fee for
                                          rental units as
                                          the market
                                          develops/
                                          improves.
    Explore additional funding           Ongoing              Community &               General
     sources and opportunities to         monitoring (see      Economic                  Fund
     leverage existing funding to         Program 1.3.3)       Development
     increase resources for affordable                         Department
     housing programs.
Program 3.2.2: Acquire Land for Affordable Housing
Actions:                                  Timeframe:           Responsible Agency:       Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                                     Objectives:
    Utilize a variety of funding         Ongoing              Community &               Affordable  n/a
     sources to increase the City’s                            Economic                  Housing
     inventory of City-controlled                              Development               Fund,
     properties to be set aside for                            Department                CDBG, and
     future development of                                                               HOME.
     affordable housing.
     -      Continue to allow land
            dedication as an
            alternative compliance
            method under the
            Inclusionary Housing
            Ordinance (with City
            Council approval).
Program 3.2.3: Partner with Affordable Housing Developers
Actions:                                  Timeframe:           Responsible Agency:       Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                                     Objectives:
    Coordinate with nonprofit            Ongoing; as          Community &               General     n/a
     housing developers and               projects are         Economic                  Fund (staff
     applicable federal, state and        proposed             Development               time)
     regional agencies to facilitate                           Department
     the development of quality
     affordable housing.
    Continue to foster relationships     Ongoing; as          Community &               General     n/a
     with nonprofit housing               opportunities        Economic                  Fund
     developers active in the region.     arise *              Development
                                                               Department
* Staff sends out Requests for Proposals (RFPs) for partnerships, as City-owned site development opportunities
arise, and as projects propose support from the City’s Affordable Housing Fund. Staff also communicates with
developers and housing services providers via participation in community-based and regional committees to
address housing needs (see Goal 6 below).
5-18

Program 3.2.4: Conversion of Market-Rate to Affordable Units
Actions:                                Timeframe:         Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                          Objectives:
   Continue to provide financial       Ongoing; with      Community &         Affordable Assist in the
    resources to non-profit             monthly            Economic            Housing    conversion
    organizations to convert and        coordination       Development         Fund       of 2 to 3
    increase the existing affordable    with non-profit    Department                     units from
    housing stock.                      development                                       market-rate
                                        partners to                                       to
                                        identify potential                                affordable
                                        properties                                        per year
Program 3.2.5: Subsidies and Incentives
Actions:                                Timeframe:         Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                          Objectives:
 Continue to provide subsidies to      Ongoing; as        Community &         Affordable n/a
    affordable housing projects,        opportunities      Economic            Housing
    prioritizing those that provide the arise and          Development         Fund
    greatest level of affordability     through annual     Department
    and serve special needs             Housing &
    households.                         Human Services
    -     Consider fee waivers for      Grant allocation
          affordable units, direct      process
          subsidy through the
          Affordable Housing Fund, or
          providing land reserved for
          affordable housing.
 Continue to allow the HIP             Ongoing; as        Community &         General    n/a
    exemption for projects with at      projects are       Economic            Fund
    least 35% very-low income units;    proposed           Development
    emphasize affordable projects                          Department
    during competitive years.
 Continue to allow developers of       Ongoing; as        Community &         General    n/a
    affordable units to amortize the    projects are       Economic            Fund
    payment of applicable               proposed           Development
    development impact fees over                           Department
    time to help meet affordable
    housing targets.
 Continue to meet regularly with       Ongoing;           Community &         General    n/a
    developers to discuss incentive     annually at a      Economic            Fund
    opportunities and provide           minimum            Development
    information at workshops.                              Department
Program 3.2.6: Public Outreach
Actions:                                Timeframe:         Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                          Objectives:
 Improve communication with            Ongoing;           Community &         General    n/a
    the public to increase              monthly            Economic            Fund
    awareness of policies, programs,    participation in   Development
    and permit processes that           community          Department
    support the production of           based meetings
    affordable housing.                 to distribute info
                                                                                                  5-19

Policy 3.3: Provide housing assistance to lower and moderate-income
households and other households with special needs.
Program 3.3.1: First-Time Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance Program
Actions:                                  Timeframe:    Responsible Agency:  Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                         Objectives:
 Continue to provide mortgage            2015 through  Community &          Affordable  Continue to
    assistance for down payment,          2022          Economic             Housing     provide
    closing costs, and secondary                        Development          Fund        First-Time
    financing to low- and moderate-                     Department                       Homebuyer
    income first-time homebuyers.                                                        Down
                                                                                         Payment
                                                                                         Assistance
                                                                                         to an
                                                                                         average of
                                                                                         10-15 low
                                                                                         and
                                                                                         moderate-
                                                                                         income
                                                                                         households
                                                                                         annually
 Continue to target persons with         Ongoing       Community &          Affordable  n/a
    disabilities for participation in the               Economic             Housing
    program.                                            Development          Fund
                                                        Department
 Continue to promote and                 Ongoing       Community &          General     n/a
    provide information about the                       Economic             Fund
    program on the City’s website,                      Development
    newsletter, through e-mail                          Department
    distribution, local advertising,
    and with brochures and
    handouts at the City’s permit
    center counter.
Program 3.3.2: Rental Assistance
Actions:                                  Timeframe:    Responsible Agency: Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Pursue additional funding to            Ongoing       Livermore Housing   General     n/a
    maintain the Section 8 Rental                       Authority and       Fund
    Assistance Program and                              Community &
    enhance support for other rental                    Economic
    assistance programs.                                Development
                                                        Department
 Assist Livermore Housing                Ongoing;      Community &         General     n/a
    Authority (LHA) to maintain           monthly       Economic            Fund
    and/or increase the amount of         coordination  Development
    rental housing available to very-     meetings with Department
    low income households, as well        LHA
    as the amount of households
    assisted through the Section 8
    program:
    -     Provide technical
          assistance with property
          acquisition and
          administrative assistance to
5-20

          the Advisory Board.
    -     Continue to provide capital                                      Affordable  n/a
          funds as needed to the LHA                                       Housing
          to upgrade rental housing                                        Fund,
          owned and managed by                                             CDBG
          the LHA.
   Increase promotion of the         Update            Community &        General     n/a
    Section 8 program to the          information as    Economic           Fund
    development community,            needed or         Development
    property owners, and possible     annually          Department
    participants.
    - Provide information on LHA
          on City’s website.
    - Continue to advertise the
          program through the City’s
          newsletter and brochures
          at the permit center and
          other public counters.
   Support partners that provide     Ongoing; annual   Community &        General     Collaborate
    outreach to landlords about       workshops and     Economic           Fund        to hold one
    voucher programs with aim of      quarterly         Development                    annual
    increasing housing opportunities  coordination      Department                     outreach
    for recipients of rental          with other cities                                event for
    assistance.                                                                        landlords.
Program 3.3.4: Homelessness Prevention and Intervention
Actions:                              Timeframe:        Responsible Agency  Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                       Objectives:
 Amend the Development Code          At the time of    Community &         General    n/a
    to modify the definition of       Housing Element   Economic            Fund
    transitional and supportive       adoption          Development
    housing and update the use                          Department
    tables, listing transitional and
    supportive housing as a
    residential use subject to the
    same permit requirements as a
    residential use of the same type
    in the same zone.
 Continue to provide support         Ongoing;          Community &         CDBG and   Assistance
    (rental subsidies and case        through annual    Economic            HOME       to six
    management) to emancipated        Housing &         Development         funds      individuals
    youth through Project             Human Services    Department                     annually
    Independence.                     Grant allocation                                 through the
                                      process                                          Project
                                                                                       Independen
                                                                                       ce program
 Provide homelessness                Ongoing;          Community &         General    Assistance
    prevention/intervention support   monthly           Economic            Fund,      to 10
    services and rental assistance    coordination      Development         Affordable individuals
    through Abode Services’ AC        with Alameda      Department          Housing    annually
    Impact program.                   County                                Fund,      through the
                                                                            County     AC Impact
                                                                            Funds      program
                                                                                              5-21

 Provide rental subsidies and       Ongoing;          Community &         CDBG and   Assistance
    related assistance to households through annual    Economic            HOME       to 10
    at risk of homelessness through  Housing &         Development         funds      individuals
    ECHO Housing.                    Human Services    Department                     annually
                                     Grant allocation                                 through
                                     process                                          Echo
                                                                                      Housing’s
                                                                                      homeless
                                                                                      prevention
                                                                                      program
 Facilitate the coordination of the Ongoing;          Community &         General    n/a
    faith-based community and        through City-     Economic            Fund
    providers of homeless services,  hosted            Development
    building upon the Mayor’s        subcommittee      Department
    Homeless Summit.                 meetings
 Support the efforts of the         Ongoing;          Police Department,  General    n/a
    Homeless Street Outreach (HSO)   monthly           Community &         Fund
    Team to proactively connect      oversight and     Economic
    homeless individuals to          coordination      Development
    resources.                                         Department
GOAL 4:           PRESERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Preserve and improve the existing stock of affordable housing and residential
neighborhoods.
Policy 4.1:       Improve the quality of existing affordable housing.
Program 4.1.1: Minor Home Repair Program
Actions:                             Timeframe:        Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
   Continue to provide              Ongoing;          Community &         CDBG,      Assistance
    rehabilitation grants to lower   through           Economic            HOME,      to 24-32
    income households and            identification of Development         Affordable owners of
    occupants of mobile homes to     applicants        Department          Housing    mobile
    cover the cost of minor repairs  through                               Fund       home units
    such as plumbing, weather        Neighborhood                                     and 6-8
    stripping, electrical work, and  Preservation                                     lower
    accessibility improvements.      contacts and                                     income
                                     requests for                                     households
                                     assistance                                       annually
   Continue to advertise the        Ongoing           Community &         General    n/a
    program through the City’s                         Economic            Fund
    website, newsletter, targeted                      Development
    mailings, and brochures                            Department
    distributed at public counters
    and to local agencies.
5-22

Program 4.1.2: Owner-Occupied Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
Actions:                                Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding:     Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Provide assistance to lower           2015 through   Community &         CDBG,        Assistance
    income households in the form       2022           Economic            HOME,        to 3-4 lower
    of deferred payment loans for                      Development         Affordable   income
    major repairs (roof, furnace,                      Department          Housing      households
    electrical, plumbing), or for                                          Fund         annually
    installation of wheelchair ramps,
    support rail systems, or
    security/safety devices in
    housing occupied by elderly
    and disabled.
 Continue to advertise the             Update         Community &         General      n/a
    program through the City’s          information    Economic            Fund
    website, newsletter, targeted       annually or as Development
    mailings, and brochures             needed         Department
    distributed at public counters
    and to local agencies.
 Collaborate with nonprofit            Ongoing; as    Community &         CDBG,        n/a
    agencies such as GRID               projects are   Economic            HOME,
    Alternatives to assist with energy- proposed       Development         Affordable
    related improvements.                              Department          Housing
                                                                           Fund
 Develop a Healthy Homes               2015-2016      Community &         CDBG,        n/a
    Initiative that provides outreach                  Economic            HOME,
    and education to help people                       Development         Affordable
    maintain their homes.                              Department          Housing
                                                                           Fund
Program 4.1.3: Historic Preservation Tax Credits (Mills Act)
Actions:                                Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding:     Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Investigate the feasibility of        Underway       Community &         General      n/a
    participation in the Mills Act                     Economic            Fund
    Property Tax Abatement                             Development
    Program to encourage the                           Department
    restoration and maintenance of
    historic properties.
Program 4.1.4: Neighborhood Improvement
Actions:                                Timeframe:     Responsible Agency: Funding:     Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Continue to upgrade the quality       Ongoing        Community &         General       n/a
    of the living environment of                       Economic            Fund,
    older neighborhoods through                        Development         Transportati
    improvements to infrastructure                     Department          on Impact
    and public facilities.                                                 Fee, CDBG
                                                                                               5-23

 Continue funding the sidewalk       Ongoing    Community &         General      n/a
    repair program and ADA                       Economic            Fund,
    sidewalk curb cuts and access                Development         Transportati
    ramps to improve sidewalk-to-                Department          on Impact
    street access for Livermore’s                                    Fee
    disabled citizens.
 Pursue funding available for        Annually   Community &         Affordable   See 3.2.4
    acquisition and rehabilitation of            Economic            Housing
    foreclosed, vacant, and/or                   Development         Fund, State
    blighted properties.                         Department          and
                                                                     Federal
                                                                     sources
Program 4.1.5: Neighborhood Preservation Program
                                                                                  Quantified
Actions:                              Timeframe: Responsible Agency: Funding:
                                                                                  Objectives:
   Encourage low-income              Ongoing    Community &         General      Assistance
    homeowners who need                          Economic            Fund         to an
    financial assistance to correct              Development                      average of
    code violations to utilize the               Department                       10 qualified
    Housing Rehabilitation                                                        lower-
    programs.                                                                     income
                                                                                  households
                                                                                  annually
   Continue to identify and provide  Ongoing    Community &         General      n/a
    assistance to rehabilitate units             Economic            Fund;
    needing substantial renovation               Development         CDBG
    due to severe deterioration.                 Department          Affordable
                                                                     Housing
                                                                     Fund
   Continue the Housing Quality      Ongoing    Community &         General      n/a
    Inspections for multi-family                 Economic            Fund
    complexes that have received                 Development
    CDBG and HOME funding.                       Department
   Continue to promote               Ongoing    Community &         General      n/a
    Neighborhood Preservation                    Economic            Fund
    programs and clean-up events                 Development
    through the City’s website.                  Department
   Use volunteer assistance clean-   Ongoing    Community &         Volunteer    n/a
    up teams specifically to assist              Economic            staff
    frail elderly and disabled                   Development
    homeowners that have                         Department
    received code complaints for
    property upkeep.
5-24

Policy 4.2:        Preserve affordable housing that is at risk of converting to market rate
housing.
Program 4.2.1: Preservation of Subsidized Housing at-risk of Conversion to Market
Rate
Actions:                                 Timeframe:    Responsible Agency  Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
 Monitor the at-risk status of          Annually 2015 Community &         General    n/a
    affordable housing projects          through 2022  Economic            Fund
    -     Send a list of potentially at-               Development
          risk housing projects to                     Department
          nonprofit developers to
          solicit participation in the
          City’s efforts to preserve the
          units.
    -     Contact project owners of
          at-risk projects to discuss
          preservation
          options/incentives and
          facilitate collaboration with
          potentially interested non-
          profits; and
    -     Notify tenants according to
          State and Federal
          requirements.
 Communicate with tenants and           Ongoing, as   Community &         General    n/a
    respond to notices of intent filed   needed        Economic            Fund
    by property owners in a timely                     Development
    manner.                                            Department
 Work to preserve at-risk housing       2015 through  Community &         CDBG,      n/a
    units by providing financial         2022          Economic            Affordable
    incentives to landlords who in                     Development         Housing
    turn agree to continue to                          Department          Fund
    provide affordable units.
 Pursue State funding available         Annually      Community &         General    Preservation
    for the preservation of at-risk                    Economic            Fund       of 36 units
    housing.                                           Development                    at risk of
                                                       Department                     conversion
                                                                                      to market
                                                                                      rate
Program 4.2.2: Maintain Affordability of Housing Stock
Actions:                                 Timeframe:    Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
 Support the preservation of            Ongoing       Community &         General    n/a
    existing market rate housing that                  Economic            Fund
    is affordable to lower income                      Development
    households through                                 Department
    rehabilitation and rental
    assistance programs.
                                                                                              5-25

GOAL 5:           PROVISION OF EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
Promote equal opportunity to secure safe, sanitary, and affordable housing for all
persons in the community regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry,
national origin, color, disability, or any other arbitrary factor covered by state and
federal law.
Policy 5.1: Support and implement state and federal laws that prohibit
discriminatory housing practices.
Program 5.1.1: Support Non-Profit Organizations Specializing in Fair Housing
Services
Actions:                              Timeframe:       Responsible Agency: Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
 Continue to provide financial       Ongoing;         Community &         CDBG and   n/a
    assistance and administrative     through annual   Economic            Affordable
    support to local non-profit       Housing &        Development         Housing
    organizations that specialize in  Human Services   Department          Fund
    reducing discriminatory housing   Grant allocation
    practices through fair housing    process
    counseling, tenant/landlord
    mediation, education/outreach,
    and rental assistance.
 Continue to refer complaints of     Ongoing          Community &         CDBG and   n/a
    discriminatory housing practices                   Economic            Affordable
    to LHA and ECHO Housing.                           Development         Housing
                                                       Department          Fund
 Continue to refer complaints        Ongoing          Community &         CDBG and   n/a
    and requests for housing for the                   Economic            Affordable
    disabled to partner                                Development         Housing
    organizations.                                     Department          Fund
 Continue to assist in the           Annually, or as  Community &         General    n/a
    distribution of fair housing      needed           Economic            Fund.
    brochures at public locations,                     Development
    such as city counters, public                      Department
    libraries, community/senior
    centers, and service providers.
    -     Continue to expand
          outreach and access to
          information for limited
          English-speaking residents.
 Continue to provide financial       Annually,        Community &         CDBG and   n/a
    support for the City’s Fair       through annual   Economic            Affordable
    Housing Audit conducted by        Housing &        Development         Housing
    ECHO and the dissemination of     Human Services   Department          Fund
    audit results and information on  Grant allocation
    fair housing laws to landlords,   process
    rental housing organizations and
    the public.
5-26

Program 5.1.2: Reasonable Accommodation
Actions:                                 Timeframe:    Responsible Agency:  Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                       Objectives:
   Consistent with state and federal    Ongoing       Community &          General    n/a
    laws, continue to provide                          Economic             Fund
    individuals with disabilities                      Development
    reasonable accommodation in                        Department
    rules, policies, practices, and
    procedures through the building
    permit and development review
    processes.
   Continue to partner with ECHO        Ongoing       Community &          General    n/a
    to conduct fair housing tests for                  Economic             Fund
    reasonable accommodations in                       Development
    multi-family rental properties.                    Department
    -     Provide regular training to
          landlords.
   Work with Livermore Housing          Ongoing; as   Community &          CDBG,      n/a
    Authority and partner                project       Economic             HOME, and
    organizations to identify            opportunities Development          Affordable
    landlords in need of assistance      occur         Department           Housing
    with making modifications for                                           Fund
    persons with disabilities within the
    Section 8 program.
GOAL 6:           REGIONAL COOPERATION TO ADDRESS HOUSING NEEDS
Participate in and/or initiate coordinated efforts with communities in the region in
order to effectively address affordable housing needs.
Policy 6.1: Foster regional cooperation and partnerships to address regional
housing issues related to affordability, homelessness, and special housing needs.
Measurable objectives:
        Provide funding to regional organizations to serve an average of 450 persons who are,
         or are at risk of becoming, homeless annually during the 2015 – 2022 period.
Program 6.1.1: Tri-Valley Affordable Housing Committee
Actions:                                 Timeframe:    Responsible Agency:  Funding:   Quantified
                                                                                       Objectives:
 Continue to participate in Tri-        Ongoing,      Community &          General    n/a
    Valley Affordable Housing            quarterly     Economic             Fund
    Committee to identify                              Development
    regional housing issues and                        Department
    to develop multi-jurisdictional
    approaches to solving
    affordable housing problems.
                                                                                            5-27

Program 6.1.2: Emergency, Transitional, and Supportive Housing Services
Actions:                               Timeframe:       Responsible Agency: Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Continue to coordinate with          Ongoing;         Community &         CDBG,       n/a
    other local jurisdictions to       through annual   Economic            HOME,
    provide for the acquisition,       Housing &        Development         Section 108
    rehabilitation, and operation of   Human Services   Department
    emergency housing for families.    Grant allocation
    -     Support the Tri-Valley       process
          Haven in providing
          outreach, social services,
          and referrals to people with
          disabilities, survivors of
          domestic violence, and
          homeless or those at risk of
          being homeless.
 Pursue opportunities to secure       In 2015, and     Community &         General     n/a
    joint funding with neighboring     annually as      Economic            Fund
    and local jurisdictions to aid     opportunities    Development
    homeless and at-risk households.   arise            Department
 Assist in implementing the           Ongoing          Community &         General     n/a
    County-wide Homeless and                            Economic            Fund
    Special Needs Housing Plan                          Development
    “EveryOne Home”.                                    Department
 Maintain membership in the           Ongoing;         Community &         General     n/a
    HOPE Partnership, which            through annual   Economic            Fund
    oversees the HOPE Mobile           Housing &        Development
    Services Unit.                     Human Services   Department
                                       Grant allocation
                                       process
 Work with local and regional         Ongoing          Community &         General     n/a
    organizations such as Tri-Valley                    Economic            Fund
    REACH to provide information on                     Development
    housing and services available                      Department
    for persons with disabilities,
    including developmental
    disabilities.
    -     Provide information through
          the City’s website and at
          the Multi-service Center.
Program 6.1.3: Regional Home Ownership Education and Counseling
Actions:                               Timeframe:       Responsible Agency: Funding:    Quantified
                                                                                        Objectives:
 Continue to cooperate with Tri-      Ongoing;         Community &         General     n/a
    Valley cities to support locally   through monthly  Economic            Fund
    accessible home ownership          services         Development
    counseling and foreclosure         agreement with   Department
    intervention services through      TVHOC
    regional and local agencies
    such as the Tri-Valley Housing
    Opportunity Center (TVHOC).
5-28

GOAL 7:            ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Reduce the energy-related costs of housing and the associated emissions of
greenhouse gases.
Policy 7.1: Promote the use of energy conservation features in the design and
siting of new residential structures and in the retrofit of existing residential units.
Program 7.1.11: Green Building
Actions:                                 Timeframe:      Responsible Agency: Funding: Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
    Continue to enforce State           Ongoing         Community &         General  n/a
     Energy Code when reviewing                          Economic            Fund
     construction plans submitted in                     Development
     order to obtain building permits.                   Department
    Encourage developers to                             Community &         General  n/a
     exceed the minimum green                            Economic            Fund
     building point requirement by:                      Development
                                                         Department
     -     Maintaining and regularly     Annually and/or
           updating the Green            as needed
           Building Resource Center
           and the City’s website
     -     Providing one on-one-         Ongoing, as                                  n/a
           consultation with certified   requested
           or accredited staff to assist
           with project design and
           incorporating green
           building measures
    As part of the Housing              Ongoing         Community &         General  n/a
     Implementation Program (HIP),                       Economic            Fund
     require applicants to either: 1)                    Development
     provide a photovoltaic system(s)                    Department
     that generates a minimum of
     10% of the total anticipated
     energy demand of the project,
     or 2) achieve Tier 2 California
     Green Building Code Energy
     Conservation Compliance for
     the entire project.
PROGRAM 7.1.2: Climate Action Plan
Actions:                                 Timeframe:      Responsible Agency  Funding: Quantified
                                                                                      Objectives:
    Implement Climate Action Plan       Ongoing         Community &         General  n/a
     to reduce energy use and                            Economic            Fund
     emissions associated with                           Development
     residential development.                            Department
                                                                                           5-29

APPENDIX 

Table A-1: General Plan Areas - Vacant Sites
                  Land    Exist                                 Density  Realistic  Viable
      APN                        Zoning     GP   Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM             Infrastructure
                   Use    Units                                 Range    Density   Capacity
                                   PD-     SV-5-                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 136700201  Vacant     0      SLVSP     AP    41,978   0.96            1.50        1    0  0 0  1              constraints.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                        constraints. Residential PD’s shall
                                                                                                      conform to density specified in the
                                                                                                      General Plan and to zoning district
 099B545000200  Vacant     0     PD (RS)    RR   526,648  12.09 0.2 to 1   0.30        3    0  0 0  3      closest to that density (RS).
                Vacant
                / open                                                                                  Must provide access over creek.
 099 010003200   space     0      PD-16     RR    49,443   1.13 0.2 to 1   1.00        1    0  0 0  1     PD-16 zoning permits 1 unit.
                                                                                                        Residential PD’s shall conform to
                                                                                                        density specified in the General
                                                                                                      Plan and to zoning district closest to
 099 110102500  Vacant     0     PD (RS)    RR    38,680   0.88 0.2 to 1   1.00        1    0  0 0  1           that density (RS).
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134301200  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   849,073  19.40   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134301900  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   784,559  18.01   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134302200  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   848,113  19.47   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134302500  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   958,756  22.01   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134303000  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   946,123  21.72   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134303300  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   879,041  20.18   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134303500  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   811,523  18.63   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 134303600  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   879,912  20.20   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                0.01 to                                   constraints. Zoning permits 1
 099 135600500  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   848,272  19.47   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                0.01 to                                   Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 135600600  Vacant     0     PD/AG    AGVT   849,211  19.50   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1     constraints. Zoning permits 1
                                                                                                                                       A-1

               Land  Exist                              Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN                   Zoning   GP   Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM              Infrastructure
                Use  Units                              Range    Density   Capacity
                                                                                                             dwelling.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                        0.01 to                                  constraints. Zoning permits 1
099 135600700 Vacant  0    PD/AG   AGVT  760,663  17.46   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                        0.01 to                                  constraints. Zoning permits 1
099 136100600 Vacant  0    PD/AG   AGVT  788,872  18.11   0.05     0.05        1    0  0 0  1                dwelling.
                                                                                              Area was redesignated in 2003 GP
                                                                                              to more appropriate lower density
                                                                                                 UL-1 designation to address
                                                                                              potential environmental constraints
                                                                                              and preserve amenities of site. This
                                                                                                density is intended for large lots
                                                                                                and/or smaller lots to preserve
                                         1,745,88                                                Open Space through density
099B530000213 Vacant  0    PD (RS)  UL-1     5    40.08 1 to 1.5   1.00       40    0  0 0 40                clustering.
                                                                                              Area was redesignated in 2003 GP
                                                                                              to more appropriate lower density
                                                                                                 UL-1 designation to address
                                                                                              potential environmental constraints
                                                                                              and preserve amenities of site. This
                                                                                                density is intended for large lots
                                                                                                and/or smaller lots to preserve
                                         1,379,70                                                Open Space through density
 099B5300010  Vacant  0    PD (RS)  UL-1     7    31.67 1 to 1.5   1.50       45    0  0 0 45                clustering.
                                                                                              Area was redesignated in 2003 GP
                                                                                              to more appropriate lower density
                                                                                                 UL-1 designation to address
                                                                                              potential environmental constraints
                                                                                              and preserve amenities of site. This
                                                                                                density is intended for large lots
                                                                                                and/or smaller lots to preserve
                                                                                                 Open Space through density
099B811702403 Vacant  0    PD (RS)  UL-1 422,532   9.70 1 to 1.5   1.50       12    0  0 0 12                clustering.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 014807500 Vacant  0     RS-2    UL-2  15,200   0.35 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1    standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 070105802 Vacant  0     RS-2    UL-2  38,106   0.87 1.5 to 2   1.50        1    0  0 0  1    standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 072505300 Vacant  0     RS-2    UL-2  23,106   0.53 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1    standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
099 072517700 Vacant  0     RS-2    UL-2  14,484   0.33 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1    constraints. Min./Max. lot size
                                                                                                                              A-2
               Land  Exist                             Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN                   Zoning  GP   Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM              Infrastructure
                Use  Units                             Range    Density   Capacity
                                                                                                  standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 072520900 Vacant  0      RS-2  UL-2  14,026   0.32 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 131103506 Vacant  0      RS-2  UL-2  15,532   0.35 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                             Adequate infrastructure. Residential
                                                                                                  PD’s shall conform to density
                                                                                             specified in the General Plan and to
                                                                                             zoning district closest to that density
                                        1,662,09                                               (RS). Property owned by the East
099B545000300 Vacant  0    PD (RS) UL-2     7    38.16 1.5 to 2   1.50       57    0  0 0 57        Bay Regional Park District.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Residential PD’s shall
                                                                                              conform to density specified in the
                                                                                              General Plan and to zoning district
099 007500215 Vacant  0    PD (RS) ULM    6,775   0.16  2 to 3    3.00        1    0  0 0  1       closest to that density (RS)
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 007500306 Vacant  0    PD (RS) ULM    4,825   0.11  2 to 3    3.00        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                   Entitled for 18 single-family
                            PD06-                                                             residences, including 14 detached
099 028300307 Vacant  1      006   ULM  223,898   5.14  2 to 3    3.00       18    0  0 4 14   and 4 attached affordable units.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
099 115104400 Vacant  0      RS-3  ULM   43,560   1.00  2 to 3    2.00        2    0  0 0  2               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
099 132101300 Vacant  0    PD (RS) ULM   19,019   0.43  2 to 3    3.00        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
099 075011000 Vacant  0    PD (RS) UM     8,190   0.18 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
              Vacant                                                                              Adequate infrastructure/no
099 108507500  /pool  0       RL   UM     7,100   0.16 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 009602700 Vacant  0       RL   UM     8,800   0.20 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
              Vacant                                                                             constraints. Min./Max. lot size
098 026401100  /pool  0       RL   UM     6,922   0.16 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
098 035003300 Vacant  0       RL   UM     5,992   0.14 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Min./Max. lot size
098 038700201 Vacant  0       RL   UM     4,150   0.10 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1      standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                                               A-3

               Land   Exist                           Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN                    Zoning  GP Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM              Infrastructure
                Use   Units                           Range    Density   Capacity
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
098A040302009 Vacant   0      RL    UM  10,040   0.23 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
098A040500900 Vacant   0      RL    UM  6,200    0.14 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 019202400 Vacant   0      RS    UM  11,229   0.26 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 031105001 Vacant   0      RL    UM  7,112    0.16 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 031105002 Vacant   0      RL    UM  6,111    0.14 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit.
                                                                                            Adequate infrastructure, located in
                                                                                             existing residential neighborhood.
                                                                                              Hindu Community and Cultural
099B510000701 Parking  0     RS-5   UM 174,240   4.00 3 to 4.5   4.00       16    0  0 0 16            Center property.
                                                                                            Adequate infrastructure, located in
                                                                                             existing residential neighborhood.
                                                                                              Hindu Community and Cultural
099B512500506 Parking  0     RS-5   UM 167,270   3.84 3 to 4.5   4.00       15    0  0 0 15            Center property.
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
099 108209000 Vacant   0      RL    UM  6,740    0.15 3 to 4.5   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 002600502 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  5,000    0.11 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 004900504 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  7,500    0.17 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 008501800 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  7,500    0.17 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 010200704 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  5,000    0.11 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Min./Max. lot size
097 010201200 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  5,000    0.11 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1     standards permit only 1 unit
                                                                                                   Adequate infrastructure.
                                                                                            Development would require access
098 029000416 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  31,366   0.72 4.5 to 6   4.50        3    0  0 0  3           from front parcel.
098 034909502 Vacant   0      RL   UMH  10,616   0.24 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1     Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                                            A-4
               Land  Exist                             Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN                   Zoning   GP  Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM              Infrastructure
                Use  Units                             Range    Density   Capacity
                                                                                              constraints. Access available via N
                                                                                                              Street.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Development would
                                                                                               require access through adjacent
                                                                                                  parcel or consolidation with
                                                                                               adjacent parcels to create larger
098A041400300 Vacant  0       RL   UMH   9,702    0.22 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1           residential project.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041400400 Vacant  0       RL   UMH   4,500    0.10 4.5 to 6   6.00        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Target lot size permits
099 005100302 Vacant  0     RS-5   UMH   18,800   0.43 4.5 to 6   5.00        2    0  0 0  2               only 2 units.
                                                                                             “Morning Glory” project entitled for
                                                                                                26 single-family detached units.
                                                                                                  Developer paid fee in lieu of
099 130906200 Vacant  0    PD (RS) UMH  242,600   5.57 4.5 to 6   5.00       26    0  0 0 26   providing affordable units on-site.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                 constraints. Minimum lot size in
                                                                                             zoning district permits only 1 lot with
098 023100800 Vacant  0      T4N   UH-2  7,500    0.17 8 to 14   12.00        2    0  0 2  0                  2 units.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041402103 Vacant  0    RG-16   UH-2  21,837   0.50 8 to 14   11.00        5    0  0 5  0               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Residential PD’s shall
                                                                                             conform to density specified in the
                             PD                                                               General Plan and to zoning district
098A061000200 Vacant  0     (RM)   UH-2  17,000   0.39 8 to 14   11.00        4    0  0 4  0      closest to that density (RM).
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                               constraints. Residential PD’s shall
                                                                                             conform to density specified in the
                             PD                                                               General Plan and to zoning district
098A061000400 Vacant  0     (RM)   UH-2  7,740    0.18 8 to 14   11.00        2    0  0 2  0      closest to that density (RM).
                            PDR-                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
099 137000300 Vacant  0    05-007  UH-2  59,338   1.36 8 to 14   11.00       14    0  0 0 14               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
098 025602700 Vacant  0    RG-12   UH-3  61,000   1.40 8 to 14   11.00       15    0  0 0 15               constraints.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                  constraints. Minimum lot size
                                                        14 to                                 requirements will allow 3 lots with 2
098 021300302 Vacant  0      T4N   UH-3  17,500   0.40    18     16.00        6    0  0 6  0               units each.
                                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                        14 to                                     constraints. Lot size can only
098 022700300 Vacant  0      RM    UH-3  5,000    0.11    18     14.00        1    0  0 1  0       accommodate single unit.
098 022800102 Vacant  0      T4N   UH-3  5,000    0.11  14 to    18.00        2    0  0 2  0      Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                                               A-5

               Land  Exist                               Density Realistic  Viable
     APN                   Zoning   GP    Lot Size Acres                            VL  L M  AM                Infrastructure
                Use  Units                               Range   Density   Capacity
                                                            18                                       constraints. Lot size can only
                                                                                                      accommodate single unit.
                                                                                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                           14 to                                     constraints. Lot size can only
098 022800103 Vacant  0     T4N    UH-3    5,000    0.11    18    18.00        2     0  0  2  0       accommodate single unit.
                                                                                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                     constraints. Lot size can only
                                                                                                 accommodate single unit. The small
                                                           14 to                                  historic structure on the site would
098 022800105 Vacant  0     T4N    UH-3    5,000    0.11    18    18.00        2     0  0  2  0          need to be relocated.
                                                                                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                  constraints. Current development
                                                           14 to                                   application is for 22 single-family
098 026400401 Vacant  0      RM    UH-3    51,591   1.18    18    18.00       22     0  1  1 20                     units.
                                  NC/U                     14 to
099 002200501 Vacant  0      PD     H-3   139,305   3.20    18    18.00       58     0  0 58  0       Entitled for 58 townhouses.
                            PUD   LII/UH-                 (30 to                                   Rezoned in 2013 to allow higher
099 132508500 Vacant  0    246-81    5b   269,201   6.18    38)   34.00      210    210 0  0  0          density development.
                            PUD   LII/UH-                 (30 to                                   Rezoned in 2013 to allow higher
099 132501200 Vacant  0    246-81    5b   291,184   6.68    38)   34.00      226    226 0  0  0          density development.
                                                                                                   Rezoned in 2013 to allow higher
                                  HII/UH                  (30 to                                  density development. City-owned
099B576001000 Vacant         I-4    -5b    59,279   1.40    38)   34.00       46    46  0  0  0                     site.
 Subtotal A-1                                                                900    482 1 89 328
                                                                                                                                  A-6
Table A-2: General Plan Areas - Vacant Sites with Approved Neighborhood Plans
                    Land  Exist                                   Density Realistic  Viable
        APN                      Zoning     GP     Lot Size Acres                            VL  L   M  AM              Infrastructure
                     Use  Units                                   Range    Density  Capacity
                                                                                                             Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan.
 Arroyo Vista                                                               17.3                             Development capacity is based
                                                                                      495    0   0  343 152
 Neighborhood Plan                                                        average                             on the adopted Neighborhood
                                                                                                                         Plan (2007).
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to
 099 132502202    Vacant   0                       128,500   2.95
                                 246-81       3                     18)
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to
 099 132502300    Vacant   0                       206,910   4.75
                                 246-81       3                     18)
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to
 099 132503004    Vacant   0                       213,008   4.89
                                 246-81       3                     18)                                             Part of Arroyo Vista
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to                                           Neighborhood Plan
 099 132502902    Vacant   0                       141,570   3.25
                                 246-81       3                     18)
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to
 099 132502702    Vacant   0                       313,196   7.19
                                 246-81       3                     18)
                                  PUD     LII/UH-                  (14 to
 099 132508900    Vacant   0                       255,845   5.87
                                 246-81       3                     18)
                                                                                                            Brisa Neighborhood Plan. Entitled
                                                                                                            in 2013 for 465 units, including 246
                                                                                                             single family units and 216 multi-
                                                                                                             family attached units (48 condo
                                                                            14.6
 Brisa Neighborhood Plan                                    37.00                     465    0  171  48 246     townhomes and 171 rental
                                                                          average
                                                                                                              apartments). The distribution of
                                                                                                             units by income is based on the
                                                                                                            density (34 DU/AC for apartments
                                                                                                              and 17 DU/AC for townhomes).
                                          HII/UH                   (14 to
 099B576000800    Vacant   0       I-3             355,759   8.00
                                             -3                     18)
                                          HII/UH                   (14 to
 099B576000900    Vacant   0       I-3             460,120  10.00
                                             -3                     18)                                                  Part of Brisa
                                          HII/UH                   (14 to                                           Neighborhood Plan
 099B576000700    Vacant   0       I-3             386,717   8.80
                                             -3                     18)
                                          HII/UH                   (14 to
 099B576000600    Vacant   0       I-3             426,252   9.00
                                             -3                     18)
 Subtotal A-2                                                                         960    0  171 391 398
                                                                                                                                           A-7
Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan Site – Lower Density Land Use Concept
                                                                     A-8

Arroyo Vista Neighborhood Plan Site – Higher Density Land Use Concept
                                                                      A-9 

Brisa Neighborhood Plan Site
                             A-10
Table A-3: General Plan Areas - Vacant Sites with Approved Residential Projects
                           Exist                                  Density   Realistic  Viable
     APN       Land Use           Zoning    GP     Lot Size Acres                              VL L  M  AM             Infrastructure
                           Units                                  Range     Density   Capacity
                Single-
                 family            PDR-                                                                        Adequate infrastructure/no
099 134803600  detached     0     00-170   UL-2     24,617   0.56 1.5 to 2    2.00        1    0  0  0   1              constraints.
                                                                                                           Shea project entitled for 476 multi-
                                                                                                            family attached units. Developer
                                  PDI-03-  BCP/   1,176,12         18 to                                    agreed to pay in lieu fees for the
903 001003700   Vacant      0       003    UH-4        0    27.00    22      18.00      476    0  0 476  0  affordable housing requirement.
                                                                                                              Former Honda Dealership site.
                                                                                                             Entitled for 70 townhouse units.
                                                                                                             Developer agreed to pay in lieu
                                   PDR-                                                                      fees for the affordable housing
099 005600115   Vacant      0     05-004   UH-2     52,982   1.22 8 to 14    13.00       15    0  0 15   0             requirement.
                                   PDR-                                                                     Part of former Honda Dealership
099 005601200   Vacant      0     05-004   UH-2    190,000   4.36 8 to 14    13.00       55    0  0 55   0                  site.
 Subtotal A-3                                                                           547    0  0 546  1
                                                                                                                                        A-11
Table A-4: General Plan Areas - Underdeveloped Sites
                             Exist                               Density  Realistic  Viable
      APN        Land Use          Zoning   GP    Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM             Infrastructure
                            Units                                Range    Density   Capacity
                                           SV-2-
                   Com-              PD-    AP/                                                        South Livermore Valley Specific Plan
 099A293400202    mercial     0     SLVSP  RDA    274,805   6.31            3.50       20    0  0 0 20     permits 20 units on this site.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 131101100  detached      0      RS-1   RR    217,800   5.00 0.2 to 1   1.00        3    0  0 0  3               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 014101700  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2    59,677   1.37 1.5 to 2   1.50        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 014101800  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2    45,594   1.05 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 015101102  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2   192,970   4.43 1.5 to 2   1.50        5    0  0 0  5               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 015101300  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2    55,280   1.27 1.5 to 2   2.00        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 040000103  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2   262,196   6.02 1.5 to 2   1.50        8    0  0 0  8               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 040105200  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2   209,088   4.80 1.5 to 2   1.50        6    0  0 0  6               constraints.
                                                                                                           Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 040000728    Church      0      RS-2  UL-2   129,366   2.97 1.5 to 2   1.50        4    0  0 0  4               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 072517100  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2    91,527   2.10 1.5 to 2   1.50        2    0  0 0  2               constraints.
                                                                                                            Adequate infrastructure.
                                                                                                       Development would require access
                                                                                                         improvements, as developable
 099 115000406    Church      0      RS-2  UL-2   426,450   9.79 1.5 to 2   1.50       14    0  0 0 14   portion is located in rear of site.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 136004400  detached      1      RS-2  UL-2   233,046   5.35 1.5 to 2   1.50        7    0  0 0  7               constraints.
                   Single-
                   family                                                                                  Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 007500214  detached      1    PD (RS) ULM     40,970   0.94  2 to 3    2.50        1    0  0 0  1               constraints.
                   Com-                                                                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
 099 007500402    mercial     0    PD (RS) ULM     46,609   1.06  2 to 3    3.00        3    0  0 0  3               constraints.
                  Ranch,
                   single-
                   family           RS-3-                                                                Adequate infrastructure. Site is a
 099 018901503  detached      1     HP-H   ULM     96,485   2.21  2 to 3    2.00        3    0  0 0  3           historic property.
                                                                                                                                       A-12
                          Exist                           Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN       Land Use         Zoning  GP Lot Size Acres                             VL L M AM           Infrastructure
                          Units                           Range    Density   Capacity
               and out-
               buildings
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099 110001302 detached     1     RS-3  ULM  47,480   1.00  2 to 3    3.00        2    0  0 0  2            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099 115103300 detached     1     RS-3  ULM  38,711   0.88  2 to 3    2.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
902 001402700 detached     0     OS-A  ULM  87,120   2.00  2 to 3    2.00        4    0  0 0  4            constraints.
                 Rural-
              residential                                                                          Adequate infrastructure/no
099B505001100    units     4     RS-5   UM 108,900   2.50  3 - 4.5   4.00        6    0  0 0  6            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099B507500504 detached     0     RS-5   UM  92,350   2.12  3 - 4.5   4.00        7    0  0 0  7            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099B507500601 detached     1     RS-5   UM  66,560   1.53  3 - 4.5   4.00        5    0  0 0  5            constraints.
                                                                                                   Adequate infrastructure/no
098 021000302   Office     0     RL-6   UM  18,950   0.43 3 to 4.5   3.00        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                                                                                                   Adequate infrastructure/no
                Single-                                                                           constraints. Zoning permits 5
                family           PDR-                                                           detached single-family units, for a
099B510000500 detached     0    03-004  UM  41,992   0.96 3 to 4.5   3.00        4    0  0 0  4      net increase of 4 units.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041400100 detached     1     RL-6  UMH  45,738   1.50  4.5 - 6   5.00        6    0  0 0  6            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041400508 detached     1     RL-6  UMH  22,490   0.51  4.5 - 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041400704 detached     1     RL-6  UMH  24,030   0.55  4.5 - 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
098A041400802 detached     1     RL-6  UMH  17,350   0.40  4.5 - 6   5.00        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099 005100301 detached     1     RS-5  UMH  23,597   0.54 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099 005100700 detached     1     RS-5  UMH  21,780   0.50 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                Single-
                family                                                                             Adequate infrastructure/no
099 005100800 detached     1     RS-5  UMH  21,780   0.50 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0 0  1            constraints.
                                                                                                                             A-13
                          Exist                            Density  Realistic  Viable
     APN       Land Use         Zoning  GP  Lot Size Acres                             VL L M  AM              Infrastructure
                          Units                            Range    Density   Capacity
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
098 032000900 detached     1    RL-5-0 UMH   43,560   1.00 4.5 to 6   5.00        4    0  0  0  4               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
098 032001100 detached     1    RL-5-0 UMH   21,780   0.50 4.5 to 6   4.50        1    0  0  0  1               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
099 113000102 detached     1      PD   UH-1 103,736   2.38  6 to 8    6.00       13    0  0  0 13               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
098A061000102 detached     1      PD   UH-2  9,600    0.22 8 to 14   11.00        1    0  0  1  0               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
098A061000300 detached     1      PD   UH-2  41,200   0.94 8 to 14   11.00        9    0  0  9  0               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
098A061000500 detached     1      PD   UH-2  10,800   0.24 8 to 14   11.00        1    0  0  1  0               constraints.
                                                                                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
099 135500200 Park n Ride  0      PD   UH-2  39,098   0.89 8 to 14   11.00        9    0  0  9  0               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                                                                Adequate infrastructure/no
099 137000100 detached     1      PD   UH-2  19,295   0.44 8 to 14   11.00        3    0  0  3  0               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family
              detached                                      14 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 025600700   (2 units)  2      R-2  UH-3  10,838   0.24    18     16.00        1    0  0  1  0               constraints.
                Historic                                    14 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 022800104  Structure   0      RM   UH-3  5,000    0.11    18     16.00        1    0  0  1  0               constraints.
                 Com-                                       14 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 025400800   mercial    0      RM   UH-3  15,000   0.34    18     16.00        5    0  0  5  0               constraints.
                 Com-                                       14 to                                  Adequate infrastructure. Proximity
098 026000505   mercial    0      RM   UH-3  28,350   0.65    18     16.00       10    0  0 10  0   to railroad requires sound study.
                                                                                                   Adequate infrastructure. Proximity
                                                                                                    to railroad requires sound study.
                                                                                                      There is an opportunity for lot
                 Com-                                       14 to                                  consolidation with adjacent parcel
098 026001901   mercial    0      RM   UH-3  39,587   0.91    18     16.00       14    0  0 14  0            (098 026001902).
                 Com-                                       14 to                                  Adequate infrastructure. Proximity
098 026001902   mercial    0      RM   UH-3  35,512   0.82    18     16.00       13    0  0 13  0   to railroad requires sound study.
                 Ware-                                      14 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 026402801   housing    0     RM-H  UH-3  35,105   0.81    18     16.00       12    0  0 12  0               constraints.
                 Single-
                 family                                     14 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 034601803 detached     1    RL-5-0 UH-3  41,882   0.96    18     16.00       13    0  0 13  0               constraints.
 Subtotal A-4                                                                   231    0  0 92 139
                                                                                                                                A-14
Table A-5
                        Exist                            Density   Realistic  Viable
     APN      Land Use        Zoning  GP Lot Size Acres                               VL L M AM                Infrastructure
                        Units                             Range    Density   Capacity
                                                                                                  Rincon Center site. Proforma and
                                                                                                  site plan prepared for TDC report
                                                         15 to 24                                indicates feasibility of providing up
098 035100605  Vacant    0     NMU   NMM 252,650   5.80 (3 to 4.5)   4.50       26    0  0 0 26            to 96 units on site.
                Neigh-
              borhood
                Com-                                     15 to 24
098 035100500  mercial   0     NMU   NMM  12,100   0.28 (3 to 4.5)   4.50        1    0  0 0  1        Part of Rincon Center site.
                Neigh-
              borhood                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure/no
                Com-                                     12 to 15                               constraints. Adjacent to Former Nob
098A041210606  mercial   0     NMU   NML  61,420   1.41  (2 to 3)    3.00        4    0  0 0  4          Hill Shopping Center.
                                                                                                      Former Nob Hill Center site.
                                                                                                 Adequate infrastructure. Currently
                                                                                                        developed with existing
                Neigh-                                                                            commercial shopping center with
               borhood                                                                            neighborhood-serving businesses.
                Com-                                     12 to 15                                  Zoned for mixed-use residential
098A041210608  mercial   0     NMU   NML  71,875   1.65  (2 to 3)    3.00        5    0  0 0  5             redevelopment.
                Neigh-
              borhood
                Com-                                     12 to 15
098A041210603  mercial   0     NM-1  NML 132,860   3.05  (2 to 3)    3.00        9    0  0 0  9       Part of Nob Hill Center site.
                                                         12 to 15
098A041210605  Vacant    0     NM-1  NML  19,170   0.44  (2 to 3)    3.00        1    0  0 0  1       Part of Nob Hill Center site.
                Single-
                family                                   15 to 24
099A150000400 detached   1     NM-2  NMM  11,320   0.26 (3 to 4.5)  11.00        1    0  0 0  1     Part of Vasco Rd/East Ave site.
                                                                                                Vasco Rd/East Ave site. Application
                                                                                                  submitted for 50 detached single-
                                                         15 to 24                                   family units (net increase of 49
099A150000505  Vacant    0     NM-2  NMM 187,740   4.31 (3 to 4.5)  11.00       48    0  4 4 40                    units).
 Subtotal A-5                                                                   95    0  4 4 87
                                                                                                                                 A-15
APPENDIX B
           A-16

 Table B-1: Downtown Specific Plan – Vacant Sites
                        Exist                                    Density Realistic  Viable
     APN       Land Use          Zoning   GP      Lot Size Acres                            VL  L M  AM            Infrastructure
                        Units                                    Range   Density   Capacity
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 001300900   Vacant    0       ore     DA       2,500    0.05   55     55.00        3    3      0  0 constraints. City-owned property.
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 000102200   Vacant    0       ore     DA       2,460    0.05   55     55.00        2    0   2  0  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 001400504   Vacant    0       ore     DA       2,500    0.05   55     55.00        2    0   2  0  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 001500800   Vacant    0       ore     DA       5,500    0.12   55     40.00        4    0   4  0  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
098 028000707   Vacant    0       ore     DA       15,265   0.35   55     35.00       11    0  11  0  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/C                            30 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 013600102   Vacant    0       ore     DA       2,440    0.05   55     40.00        2    0   2  0  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/B                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 002400305   Vacant    0        G      DA       5,000    0.11   30     21.00        2    0   0  2  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/B                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 002400101   Vacant    0        G      DA       15,000   0.35   30     30.00       11    0   0 11  0              constraints.
                                                                  18 to
099 005101906   Vacant    0     DSP/TG    DA       31,491   0.72   37     27.00       10    0   0 10  0         Entitled for 10 units.
                                                                  18 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 015200300   Vacant    0     DSP/TG    DA       9,487    0.21   37     27.00        5    0   0  5  0              constraints.
                                                                                                          Landscaped area as part of
                                                                  18 to                                  entitlement / encumbered with
098 027500903   Vacant    0     DSP/TG    DA       13,926   0.31   37     27.00        8    0   0  8  0      maintenance easement.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
098 025000500   Vacant    0        NS     DA       30,000   0.68   24     19.00       12    0   0 12  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
098 025100900   Vacant    0        NS     DA       45,000   1.03   24     19.00       19    0   0 19  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to
098 025200601   Vacant    0        NS     DA       17,500   0.40   24     19.00        7    0   0  7  0 Part of project entitled for 10 units.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
098 028100900   Vacant    0        NS     DA       7,500    0.17   24     19.00        3    0   0  3  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
098 028101000   Vacant    0        NS     DA       7,500    0.17   24     19.00        3    0   0  3  0              constraints.
                                 DSP/N                            15 to
098 025200100   Vacant    0        NS     DA       7,500    0.17   24     19.00        3    0   0  3  0 Part of project entitled for 10 units.
                Single-
                 family
              detached/          DSP/NS                           15 to                                    Adequate infrastructure/no
097 001800600   vacant    0        S      DA       5,000    0.11   24     19.00        2    0   0  2  0              constraints.
 Subtotal B-1                                                                        109    3  21 85  0
                                                                                                                                       B-1

B-
B-
Table B-2: Downtown Specific Plan – Underdeveloped Mixed Use Sites
                 Land   Exist                                  Density Realistic  Viable
      APN                       Zoning   GP    Lot Size Acres                             VL  L M AM                 Infrastructure
                  Use   Units                                   Range  Density   Capacity
                                                                                                      Parcel is primarily vacant with one
                                                                                                      existing older warehouse building.
                                                                                                     Potential for redevelopment and lot
                Comm             DSP/                            30 to                               consolidation with adjacent parcel
 097 013100202   ercial  0       Core    DA     4,546    0.10     55    35.00        3    0   3 0  0              (097 013100303).
                                                                                                     Developed with a small commercial
                                                                                                           strip center with office uses,
                                                                                                        restaurant, and a small market.
                                                                                                     Potential for redevelopment and lot
                 Com-            DSP/                            30 to                                    consolidation with parcel 097
 097 013100303  mercial  0       Core    DA     22,065   0.50     55    35.00       15    0  15 0  0                   013100202.
                                                                                                        Developed with retail buildings.
                                                                                                             Portion of the lot can be
                                                                                                        incorporated into the adjacent
                                 DSP/                            30 to                                   City-owned site for residential
 097 000103000   Retail  0       Core    DA     15,486   0.35     55    35.00       11    0  11 0  0               development.
                                                                                                         Developed with a single-story
                                 DSP/                            30 to                                 commercial building. Adequate
 097 000102300   Retail  0       Core    DA     5,000    0.11     55    35.00        3    0   3 0  0                infrastructure.
                  Gas            DSP/                            30 to                               Existing brownfield site identified for
 097 000102401  Station  0       Core    DA     10,000   0.22     55    35.00        7    0   7 0  0    remediation and development.
                                                                                                         Developed with a single-story
                                                                                                     building, covering half of lot. Existing
                 Auto-           DSP/                            30 to                                  use is legal nonconforming use.
 097 001200102  Service  0       Core    DA     10,700   0.24     55    35.00        7    0   7 0  0         Adequate infrastructure.
                                                                                                         Developed with a single-story
                                                                                                         building. Adjacent City-owned
                                                                                                      parcel is planned for ground floor
                 Rest-           DSP/                            30 to                                  commercial use with residential
 097 001300800  aurant   0       Core    DA     2,500    0.05     55    35.00        2    0   2 0  0                  units above.
                 Rest-           DSP/                            30 to                                     Existing building on the site.
 097 001400505  aurant   0       Core    DA     7,700    0.18     55    35.00        5    0   5 0  0         Adequate infrastructure.
                                                                                                     Corner parcel contains small single-
                                                                                                      story brick building occupied by a
                                                                                                            restaurant. Potential for lot
                 Rest-           DSP/                            30 to                                    consolidation with adjacent
 097 001500600  aurant   0       Core    DA     3,000    0.06     55    35.00        2    0   2 0  0     property as owner is the same.
                                                                                                                                      B-4

               Land   Exist                          Density Realistic  Viable
     APN                    Zoning GP Lot Size Acres                            VL  L M AM                Infrastructure
                Use   Units                          Range   Density   Capacity
                                                                                             Developed with a small one-story
                                                                                             building that is considered locally
               Com-                                                                        significant. Modifications can occur
              mercial        DSP/                     30 to                                  with special consideration. Same
097 001500700 /Retail  0     Core  DA  2,000    0.04   55     35.00        1    0   1 0  0 property owner as adjacent parcel.
                                                                                             Contains a single-story building at
                                                                                             front of the lot. Existing retail use is
                                                                                              conforming although businesses
                                                                                           have transitioned several times over
                             DSP/                     30 to                                       last few years. Adequate
097 000102000  Retail  0     Core  DA  3,250    0.07   55     35.00        2    0   2 0  0               infrastructure.
                                                                                           Developed with a two-story building
               Com-                                                                            covering about half of the lot.
              mercial        DSP/                     30 to                                     Office uses have transitioned.
097 000102100 /Office  0     Core  DA  10,200   0.23   55     35.00        7    0   7 0  0         Adequate infrastructure.
 Subtotal B-2                                                             65    0  65 0  0
                                                                                                                             B-5
Table B-3: Downtown Specific Plan – Catalyst Sites
                Land   Exist                                     Density Realistic  Viable
      APN                       Zoning    GP      Lot Size Acres                            VL  L   M  AM              Infrastructure
                 Use   Units                                     Range   Density   Capacity
                                                                                                           Livermore Village site. Adequate
                                                                                                              infrastructure/no constraints.
                                                                                                            Viable capacity is based upon
               Vacant/           DSP/                             30 to                                         number of units previously
 098 028902100 parking   0       Core     DA      172,251   3.90   55     42.00      165    0  165  0   0         approved for the site.
               Vacant/           DSP/                             30 to
 098 028901800 parking   0       Core     DA       51,890   1.20   55     42.00       50    0  50   0   0     Part of Livermore Village site.
               Vacant/           DSP/                             30 to
 098 028901900 parking   0       Core     DA       16,353   0.38   55     55.00       20    0  20   0   0     Part of Livermore Village site.
                                                                                                             Groth Brothers site. Adequate
                                                                                                              infrastructure/no constraints.
                                                                                                          Property is for sale with interest by
                                                                                                          several parties to develop the site.
                                                                                                            Viable capacity is based upon
                                                                                                           number of units proposed as part
                                 DSP/                             30 to                                        of a previous development
 098 040500400  Retail   0       Core     DA      100,751   2.30   55     62.00      143    0  57  86   0         application for the site.
                                 DSP/                             30 to
 097 000300701  Retail   0       Core     DA       75,000   1.72   55     62.00      107    0  43  64   0       Part of Groth Brothers site.
  Subtotal B-3                                                                       485    0  335 150  0
                                                                                                                                         B-6

Table B-4: Downtown Specific Plan – Likely Residential Redevelopment Sites
                 Land   Exist                                    Density   Realistic  Viable
      APN                       Zoning     GP    Lot Size  Acres                              VL L M  AM               Infrastructure
                  Use   Units                                    Range     Density   Capacity
                 Auto-          DSP/B                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 001000702  motive   0        G        DA     15,000    0.34   30       30.00       10    10       0                constraints.
                                                                                                            Entitled for the development of
                                                                  18 to                                  single-family detached units, as part
 098 027501505  Vacant   0     DSP/TG      DA     5,012     0.11   37       28.00        3     0 0  3  0         of the Brighton project.
                 Auto-                                            18 to                                      Site can be incorporated into
 097 013600412  motive   0     DSP/TG      DA     14,576    0.33   37       28.00        9     0 0  9  0 adjacent townhouse development.
                                                                                                              Adequate infrastructure/no
                                                                                                              constraints. Site is located in
                                                                  18 to                                    proximity/adjacent to ACE/Wheel
 098 026000804   Retail  0     DSP/TG      DA     21,780    0.50   37       56.00       28     0 2 26  0        Downtown Transit Station.
                Vacant
                (under                                                                                    Entitled for the development of 94
               develop                                            18 to                                     small lot single-family detached
 098 027500906  -ment)   0     DSP/TG      DA    184,072    4.20   37       23.00       94     0 0 94  0 units, as part of the Brighton project.
                                                                                                           Contains small automotive use on
               Automot                                                                                    portion of the site. Remaining site is
                  ive/                                            18 to                                  vacant with one barn over 50 years
 097 013600206  vacant   0     DSP/TG      DA     60,550    1.39   37       28.00       37     0 0 37  0                    old.
               Storage/                                           18 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 097 013000100  vacant   0     DSP/TG      DA     13,000    0.29   37       28.00        7     0 0  7  0                constraints.
                                                                                                           Underdeveloped site adjacent to
                                                                                                             parcel 098 025000103. Existing
                 Com-           DSP/N                             15 to                                    buildings on the site are currently
 098 025000204  mercial  0        NS       DA     12,932    0.29   24       20.00        5     0 0  5  0                  vacant.
                                                                                                            Adequate infrastructure. Existing
                 Com-           DSP/N                             15 to                                    buildings on the site are currently
 098 025000103  mercial  0        NS       DA     15,000    0.34   24       20.00        6     0 0  6  0                  vacant.
                                DSP/N                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 098 024900103   Retail  0        NS       DA     52,237    1.19   24       20.00       24     0 0 24  0                constraints.
                                DSP/N                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 098 024900104  Vacant   0        NS       DA     19,400    0.46   24       20.00        9     0 0  9  0                constraints.
                                DSP/N                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 098 024900105  Vacant   0        NS       DA     13,110    0.30   24       20.00        6     0 0  6  0                constraints.
                                DSP/N                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 098 029001101   Retail  0        NS       DA     15,483    0.35   24       48.57       17    17       0                constraints.
                                DSP/N                             15 to                                       Adequate infrastructure/no
 098 029000607  Office   0        NS       DA     91,262    2.00   24       43.50       87    82 0  5  0                constraints.
                 Com-           DSP/N                             15 to
 098 029000111  mercial  0        NS       DA    124,996    2.90   24       17.93       52     0 5 47  0    Developed with a bowling alley.
                                                                                                                                         B-7

                Land   Exist                          Density Realistic  Viable
     APN                     Zoning GP Lot Size Acres                            VL  L  M  AM             Infrastructure
                 Use   Units                          Range   Density   Capacity
                                                                                              Former Millers Outpost site. Currently
                                                                                                 developed with a commercial
                             DSP/N                     30 to                                     shopping center. Potential for
098 029000217 Parking   0      NS   DA  14,003   0.32   36     33.00       11    11  0  0   0     residential redevelopment.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029000215   Retail  0      NS   DA 189,639   4.30   36     33.00      142    142 0  0   0  Part of former Millers Outpost site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029000207   Retail  0      NS   DA  87,496   2.00   36     33.00       66    66  0  0   0  Part of former Millers Outpost site.
                Drive
                Aisle/       DSP/N                     30 to
098 029000211   park    0      NS   DA  10,823   0.24   36     33.00        8     8  0  0   0  Part of former Millers Outpost site.
                Sub-         DSP/N                     30 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
098 029001206  station  0      NS   DA  29,369   0.67   36     33.00       22    22  0  0   0              constraints.
                                                                                              Former K-Mart Center site. Currently
                                                                                                 developed with a commercial
              Parking/       DSP/N                     30 to                                     shopping center. Potential for
099 017502101   retail  0      NS   DA  61,650   1.41   36     33.00       47    47  0  0   0     residential redevelopment.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029002401 Parking   0      NS   DA  7,934    0.18   36     33.00        6     6  0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029002403   Retail  0      NS   DA 348,283   7.90   36     33.00      261    261 0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
099 017502201   Retail  0      NS   DA  6,230    0.14   36     33.00        5     5  0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029001901   Retail  0      NS   DA  75,814   1.74   36     33.00       57    57  0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029002100   Retail  0      NS   DA  11,905   0.27   36     33.00        9     9  0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                             DSP/N                     30 to
098 029002200   Retail  0      NS   DA  5,859    0.13   36     33.00        4     4  0  0   0  Part of former K-mart Center site.
                Com-         DSP/NS                    30 to                                      Adequate infrastructure/no
097 001700100 mercial   0      S    DA  2,976    0.07   36     33.00        1     0  0  1   0              constraints.
 Subtotal B-4                                                            1,033   747 7 279  0
                                                                                                                            B-8


4 COMMUNITY CHARACTER ELEMENT
  The natural and built environments of Livermore help create a strong sense of community for the town.
  Given the importance of Livermore’s unique history and physical setting, the community determined it was
  essential to include a Community Character Element to identify, protect and enhance these characteristics.
  Community character is best defined as the element that provides a “sense of place” within
  Livermore and contributes to its unique identity. This element encompasses both natural
  and man-made features of the local environment, as well as broader aspects that contribute
  to how the City is perceived as a unique place.
  State law does not require a Community Character Element, but some of the topics ad-
  dressed in this element, such as areas of historic value, scenic corridors, and the preservation
  of open space, are required as part of an Open Space element. However, the City of Liver-
  more has chosen to address these issues as part of the Community Character Element since
  the City values its agricultural and historical identity and community character and seeks to
  preserve it. The decisions of individual property owners, together with the efforts of City
  government and other public agencies, can do much to preserve and enhance Livermore’s
  physical appearance. This Element contains goals, objectives, policies, and actions that will
  guide private individuals and government officials in preserving and enhancing Livermore’s
  character and unique physical identity.
  I.       NATURAL SETTING
  A. Background Information
  Livermore’s most distinctive features are the hills and ridgelines that surround the City, most
  of which lie outside the City limits. Ridgelines are pronounced along the southern edge of
  the City, where views of rolling hills, interspersed with sycamore woodland areas, are com-
  plemented by intervening vistas of agricultural land and vineyards. Significant ridgelines are
  also located north of the I-580 corridor, particularly those associated with Brushy Peak to
  the northeast, as well as the Altamont Hills east of Vasco and Greenville Roads. Other open
  space to the north consists of more moderate topography, with rolling hills and rangelands.
                                                                                                             4-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Livermore’s built environment, and its planning policies, are designed to preserve views to
these hills.
Several creeks and arroyos lie within the Planning Area, including Altamont Creek, Arroyo
Seco, Arroyo Mocho, Arroyo Las Positas, Collier Canyon Creek, and Arroyo del Valle.
These creeks support vegetation and trees for portions of their length, imparting important
topographical and visual features to the general landscape.
The Planning Area, largely unincorporated, has retained its rural character and natural
setting, although it is accessible in less than one hour’s drive from one of the most
intensively urbanized areas of California. Yet this same proximity to major metropolitan
centers threatens the area’s rural character, visual excellence, and natural diversity and creates
a high priority for the protection of the area's scenic resources both within and surrounding
the City.
The community is ringed by hills and mountains which provide visual relief from spreading
development on the Valley floor. The terrain ranges from gently rolling hills in the north to
a rugged, steep mountain range in the south. The continuity of the hills and mountains is
occasionally broken by narrow canyons and valleys.
Cultivated agriculture occupies large portions of the Valley floor in rectangular plots with
straight rows contrasting with the contour planting of the rolling foothills to the north.
Vineyards occupy the southern portion of the Valley floor. They, like the other agricultural
uses, lend form to the urban pattern. In agricultural areas and grasslands, farmhouses are
scattered about, each nestled under a stand of trees. Windmills, barns, corrals and fences are
randomly spaced on the landscape. From the Valley floor on a clear day, there are excellent
and impressive views of Mt. Diablo rising above the foothills to the northwest. Brushy Peak
is a round-topped landmark formation with a contrasting cap of darker vegetation located to
the northeast. To the southeast are the rugged canyons and ridges leading toward Mt.
Hamilton, although the mountain itself is not visible from the Valley.
4-2

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
A few low, rounded knolls separate the City from the rest of the Valley to the north and
present a pleasant visual feature for travelers along I-580. Rising on both sides of the
highway, they form an attractive scenic corridor that is of local and Valley-wide significance.
An identification of the I-580 corridor visual amenities has provided the basis for assessing
impacts to visual quality from proposed developments, indicating areas which need to be
preserved and/or protected. The goals, objectives, policies, and actions below were
established to protect the I-580 scenic corridor and scenic assets and vistas within and
surrounding the City’s environs.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal CC-1       Preserve and enhance Livermore’s natural setting.
Objective CC-1.1 Use open space to protect and enhance local community character
and identity, to preserve rural characteristics, and to provide an edge to urban
growth.
    Policies
    P1.    The City shall allow no structural development in hillside areas involving skylines,
           ridgelines, or silhouettes.
    P2.    The City shall permit no intensive development of the hills. Development includ-
           ing roads, buildings and other structural or land coverage shall be located, sited
           and designed to fit and be subordinate to the natural landforms. Under no cir-
           cumstances shall development create uniform, geometrically terraced building
           sites which are contrary to the natural landforms and which detract, obscure or
           negatively effect the visual quality of the landforms.
    P3.    Areas with slopes should be conditioned carefully with respect to grading, cut and fills, runoff,
           erosion and sedimentation, and maintenance of vegetation. Hillside development regulations
           should reflect these environmental concerns. (NLUGBI)
                                                                                                              4-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P4.       No building site or greenhouse, in whole or in part, may be located on a pre-development slope of
               more than 20%. No building may be located on a site that has access over a natural slope of
               more than 25%. Cultivated agriculture may not be conducted on a slope, prior to topographical
               alteration, of more than 20%. (NLUGBI)
     P5.       The designation of various scenic routes in the Planning Area shall be determined
               according to the Scenic Route Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions and visual
               resource policies of the General Plan.
     P6.       The City shall maintain an area of non-urbanized land surrounding Livermore to
               serve as a buffer between communities. Uses that are considered compatible with
               this area include agriculture, grazing, open space, recreation, and reclaimed sand
               and gravel extraction.
     P7.       Open space shall be used to protect and enhance local community character and
               identity, and to guide the physical shape and direction of urban growth to pre-
               serve the rural characteristics of the area.
     P8.       New development shall be designed to preserve views from existing neighbor-
               hoods to the greatest extent feasible.
     P9.       Open space shall be used as a buffer between incompatible land uses within urban
               or essentially undeveloped areas.
     P10.      The City shall permit no development on grassland in upland areas (knolls, hillsides, and ridge-
               lines that rise above the valley floor) unless such development will be screened effectively from ex-
               isting or proposed public viewing areas or scenic corridors. (NLUGBI)
     P11.      The City shall preserve and enhance, or work with and support the efforts of
               other agencies, as appropriate (e.g., with joint grant applications, sharing of staff
               resources and legal services), to preserve and enhance the following natural
               amenities:
               (a)     Ridgelines
               (b)     Oak Woodlands and Grasslands
4-4
                                                                     C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     (c)   Grasslands
     (d)   Riparian Woodland
     (e)   Arroyos and Creeks
     (f)   Knolls
     (g)   Brushy Peak
     (h)   Arroyo Mocho/Cedar Mountain
     (i)   Corral Hollow
     (j)   Sycamore Grove
     (k)   Hilltops (NLUGBI)
     (l)   Slopes (NLUGBI)
     (m)   Viewscapes (NLUGBI)
     (n)   Frick Lake
     (o)   Springtown Alkali Sink
P12. The City shall preserve and enhance the following manmade amenities:
     (a)   Vineyards
     (b)   Other Agriculture
     (c)   Lake Del Valle
     (d)   Scenic Highways, Roads, and Corridors
     (e)   Buildings of Historic or Architectural Significance or Interest
     (f)   Community Entrance Points
P13. The City shall utilize open space easements to preserve sensitive environmental
     and visual resource areas as open space in perpetuity. Parcels with open space
     easements recorded on them shall subsequently be redesignated to Open Space
     (OSP) on the General Plan Land Use Map to ensure that no future urban devel-
     opment is considered on the parcel.
                                                                                                  4-5
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-1.2 The intensity of land use in woodland areas shall reflect the density
of the trees so as to perpetuate the woodland character.
     Policies
     P1.       No structure or appurtenance shall exceed the height of the tree canopy in wood-
               land areas.
     P2.       Development in woodland, grassland, or grassland/woodland areas shall employ
               colors and materials which are in harmony with, rather than contrast to, the vege-
               tation cover of the site.
Objective CC-1.3 Minimize obtrusive glare and wasted energy from excessive night-
time lighting and preserve views of the nighttime sky.
     Policy
     P1.       The importance of views of the nighttime sky unimpaired by inappropriate inten-
               sities of light and glare shall be acknowledged as a significant scenic resource in
               Livermore.
     Action
     A1.       Incorporate standards in the development of design review guidelines that are
               concerned with lighting quantity, intensity, and design in order to minimize con-
               tributions to glare, light trespass and “sky glow” while providing nighttime light-
               ing sufficient to ensure public safety.
4-6

                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
II.      URBAN DESIGN
A. Background Information
Urban design considers the aesthetic and functional relationship of places, buildings, and
their setting. It focuses on the connections between people and places, circulation patterns
and the physical form of the City. Enhancing quality of life and the urban environment is a
key goal of urban design.
Livermore can be divided into areas characterized by broadly similar land uses, including
residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses. This section describes and summa-
rizes the location and general urban design qualities of these different land uses.
Residential
Residential uses are the most widespread land use type in the City. The development of Liv-
ermore’s residential neighborhoods has occurred in several distinct phases, each of which
has made its contribution to the City’s character and has resulted in distinguishable devel-
opment types and patterns in different areas of the City.
Central residential districts in the Downtown and immediate surrounding area reflect the
early phase of the City’s development, from the late nineteenth century to the 1950’s. De-
velopment from this phase can be seen in areas north, south and east of Downtown, where
neighborhoods follow the traditional grid pattern of the commercial core. These areas con-
sist largely of modest one-story single-family homes, most often built in a ranch, bungalow,
or craftsman style. Streets are generally wide and lined with mature trees, with relatively
short setbacks from the street.
Beyond the center of the City, radiating outward to the urban edge, are numerous residential
subdivisions built since 1950. The urban fabric of these areas reflects a classic suburban de-
velopment pattern; large tracts of one- and two-story single-family homes of largely similar
style arranged on cul-de-sacs and curvilinear local streets. Along major arterial streets,
soundwalls have traditionally been used to buffer residential areas from the impacts of ve-
                                                                                                          4-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
hicular traffic. While providing an insulating buffer to these neighborhoods, thus elevating
the living environment quality for these residents, the sound walls have had a consequential
effect of minimizing the sense of community to the traveling public. Multi-family housing
and apartment complexes are generally located along larger streets and arterials.
Other significant features of the urbanized area impact the residential areas and include a tri-
angular swath of low-density light industrial development that radiates northeast between the
railway and I-580 from east of Downtown to the City limits. The Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Laboratory (LLNL) and Sandia National Laboratories, while not within the incorpo-
rated City limits area, are located adjacent to the southeastern part of the City and are inte-
gral to the community’s identity. Finally, the Livermore Municipal Airport, a general avia-
tion airport, is located in the far west part of the City, south of I-580.
Newer residential areas at the edge create an interface of new low-density development, de-
signed to be compatible with the open space and agricultural uses that surround the City.
Newer development is interspersed with older ranches and small farms spread along outlying
roads. In areas north of I-580, residential development is limited to the Springtown and
Altamont Creek neighborhoods on the east side of town, as well as adjacent to Las Positas
Community College along North Canyons Parkway on the west side of town.
Downtown
Downtown is the City’s historic commercial center, reflecting the City’s former importance
as a regional commercial center for the surrounding agricultural and ranching community.
Livermore’s historic Downtown lies south of the railway corridor and I-580, in an area
bounded roughly by Railroad Avenue and the railway to the north, Fourth Street to the
south and east, and South S Street to the west. Today, Downtown has a mixture of com-
mercial uses located in a variety of one- and two- story buildings. Much of the Downtown is
walkable, with generous sidewalks and low traffic volumes. First Street and Railroad Avenue
do, however, experience higher traffic volumes than most Downtown streets because of
their accessible east-west connectivity to other streets. The Downtown is also the location
of many of Livermore’s most prominent and distinguished landmarks, including the Carne-
gie Building, Southern Pacific Railroad Depot, Bank of Italy building, and the Mills Square
Flagpole.
4-8

                                                                              C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                            C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Community and Neighborhood Retail Centers
Outside of Downtown, most of Livermore’s commercial activity is concentrated in auto-
oriented retail centers, many of which are clustered close to I-580. The design of these retail
centers reflects their auto-orientation, with large “big-box” stores fronted by large parking
areas. Numerous neighborhood-serving retail centers are scattered throughout the City, gen-
erally located along major arterials. Examples of such centers include Vintner Square and
Granada Shopping Center.
Industrial Areas
Industrial areas of Livermore are primarily concentrated in the City’s eastern half, particularly
in the area between I-580 and the railroad, extending from Downtown to Greenville Road,
as well as around the Airport in the western part of Livermore. These areas are character-
ized by low-density light intensity industrial uses, including: small scale manufacturing opera-
tions, warehouses, and research and development. Buildings are generally low-rise one- and
two-story structures with a range of development featuring minimal to good architectural
features and detail.
There is no heavy industry or large-scale industrial facilities within City limits. However,
large-scale sand and gravel extraction operations are located west of Livermore. The quarry
operations are characterized by groups of large mechanical structures, heaps of extracted ma-
terial, extensive areas of exposed dirt, and large pits.
Business and Office Parks
Livermore’s large-scale dedicated business parks are found in an area of “campus style” of-
fice developments in northwest Livermore around North Canyons Parkway. Groups of of-
fice buildings, surrounded by parking lots, pedestrian walkways and landscaped communal
areas are linked to nearby thoroughfares by secondary roads. Other, smaller office devel-
opments are scattered throughout the City, generally concentrated along major arterials, and
in the light industrial areas described above.
                                                                                                           4-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Public and Semi-public Facilities
Livermore has a number of public and semi-public facilities that reflect the City’s heritage
and form a key part of its present-day character. These sites are scattered throughout the
City. Some of the most notable include the rodeo grounds, and historic sites such as the
Carnegie Building and Ravenswood.
The Carnegie Building is an important local historic landmark, situated in the center of a
one-square-block park in Downtown. The formal, linear layout of the park responds to the
classical style of the Carnegie Building, with its portico framed by Ionic columns.
The Ravenswood historic site, near the southern edge of town, is the centerpiece of a large
park. The historic site includes several nineteenth-century structures, dominated by two
white Victorian cottages, surrounded by mature palm trees and vineyards.
Livermore’s current rodeo grounds are an important community facility and a key element of
Livermore’s community identity. They are a part of the larger Robertson Park, with its flat,
open, grassy sports fields and views towards the southeast.
Laboratory Facilities
In addition to the industrial and commercial uses described above, prominent features of
Livermore’s urban environment are the LLNL and Sandia National Laboratories facilities,
located southeast of the incorporated City limits. Several multi-story lab buildings are sited
along Vasco Road, and, as the tallest buildings in Livermore, are highly visible looking east
from Vasco Road and west from Greenville Road.
Open Space
The numerous public parks and open space resources in Livermore are an important aspect
of the City’s community character. Numerous local parks are scattered throughout the City.
Prominent public open space areas include Robertson, Sycamore Grove, and Robert Liver-
more Parks. Additionally, the City and LARPD have an extensive bikeways and trails net-
work that provides additional opportunities for both recreation and transportation purposes.
This network also provides opportunities for traveling through the scenic rural and historic
4-10

                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
areas of the City, such as along arroyos and through the pastoral South Livermore wine re-
gion.
Gateways and Edges
Gateways are the entries to a City, district, or neighborhood. They act as a point of distinc-
tion between different areas, and contribute to a sense of arrival to one place from another.
For the most part, gateways in Livermore are associated with the City’s major transportation
corridors. These include exits off of I-580, as well as the points along the freeway where the
transition is made from rural surroundings into the urbanized area. Important gateways also
include entries to the City from other major regional connectors such as Stanley Boulevard,
Vallecitos Road, Vineyard Avenue, Vasco Road, and Livermore Avenue. Planned new gate-
ways in the Circulation Element include the North Canyon Parkway/Dublin Boulevard con-
nection and the West Jack London Boulevard extension to Pleasanton.
Gateways can also be found at the entrance to Livermore’s Downtown and the Livermore
Valley wine region in South Livermore. The most prominent gateway to Downtown is the
intersection of South Livermore Avenue and First Street, which includes historic buildings,
landscaping and signage. Other corridors into Downtown generate little sense of arrival, and
efforts could be strengthened to promote these potential gateways. Examples of these gate-
ways are the intersections of Portola at North Livermore Avenue, which features an orna-
mental vineyard and wine cask, and the intersection of Holmes at First Street, which features
Hansen Park, with its public fountain and historical farm equipment.
Gateways to the wine region are, in general, not formalized, but the very distinct difference
in landscape when traveling from the built-up area of Livermore to a terrain of vineyards,
clusters of winery buildings and agricultural fields serves to distinguish gateways to the wine
region along Tesla Road, Wetmore Road, Connannon Boulevard, and Arroyo Road. The
Isabel corridor to the west and the Vasco corridor to the east serve as both gateways and
edges connecting the community to its surroundings. The edges of a community are another
important way of signaling the transition from the surrounding area into a specific place.
Edges are a transition or interface between two kinds of landscapes. Livermore’s edges are
predominantly transitions between agricultural land or open space and residential areas, as
along Isabel Avenue and Vasco Road. Livermore has “feathered” edges that progress from
                                                                                                        4-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
open space outside of the City limits to low-density residential neighborhoods, to higher-
density residential neighborhoods surrounding commercial centers and the Downtown. This
gradual transition in density helps integrate neighborhoods to each other, and helps integrate
Livermore with its natural surroundings.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
Goal CC-2          Maintain high standards of urban design in Livermore.
Objective CC-2.1 Maintain and enhance Livermore’s urban design quality and en-
courage high quality design in all new development and redevelopment.
     Policies
     P1.       All new development and redevelopment shall be subject to design review.
     P2.       High-quality design shall be provided in the areas of community design, site de-
               sign, building design, and landscape design to ensure that compatibility exists be-
               tween new and existing development.
     P3.       The architectural design and site layout of new development and redevelopment
               should consider the context and character created by existing land uses.
     P4.       Design requirements and amenities shall be encouraged in new development and
               redevelopment, including, but not limited to:
               (a)    Interconnected street layout;
               (b)    Clustering of buildings;
               (c)    Landscaping on each lot;
4-12

                                                                      C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                    C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
    (d)    Visual buffers;
    (e)    Facilitating pedestrian activity; and
    (f)    Distinctiveness in architectural design.
P5. “Green building” practices shall be encouraged in new development and redevel-
    opment. Green buildings are those that utilize methods and materials that are
    more environmentally benign than conventional methods or products. Examples
    include:
    (a)    High levels of insulation throughout construction including walls, floors,
           ceilings, and openings;
    (b)    Windows with high levels of insulation;
    (c)    Windows and eaves designed for passive solar heating;
    (d)    Construction using sustainable and recycled materials;
P6. New residential, commercial, and mixed-use neighborhoods shall promote com-
    fortable, safe, and human-scaled design, pedestrian-oriented design features, and
    connections to pedestrian, bikeway and site amenities shall be incorporated into
    these new neighborhoods.
P7. In new residential developments, the use of traditional site design and architec-
    tural elements such as a grid street layout, narrower streets, street trees, detached
    sidewalks, traditional house designs, reduced setbacks, and garages to the rear or
    sides of properties, shall be encouraged where found consistent with the
    neighborhood character.
P8. Buildings with large, blank exterior walls lacking architectural details shall be pro-
    hibited.
P9. Within existing single-family neighborhoods, homes of modest size, built in pro-
    portion to their lots, shall be encouraged. Construction of single-family homes
    that are out of scale with surrounding homes, or which leave yard areas that are
    significantly smaller than other yards in the neighborhood, should be avoided.
                                                                                                  4-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P10.      Multi-family structures and non-residential uses located adjacent to single-family
               properties shall incorporate adequate screening into the project design to soften
               the visual impacts of new, more intense development.
     P11.      The establishment of gated communities shall be prohibited, excepting senior
               residential complexes.
     P12.      Off-street parking areas shall be screened, preferably by natural vegetation in con-
               junction with earth berms.
     P13.      Existing land uses or those of public necessity, which are visually offensive, shall
               be screened from view from highways or roadways, or inconspicuously located if
               within a scenic route.
     P14.      Residents and property owners shall be required to maintain their properties in
               good condition.
     Actions
     A1.       Prepare and adopt ordinances, guidelines, and/or procedures in order to imple-
               ment these policies including design review procedures, creation of development
               design standards, a specific plan for Downtown development and revitalization,
               and establishment of public improvement standards including landscaping and re-
               lated programs which address these policies. These ordinances, guidelines, and
               procedures shall address, at a minimum, the following:
               (a)    Building materials;
               (b)    Building scale, bulk, and facade treatment;
               (c)    Streetscapes;
               (d)    Lighting;
               (e)    Landscaping and trees;
4-14
                                                                               C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
          (f)      Visual impacts of multi-unit housing on nearby single-family residences and
                   historical buildings;
          (g)      Visual resources;
          (h)      Signs.
   A2.    Develop, maintain, and implement urban design guidelines and performance
          standards that establish design requirements for residential, commercial, and in-
          dustrial development and redevelopment. All new development and redevelop-
          ment shall be subject to design principles and performance standards.
   A3.    Update adopted standards for the design of public improvements in new devel-
          opment and redevelopment in recognition of the extreme importance of quality
          design of development and the value of aesthetics in developing an image and
          sense of character for the City.
   A4.    Periodically review and revise, as necessary, street width standards to address
          emergency vehicle access while also providing for the narrowest streets possible
          to enhance walkability and urban design character.
   A5.    Continue to implement an attractive, coordinated system of “street furniture,” in-
          cluding fire hydrants, litter containers, newspaper vending machines, paving pat-
          terns, planters, signposts, traffic signals, benches, and light standards.
   A6.    Arroyos and creeks, sensitive and riparian habitat, wetlands or established vegetation such as
          trees, shall be maintained and enhanced. (NLUGBI)
Objective CC-2.2 Maintain high-quality design of all signage.
   Policies
   P1.    On-premise signs shall be the minimum size, height, number and type necessary
          for identification. Their design, materials, color, texture and/or location shall re-
          late to the type of activity to which they pertain and be compatible with the archi-
          tectural character of the building it is associated with and the visual character of
          the surrounding area.
                                                                                                           4-15

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P2.       The City shall not permit off-premises outdoor advertising, except for approved
               freestanding freeway signs and approved non-commercial, general services, in-
               formational or directional panel signs, i.e. signs used for advance notice to motor-
               ists or to identify destination points, e.g. civic center, library, historic sites, the
               wine country, parks, etc.
     The City shall continue to implement freeway sign regulations that limit the number of
     joint freeway signs per interchange, as well as restricting their use to highway-dependent
     services. Regulations shall include off-site advertising for qualified participants. Ap-
     proval of signs shall be subject to the appropriate City permits. The location of each sign
     shall be determined by the optimum visibility from the freeway travel ways having the
     least impact on the scenic quality of the I-580 corridor.
Objective CC-2.3 Maintain high-quality design of public facilities.
     Policies
     P1.       Existing overhead utilities shall be placed underground through a phased program
               of conversion.
     P2.       Utility distribution lines shall be placed underground in new developments and
               upon redevelopment.
     P3.       The City shall adopt public improvement standards to implement improvements
               of high quality public facilities. Excellence in the appearance of public facilities
               shall be of utmost importance and consideration. New development and redevel-
               opment shall be designed with complimentary public and private amenities.
               Streetlights, benches, accessory structures, and public and privates spaces shall be
               designed in a complimentary fashion. Landscaping shall be an important and sig-
               nificant design component of development. Areas visible from public streets
               shall be landscaped as part of the initial development. The City’s design guide-
               lines and standards shall establish the objectives, techniques, and programs to im-
               plement the location, amount, and type of landscaping material appropriate to
               these objectives. Additionally, the Downtown Specific Plan’s design guidelines
4-16

                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
          shall provide direction on how to address these issues for new development or
          redevelopment within the Downtown Area, as defined in the Specific Plan.
   P4.    Street rights-of-way in new subdivisions shall not exceed approximately 30-
          percent of the total acreage involved in the proposed development, exclusive of
          planned open space areas.
Objective CC-2.4 Preserve and enhance all entry corridors to Livermore.
   Policies
   P1.    To protect visual quality at entrances to the City along the freeway, highway
          commercial development, if allowed, shall be limited to the immediate area of the
          interchange.
   P2.    The design review process shall be used to require new development at the major
          entrances to the City to provide enhanced site plans, landscaping, and architec-
          tural design. Uses should be aesthetically pleasing, providing a high quality design
          that will benefit its location as a gateway to the City.
   P3.    The City recognizes the significance of the El Charro area as an important gate-
          way to the community and that it provides an opportunity to support and en-
          hance the community character. Therefore, development proposed for parcels
          located southwest of the El Charro/I-580 Interchange shall provide a buffer of
          vineyards to be located along the southern edge of Friesman Road and the eastern
          edge of El Charro Road.
   Action
   A1.    Develop City-funded landscape features and/or sculptures at gateways and entries
          to the City.
                                                                                                         4-17
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
III.     CULTURAL RESOURCES
A. Background Information
Cultural resources in Livermore include both prehistoric and historic resources. As of 2002,
there were over 400 known cultural resources within the Planning Area, of which 45 had
been determined potentially eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
Paleontological Resources
In May 2002, a fossil locality search was conducted at the Museum of Paleontology at the
University of California, Berkeley to identify fossil localities within and adjacent to the Plan-
ning Area. Several Pleistocene vertebrate fossil localities were identified within the Planning
Area boundaries. The most recently discovered fossil locality is within the Lawrence Liver-
more National Laboratory, where a fossil mammoth was found during excavations in 1997
and 1998.
Archaeological Resources
In addition to fossils and other paleontological resources, the Planning Area may include
sites of prehistoric human habitation. The Livermore-Amador Valley has been inhabited by
humans for 6,000 to 12,000 years. The Native American Heritage Commission lists one site
in the Planning Area in their Sacred Lands File. Within the Planning Area, prehistoric re-
source sites are generally located near water sources such as creeks or springs. There is a
high probability of additional undiscovered prehistoric cultural resources in areas around
these features.
Since the Planning Area is known to contain paleontological and archaeological resources
and there is a probability of discovering additional resources, archival and field study is rec-
ommended prior to the implementation of projects involving or leading to ground distur-
bance.
4-18
                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Historic Resources
In addition to natural environmental features, Livermore possesses cultural resources that
are important parts of its community identity. These historic resources include historic
structures, sites and areas that played important roles in local history. Other buildings, while
not technically of historic significance, are valuable because of design attributes that provide
insight into architectural styles and values of the past. The City recognizes these historic re-
sources as worthy of preservation both for their aesthetic and cultural importance and be-
cause they are an integral part of Livermore’s character and identity.
Most of Livermore’s historic resources are concentrated in the Downtown, in an area
roughly bounded by Railroad Avenue to the north, Maple Avenue to the east, College Ave-
nue to the south, and Holmes Street to the west. In addition, historic resources associated
with viticulture, dry farming, or stock raising are present in the northern parts of the Plan-
ning Area and, to a lesser degree, in southern and eastern Livermore.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
Goal CC-3       Preserve and enhance the City's cultural and historic resources not
                merely as positive reminders of the past, but also as relevant and unique
                alternatives for the present and the future - a source of community iden-
                tity, architecture, and social, ecological and economic vitality.
Objective CC-3.1 Establish and maintain a comprehensive, Citywide preservation
program.
    Policies
    P1.     The City shall maintain a historic preservation commission and historic preserva-
            tion program with dedicated City staff to administer governmental preservation
            functions and programs.
                                                                                                         4-19

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P2.       The City shall encourage, and when possible require, the preservation of places,
               sites, areas, buildings, structures, and works of humans which have cultural, ar-
               chaeological, or historical significance or other special distinction to the commu-
               nity.
     P3.       Whenever a historical resource is known to exist in or near a proposed project
               area, the City shall require an evaluation by qualified professionals as a part of the
               environmental assessment process.
     P4.       The City shall encourage the preservation of historic resources to promote the
               sustainability, stabilization, and revitalization of its neighborhoods.
     P5.       The City shall consider historic and cultural resources in its comprehensive plan-
               ning efforts.
     P6.       The City shall act as a role model for historic preservation by maintaining and
               preserving City-owned historic properties when prudent and feasible.
     P7.       The City shall recognize the historic significance of Downtown Livermore
               through a specific plan for the Downtown. The Downtown Specific Plan shall
               include provisions to balance historic resource preservation and adaptive re-use
               with revitalization efforts. The Downtown Specific Plan shall establish a devel-
               opment review process and design guidelines for historic resource rehabilitation
               as well as require new construction to be designed such that it is compatible with
               and sensitive to the historic identity of Downtown Livermore.
     Actions
     A1.       Revise historic preservation processes and standards to reflect and implement the
               goals, objectives, policies, and actions of this General Plan.
     A2.       Incorporate historic preservation goals, objectives, policies, and actions into new
               specific plans, as well as in specific plan updates.
4-20
                                                                               C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
   A3.    Pursue identification and establishment of historic districts, if necessary, to better
          preserve historical resources.
   A4.    Implement preservation goals, objectives, policies, actions, and guidelines
          throughout various City departments and functions.
   A5.    Review and monitor permits, procedures, and activities to reinforce preservation
          goals through a historic preservation commission.
   A6.    Review and revise the development review process for historic preservation, as
          necessary, to provide clear direction on the process, procedures, and specific ap-
          plicable standards for adaptive reuse and modifications to historic resources.
   A7.    Implement training of City staff and appointed committees and commissions in
          historic preservation, including familiarity with the historic preservation compo-
          nent of the General Plan and specific plans, design guidelines for historic re-
          sources, use of the State Historical Building Code, and the historic resource provi-
          sions of the California Environmental Quality Act.
   A8.    Establish design guidelines for historic resources based on established federal and
          State standards and guidelines.
Objective CC-3.2 Establish an inventory of historic and cultural resources of signifi-
cance to the local community, the State and the Nation.
   Actions
   A1.    Conduct a Citywide survey to document and identify those resources that meet
          the criteria for listing at the local level, on the California Register of Historical Re-
          sources, and on the National Register of Historic Places.
   A2.    Update the historic resources survey periodically, as needed, to reflect changes
          due to the passage of time, loss of existing historic resources, and the availability
          of new or reinterpreted information.
                                                                                                           4-21
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     A3.       Develop historic context statements for interpreting history about historic proper-
               ties that share a common theme, common geographical area, or a common time
               period. This document should help to establish categories of historic significance
               for a given area.
Objective CC-3.3 Promote a broad public understanding of Livermore’s heritage, tra-
ditions, and preservation policies and foster a wider appreciation of the contributions
historic and cultural resources make to the City’s distinctive and diverse character.
     Policies
     P1.       The City shall increase knowledge of historic preservation through public educa-
               tion, awareness programs, and outreach programs.
     P2.       The City shall support historically-oriented visitor programs at local and regional
               levels.
     P3.       The City shall encourage identification of historic resources through a program of
               plaques and markers.
     P4.       The City shall encourage and support public and private schools to integrate local
               history into their curricula and related educational programs.
     P5.       The City shall encourage local private and non-profit organizations in their efforts
               to promote and protect historic and cultural resources.
     Action
     A1.       Develop an awards program to recognize excellence in preservation, conserva-
               tion, rehabilitation, and education.
4-22

                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-3.4 Identify and protect archaeological and paleontological resources
that enrich our understanding of early Livermore and the surrounding region.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall require proper archaeological or paleontological testing, research,
          documentation, monitoring, and safe retrieval of archaeological and cultural re-
          sources as part of a City established archaeological monitoring and mitigation pro-
          gram.
   P2.    Whenever there is evidence of an archaeological or paleontological site within a
          proposed project area, an archaeological survey by qualified professionals shall be
          required as a part of the environmental assessment process.
   P3.    If an archaeological site is discovered during construction, all work in the immedi-
          ate vicinity shall be suspended pending site investigation by qualified profession-
          als. If, in the opinion of a qualified professional, the site will yield new informa-
          tion or important verification of previous findings, the site shall not be destroyed.
   P4.    Archaeological sites should be preserved for research and educational programs.
          Where possible, such sites shall be made accessible to the public as part of the
          open space/recreation/educational system.
   P5.    The City shall consult with Native American organizations before implementation
          of any project in the vicinity of Brushy Peak Regional Park.
Objective CC-3.5 Provide incentives to encourage owners of historic resources to pre-
serve and rehabilitate their properties.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall pursue and support the use of federal, State, local, and private
          grants, loans, and tax credits to preserve and rehabilitate historic properties.
                                                                                                       4-23
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P2.       The City shall encourage continuing the original use of historic resources where
               possible; adaptive use of historic resources is the preferred alternative when the
               original use can no longer be sustained.
     P3.       The City shall use the State Historical Building Code and Uniform Code for
               Building Conservation and provisions for historic buildings in the Americans with
               Disabilities Act to maximize the preservation and architectural integrity of historic
               buildings and structures wherever possible.
     Actions
     A1.       Collect, maintain and make available to the public an information base of State,
               federal and private incentive programs for historic resources.
     A2.       Explore opportunities for promoting heritage tourism, including cooperation with
               regional and State marketing efforts.
IV.      SCENIC ROUTES
A. Background Information
Livermore’s location within the Livermore Valley provides topographical and visual diversity
looking outwards from the City. These views of the surrounding hillsides are one of the
primary visual characteristics and amenities of the City. While the majority of the City lies
on relatively flat terrain, some northern and far southern areas are built up to hillsides, pro-
viding some topographical variety within the City itself. Hill and ridgeline views are available
from many vantage points within City limits. Mount Diablo is visible to the northwest of
Livermore, and Brushy Peak is prominent to the northeast.
Within the urbanized area, scenic views of surrounding hillside open space are most readily
available along the urban edge, and within areas of the City and Planning Area that have seen
minor development. The South Livermore residential subdivisions, east of Arroyo Road and
south of Alden Lane, are situated on a rise, and enjoy scenic vistas to the south. Develop-
ment in the Altamont Creek residential area is afforded attractive surrounding views due to
4-24

                                                                              C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                            C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
the lack of intervening development. In more central parts of Livermore, views towards the
hills are primarily available as one travels along the City’s major arterials, where the roadway
corridor permits a relatively clear sightline to outlying areas.
This General Plan identifies a number of roadways in the Planning Area that are considered
scenic routes. These streets and roadways are so designated because they pass through areas
of high scenic value, or provide access to important scenic, recreational, cultural, or historic
points. Figure 4-1 shows the identified scenic routes.
Protection of scenic views from I-580 is of particular importance. This heavily-traveled
roadway provides some of the best views of Livermore’s surrounding hillsides and ridgelines.
Policies and actions in this General Plan specifically seek to preserve and protect scenic
views within the designated I-580 Scenic Corridor through control of grading, land-
scaping, and building height. The I-580 Scenic Corridor is defined as the area within 3,500
feet of the freeway centerline and visible from the roadway.
Along the freeway, traveling west to east, views on the north from El Charro Road to
Doolan Canyon range from agricultural/range lands to gently rolling grasslands. On the
south, from El Charro Road to Airway Boulevard, views range from fallow agricultural
fields, the Las Positas Golf Course, and limited views of the Airport and aircraft activity.
On the north side, traveling from Doolan Canyon to the programmed Isabel/I-580 inter-
change, views include high-end business and commercial park development. Development
in this area has been constructed at limited heights to preserve views of the surrounding
hills.
Continuing along the freeway, looking south from Airway Boulevard to North Livermore
Avenue, the area is relatively flat with some scenic views of the Arroyo Las Positas, minimal
residential development, and scattered commercial development. In this same area on
the north side, there are scenic views of adjacent hillsides. These views continue on the
north side essentially until the area known as Springtown is reached. Views on the south
side between North Livermore Avenue east to First Street are somewhat limited due to ex-
isting commercial development, as well as minimally developed rolling hills. Continuing east
                                                                                                          4-25

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
on I-580, scenic views are limited on both the north and south sides of the freeway due to
commercial development, by residential development on the north side, and primarily by low
intensity industrial development on the south side. It is not until Greenville Road is ap-
proached that scenic views of the Altamont Hills to the north, south, and east can be seen
once again.
In addition to I-580, rural roads that pass through undeveloped parts of the Planning Area
constitute the most important scenic roadway routes in the Planning Area. These are shown
on Figure 4-1.
4-26
EXISTING PROPOSED ROUTES
                                                     FIGURE 4 - 1
                  Freeway
                  Non-Scenic Sgement
                                     PLANNED SCENIC ROUTES
                  Major Streets
                  Water Ways
                  Scenic Vistas
                                          LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal CC-4          Protect and enhance public views within and from established scenic
                   routes, including views of arroyos.
Objective CC-4.1 Protect public views from scenic routes and corridors.
     Policies
     P1.       Development shall not be allowed to obscure, detract from, or negatively affect
               the quality of the views from designated scenic routes.
     P2.       The City shall maintain in open space that portion of the hills which is seen from
               the freeway and which is within the I-580 Scenic Corridor as shown in Figure 4-1.
               Any development within the I-580 Scenic Corridor is subject to the policies set
               forth under Goal CC-4 and the conditions set forth in Section C, I-580 Scenic Corri-
               dor Implementation.
     P3.       The City shall permit no development to wholly obstruct or significantly detract
               from views of any scenic area as viewed from a scenic route.
Objective CC-4.2 Provide a continuous, convenient system of scenic routes.
     Policies
     P1.       The scenic route system should be complete enough to be convenient to all per-
               sons in Livermore and to provide continuous pleasurable trails within and be-
               tween major scenic areas and recreational and cultural centers in the Planning
               Area and adjacent areas.
     P2.       The scenic routes should afford aesthetically pleasing views to both the traveler
               and the outside observer throughout the entire system.
     P3.       The I-580 Scenic Corridor development shall include provision for cycling, hik-
               ing, and riding trails within or adjacent to street rights-of-way, where feasible.
4-28
                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-4.3 Establish efficient and attractive connecting links.
   Policies
   P1.    The scenic route system should include attractive and efficient links between
          routes of major scenic value and recreational and cultural centers.
   P2.    Links between scenic routes and recreational and cultural centers should include
          certain freeways and other roadways coordinated among appropriate jurisdictions.
   Action
   A1.      Trees, shrubs, and other landscaping shall be planted along scenic roads in ac-
            cordance with a landscape plan approved by the City.
Objective CC-4.4 Provide a variety of scenic routes.
   Policies
   P1.    A variety of experiences, such as changes in terrain, vegetation, landforms, and
          view, should be provided in the selection of routes with the system.
   P2.    The geographical location and distribution of routes should be selected to provide
          the traveler with a choice from among the outstanding scenic values within the
          Valley.
Objective CC-4.5 Control access to scenic routes.
   Policies
   P1.    Relatively uninterrupted movement of leisure driving on scenic routes should be
          accommodated by control of access, avoidance of stop signs, and synchronization
          of traffic signals on scenic expressways and thoroughfares whenever possible.
   P2.    Through movement of trucking should be prohibited on scenic routes unless no
          alternative parallel through routes are available within a reasonable distance.
                                                                                                        4-29
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-4.6 Use landscaping to increase the scenic qualities of scenic routes.
     Policy
     P1.       Landscaping should be designed and maintained in scenic route corridors to pro-
               vide added visual interest, to frame scenic views, and to screen unsightly views.
Objective CC-4.7 Minimize the presence of transmission towers and lines within sce-
nic routes.
     Policies
     P1.       New overhead transmission towers and lines should not be located within scenic
               routes.
     P2.       New, relocated, or existing utility distribution lines should be placed underground.
     P3.       If underground placement is not feasible, utility distribution lines should be lo-
               cated so as to be inconspicuous from the scenic route, on poles of an approved
               design.
     P4.       When more than one utility line is in an area, the lines should be combined on ad-
               jacent rights-of-way and common poles.
Objective CC-4.8 Establish architectural and site design review for projects within sce-
nic routes.
     Policies
     P1.       Site planning, architectural, and landscape architectural design review shall be re-
               quired so that development will be attractive from the highway and roads, and a
               harmonious relationship will exist among the various elements of proposed and
               existing developments and the visual qualities of the scenic route. Careful consid-
               eration shall be given to natural land contours and to appearances which will en-
               hance scenic qualities from the scenic routes.
4-30
                                                                              C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                            C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
   P2.    Originality in landscape and construction design should be encouraged.
   P3.    Landscape and construction design should be in keeping with the Cityscape and
          natural skyline and reflect the density, movement, and activities of the population.
   P4.    In all zoning districts where the allowable height limit exceeds 35 feet, each pro-
          posed structure over 35 feet, except utility poles and lines, should be reviewed to
          ensure that such structure will not conflict with any view from any scenic route.
   P5.    Utilize view angles established in Community Character Element Section IV.C (I-
          580 Scenic Corridor Implementation) to prohibit structures from extending above the
          applicable view surface established by the view angle.
Objective CC-4.9 Protect scenic routes from extensive or unnecessary grading.
   Policies
   P1.    Alteration of natural or artificial land contours should not be permitted without a
          grading permit as a means of preserving and enhancing the natural topography
          and vegetation in developable areas.
   P2.    Mass grading should not be permitted in the I-580 Scenic Corridor.
   P3.    A grading permit shall be granted in accordance with the guidelines stated in pol-
          icy CC-1.1.P2.
Objective CC-4.10     Apply the following criteria in the review of building and grading
permits in developable areas.
   Policies
   P1.    As a means of preserving natural “ridge skylines,” no major ridgeline shall be al-
          tered to the extent that an artificial ridgeline results. Minor grading below the sky-
          lines, ridgelines, or silhouettes may be authorized to accommodate development
          or activities otherwise consistent with these policies.
                                                                                                          4-31

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     P2.       Access roads should be located and designed to keep grading to a minimum. Sub-
               ject to the North Livermore Growth Boundary Initiative, natural ground contours in slope areas
               over ten percent should not be altered more than five percent overall, except in such slope areas
               where large stands of mature vegetation, scenic natural formations, or natural watercourses exist
               where grading should be limited so as to preserve the natural features (NLUGBI).
     P3.       The I-580 Scenic Corridor is defined as the area which is within 3,500 feet on
               each side of the centerline of I-580, and visible from the I-580 roadway. Devel-
               opment in the I-580 Scenic Corridor must preserve, to the largest degree feasible,
               the view of the ridgelines as seen from the I-580 Scenic Corridor roadway. To
               that end, no development, structures or man-made objects except plantings
               erected for landscaping purposes may obscure any portion of the ridgeline as seen
               from the I-580 Scenic Corridor roadway, except as provided in Community Char-
               acter Element Section IV.C (I-580 Scenic Corridor Implementation). Landscaping, in-
               cluding trees, shall be planted in a manner such that when mature, it does not cre-
               ate a wall-like effect that substantially obscures views of the ridgeline.
Objective CC-4.11           Designate responsibilities for scenic routes.
     Policies
     P1.       Route selection, determination of right-of-way width, and general design stan-
               dards for scenic routes are the responsibility of the City or the County and, in the
               case of State Highways, the State of California, and in certain instances are the
               joint responsibility of the State, Alameda County, and the City.
     P2.       All right-of-way land shall be owned in fee by the State or owned by or dedicated
               to the local jurisdiction. Final design standards and construction and maintenance
               of paved roads and appurtenances are the responsibility of the County Surveyor
               or City or State Engineers.
     Actions
     A1.       Periodically review Scenic Route Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions and encourage
               Alameda County to do the same.
4-32
                                                                     C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
A2. Continue cooperation with cities, adjacent counties, local and regional recreational
    and planning agencies, and all appropriate State agencies in various programs
    leading to the implementation of the Scenic Route Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Ac-
    tions.
A3. Adopt and apply legislation for control and development in accordance with prin-
    ciples and standards contained in Scenic Route Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions,
    including:
    (1)     Zoning Ordinance supplements, which will be based on scenic route plan-
            ning principles and standards and will include regulations on:
            (a) Land uses
            (b) Building heights
            (c) Building setbacks
            (d) Residential density
            (e) Building coverage
            (f) Lot area
            (g) Planned development and cluster development
            (h) Architectural and site design review
            (i) Historical preservation
            (j) On-premise signs
            (k) Outdoor advertising and time limits for removal of non-conforming
                signs
            (l) Floodways
            (m) Screening and landscaping
            (n) Quarries and other excavations
    (2)     Subdivision regulations which will be based on scenic route planning prin-
            ciples and standards and will include;
            (a) Limiting of cut and fill
            (b) Tree preservation and planting
                                                                                                 4-33
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
                       (c) Bank seeding and planting
                       (d) Limited access onto scenic highway
                       (e) Low density use of land
                       (f) Setback from water’s edge
                       (g) Easement dedication
                       (h) Screening
                       (i) Road design standards
                       (j) Underground utilities
               (3)     Building Code enforcement, which will significantly, although indirectly,
                       contribute to the improvement of aesthetic qualities.
               (4)     Maintenance controls, including:
                       (a) Housing Code - Strict enforcement of a housing code and abatement
                            of violations, as in urban infill projects.
                       (b) Fire Prevention - Enforcement of a fire prevention code can indirectly
                            contribute to the scenic route program. Fire prevention programs
                            should avoid controlled and uncontrolled burns which may destroy na-
                            tive flora of scenic value. Appropriate planting and maintenance would
                            avoid such a measure.
                       (c) Litter Control - An antilitter ordinance should be effectively enforced.
                            Public areas under the jurisdiction of the local government should be
                            carefully maintained.
                       (d) Weed and Insect Control - Attention should be given to discretionary
                            use of weed and insect control measures to eliminate unsightly condi-
                            tions in the Scenic Corridor and other pertinent areas beyond the cor-
                            ridor and to avoid the destruction of scenic native flora.
                       (e) Water Pollution - Water quality control should be enforced on the ba-
                            sis of odor and appearance as well as health hazards, consistent with
                            existing legislative and regulatory programs and development policy,
4-34

                                                                C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                              C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
         particularly in streams and lakes within and beyond the Scenic Corri-
         dor.
(5)  Streambed, canal, lake, and reservoir protection legislation to establish a
     system for review and approval of alterations to inland water bodies or wa-
     tercourses.
(6)  Application of existing legislative programs and development policy for
     additional legislative tools to acquire land, open space easements, or devel-
     opment rights in Scenic Corridors.
(7)  Application to State and Federal Government bodies for grants for:
     (a) Acquisition of property, open space easements, or development rights;
         in the Scenic Corridor,
     (b) Landscaping and trail development along all routes;
     (c) Wetlands restoration, clean water programs, flood control
     (d) Scenic road and stream corridor maintenance.
(8)  Preparation of detailed development plans or scenic routes showing paved
     roads, right-of-way, Scenic Corridor, public areas and facilities.
(9)  Establishment of official programs to encourage landscaping of all build-
     ing sites and to provide street trees along all rights-of-way.
(10) Application to the State for inclusion of State routes in the State Master
     Plan, as periodically amended, for “Scenic Highways” and for designation
     of “Official State Scenic Highways.”
                                                                                            4-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-4.12           Provide for normal uses of land and protect against unsightly fea-
                            tures in scenic routes.
     Policies
     P1.       In both urban and rural areas, normally permitted uses of land should be allowed
               in scenic routes, except that panoramic views and vistas should be preserved and
               enhanced through:
               (1) Supplementing zoning regulations with special height, area, and side yard regu-
                   lations.
               (2) Providing architectural and site design review.
               (3) Prohibiting and removing billboards, signs not relevant to the main use of the
                   property, obtrusive signs, automobile wrecking and junk yards, and similar un-
                   sightly development or use of land.
     P2.       Design and location of all signs should be regulated to prevent conglomerations
               of unsightly signs along roadsides.
Objective CC-4.13           Retain public easements for recreation trails.
     Policy
     P1.       All public trail easements should remain free and clear of any structures other
               than planting and trail improvements, except where they are required by public
               necessity or as a means of providing desired amenities (such as benches, tables,
               water fountains, public art, and restrooms) as specified by LARPD.
Objective CC-4.14           Control removal of vegetation in scenic routes.
     Policy
     P1.       Except for agricultural crops, no vegetation should be removed without permis-
               sion of the local jurisdiction, as a means of preserving scenic quality.
4-36
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-4.15      Control the alteration of streambeds and bodies of water in sce-
nic routes.
   Policies
   P1.    Alteration of streambeds or bodies of water and adjacent vegetation should be
          permitted only with approval of the local jurisdiction, as a means of preserving
          the natural scenic quality of stream courses, bodies of water, vegetation, and wild-
          life in the Valley.
   P2.    Development adjacent to streams, canals, reservoirs, and other bodies of water
          should be in a manner that will preserve the natural scenic qualities of the area, or
          when scenic qualities are minimal shall be designed and treated so as to result in
          naturalistic forms. Zone 7 has adopted Interim Design Standards and Practices
          for future construction improvements of channels. Any development with ar-
          royos and creeks fall under these standards and are subject to Zone 7’s review to
          ensure there are no impacts to Zone 7 facilities.
Objective CC-4.16      Preserve and enhance natural scenic qualities in areas beyond
scenic routes.
   Policies
   P1.    Views from scenic routes will comprise essentially all of the remainder of the Val-
          ley beyond the limits of the I-580 Scenic Corridor. The I-580 Scenic Corridor is
          intended to establish a framework for the observation of the views beyond; there-
          fore, in all areas in the Valley extending beyond the scenic routes, scenic qualities
          should be preserved through retaining the general character of natural slopes and
          natural formations, and through preservation and, where desirable, enhancement
          of water areas, water courses, vegetation and wildlife habitats.
   P2.    Development of lands adjacent to scenic routes should not obstruct views of sce-
          nic areas, and development should be visually compatible with the natural scenic
          qualities.
                                                                                                       4-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Objective CC-4.17           Coordinate scenic routes and recreation areas.
     Policies
     P1.       There should be maximum coordination in planning for scenic routes and adja-
               cent public recreation areas such as parks, scenic outlooks, roadside rests, cycling,
               hiking and riding trails.
     P2.       Recreation routes and trails should continue into adjacent communities to provide
               continuous networks for the enjoyment of the public. Scenic route recreation
               trails should be coordinated with existing and planned local, regional, and state
               trails.
     P3.       The City shall encourage the County to emphasize access to recreational areas and
               areas of outstanding scenic value in the development of its scenic route system.
C. I-580 Scenic Corridor Implementation
1. Exceptions/Exemptions to I-580 Scenic Corridor Development Requirements
Development in the I-580 Scenic Corridor may only take place outside of the view angle envelopes and/or
within established view corridors on parcels created before August 14, 2000, consistent with the North Liv-
ermore Growth Boundary Initiative, as follows (NLUGBI):
a. Where application of the regulations contained in the Scenic Route Goals, Objectives, Policies,
     and Actions would, based on the legal opinion of the City Attorney, deprive a private
     property owner of substantially all reasonable economic use of the lot, and where the
     City Council finds both of the following:
     (1) That the development is spaced sufficiently on the lot so as not to create the effect of
         a wall between the viewer and the ridgeline; and
     (2) That the development on the lot does not detract from the scenic value of the corri-
         dor; or,
4-38
                                                                                       C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
b. Where it is determined that new public works projects or elements render the develop-
     ment no longer visible from a view point along I-580; or,
c. Where the development consists of public works projects and facilities of public neces-
     sity; or,
d. Where the development consists of reconstructing a structure which existed prior to Au-
     gust 14, 2000, and where the height and area of the new structure does not exceed that of
     the pre-existing structure; or,
e. Where the development does not exceed a view angle created by an existing structure.
     The view angle is measured from the roofline of the existing structure closest to the free-
     way as viewed at a 90-degree angle to the freeway. Only that portion of the proposed
     development located directly in front of the existing structure may exceed the adopted
     view angle.
2. I-580 Scenic Corridor Zones – Limitations on Ground Contour Changes
In the I-580 Scenic Corridor, to the extent consistent with the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary
Initiative, the following limits apply to changes in the natural ground contours (NLUGBI):
     (a) Zone I: Within 2,000 feet of the center line of I-580, alterations are allowed in slope
         areas to ten percent, defined as the lowest lying ten percent slope at the base of the
         hill area. In addition, an area equal to five percent of the overall Zone I area within
         the property to be developed can be altered above the ten percent slope. This addi-
         tional area shall be distributed evenly along the ten percent slope but shall not intrude
         into the adjacent fifteen percent slope.
     (b) Zone II: Between 2,000 feet and 2,500 feet of the centerline of I-580, alterations are
         allowed in slope areas to fifteen percent, defined as the lowest lying fifteen percent
         slope at the base of the hill area. In addition, an area equal to seven and one-half
         percent of the overall Zone II area within the property to be developed can be altered
         above the fifteen percent slope. This additional area shall be distributed evenly along
         the fifteen percent slope but shall not intrude into the adjacent twenty percent slope.
                                                                                                                   4-39

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     (c) Zone III: Between 2,500 and 3,500 feet of the centerline of I-580, alterations are al-
         lowed in the slope areas to twenty percent defined as the lowest lying twenty percent
         slope at the base of the hill area. In addition, an area equal to seven and one-half per-
         cent of the overall Zone III area within the property to be developed can be altered
         above the twenty percent slope. This additional area shall be distributed evenly along
         the adjacent twenty percent slope but shall not intrude into a twenty-five percent
         slope.
     (d) Exceptions: The following exceptions apply to the area north of North Canyons
         Parkway, and bounded on the east by Independence Drive, and on the west by
         Doolan Road (as shown on Figure 4-1.1);
         i. In addition, an area equal to five percent of the overall Zone 1 area within the
               property to be developed can be altered above the 10-percent slope and may be
               calculated based on the entire site area and redistributed as indicated on Figure 4-
               1.1. Total area of additional alteration above the 10-percent slope is not to exceed
               3.1 acres, as shown on Figure 4-1.1.
         ii. In addition, two knoll areas (as identified on Figure 4-1.1) within the Zone 1 area
               of existing Parcel E may also be altered. Total area of additional alteration of
               knoll area on Parcel E is not to exceed 1.5 acres.
         iii. In order to ensure above provisions (i) and (ii) are implemented as approved, and
               that potential future purchasers of property affected by the above restrictions are
               made aware of the contour alteration exceptions and restrictions on the specific
               affected parcels within the subject site (parcels E, D, C of PM 7640, and B of PM
               7522): a) the implementing zoning district (PDI-00-181) shall be amended to re-
               flect the above contour alteration exceptions and restrictions as shown on Figure
               4.1.1 and to include a 100-foot building setback from the rear property line of ex-
               isting Parcel E; b) the current owner shall record a notice or deed restriction for
               the affected parcels which outlines the contour alteration exceptions and restric-
               tions governing the affected parcels, as shown on Figure 4-1.1. (Reso. 2004-178)
     (e) Exemptions: In Subarea 1, Subpart C, exemptions to limitations on slope alterations
         may be granted by the City Council for public works projects and facilities of public
4-40
                                                                                   C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
        necessity, which include the extension of Portola Avenue from Isabel Avenue to I-
        580, the Community College access road from Portola Avenue to the southern
        boundary of the College property, and a neighborhood park located northeast of the
        Portola Avenue/Isabel Avenue intersection. The City shall find that the necessary
        public facilities provide broader regional, community, or neighborhood benefits.
        Grading shall utilize slope contouring or other appropriate methods to avoid the use
        of terracing and/or retaining walls, to the extent feasible, which would result in unde-
        sirable geometric landforms. (Reso. 2005-013)
3. Grading
    (a) Grading shall be limited so as to preserve natural features where large stands of vege-
        tation, scenic natural formations, or natural watercourses exist.
    (b) Any contour altered by grading should be restored by means of land sculpturing in
        such a manner as to minimize run-off and erosion problems and should be planted
        with low-maintenance plant materials that are compatible with the existing environ-
        ment and the intent of the Scenic Route goals, objectives, policies, and actions.
    (c) Neither (a) nor (b) above shall preclude the restorations identified within Subparts 5A
        and 5B of Subarea 5.
4. I-580 Scenic Corridor Subareas
The I-580 Scenic Corridor is divided into six subareas, as shown in Figure 4-2. Policies and
development standards are identified for each subarea that reflect the unique visual resources
in each area. Development is not permitted if it is inconsistent with the North Livermore Urban Growth
Boundary Initiative (NLUGBI). The policies and development standards (such as identified
view angles) are intended to preserve views to ridgelines and hillsides as seen from I-580.
Development within each Subarea shall also be subject to the general Scenic Corridor design
standards contained in Objective CC-4.10 and related policies, except as otherwise expressly
provided.
                                                                                                               4-41
                          FIGURE 4 - 1.1
                            ( R e s o . 0 4 - 17 8 )
NORTH CANYONS PARKWAY EXCEPTIONS
                     LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                 FIGURE 4 - 2
SCENIC ROUTE SUBAREAS
      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
(Reso. 2005-178
               FIGURE 4 – 3A
                 ( R e s o . 0 5 - 1 7 8 )
SCENIC ROUTE SUBAREA 1
          LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN

                   figure 4-4
                   (Reso. 2005-178)
SUBAREA 1 VIEW CORRIDORS
      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Subarea 1- Development Requirements
   a. Subarea 1 is located on the north side of the I-580 freeway. The west boundary of
       Area 1 is approximately 200 feet west of Doolan Canyon Road; the east boundary is
       approximately one-mile west of North Livermore Avenue. Figure 4-3 establishes the
       boundary of Subarea 1.
   b. The following criteria shall be implemented through project specific conditions con-
       tained in all Planned Development and Site Plan Approvals for development within
       Subarea 1:
   (1) View Corridors
           View corridors shall be provided as listed below:
           (a) Doolan Canyon: Provide 200 +/- wide view corridor at approximately 90 de-
               grees from I-580. (Most of this corridor is presently outside City limits.) This
               corridor would require clear areas at approximately I-580 viewing elevation.
           (b) Triad: Provide a view corridor at approximately 60 degrees to west I-580
               lanes. Views are to the 15 percent grade average slope contour line at view
               corridor terminus. The view corridor shall be 115 +/- feet wide. The location
               of the view corridor, as identified on Figure 4-4, shall generally follow the
               right-of-way of Independence Drive.
           (c) Collier Canyon: Provide a 175 +/- foot wide view corridor to Collier Canyon
               generally at 90 degrees to I-580 and centered on Collier Canyon Road (Figure
               4-4). This corridor would require clear areas which maintain views above the
               600-foot contour line of the hills at the canyon mouth.
    (2) View Angles
           Development within Subarea 1 shall take place within the view angle envelopes
           created by using the view angles designated below. For the purposes of establish-
           ing these view angles, Subarea 1 has been divided into 4 subparts. These subparts
           reflect differing terrain, visual resources, subdivision configuration, freeway/view
           relationships, and regulatory histories within each part.
                                                                                                         4-47
                                                              Las Positas Collge
                                   City of Livermore Scenic Corridor (3,500 foot limit)
                                                                                                      City Limit Line
                                                                               APA Limit Line
                                                                                                1,000 ft
                                                                                                radius
Note: The location of the future Isabel interchange is approximate. Final
location and design to be determined through future engineering studies.
                                                                                                   FIGURE 4 - 5
                                      ISABEL INTERCHANGE 1000' RADIUS
                                                                       LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
    Figure 4-3 identifies the subparts of Subarea 1. Subpart A (commonly referred to
    as Triad-west) includes the westerly ¼ +/- of Subarea 1. Subpart B (commonly
    referred to as Triad-east) covers the next easterly approximate ¼ of Subarea 1 to
    Collier Canyon Road. Subpart C (commonly referred to as Shea Properties West)
    covers the western portion of the Shea Properties. Subpart D (commonly re-
    ferred to as Shea Properties East) covers the easterly portion of Subarea 1.
    Within each subpart, view angles are established as follows using the criteria out-
    lined in Section C.5 (I-580 Scenic Corridor Implementation):
     y Subpart A (Triad West) = 3.6 degrees
     y Subpart B (Triad East) = 3.2 degrees
     y Subpart C (Shea Properties West) = 2.45 degrees
     y Subpart D (Shea Properties East) = 3.65 degrees and 4.0 degrees as shown on
       Figure 4-3A. Building heights in this Subpart shall not otherwise exceed the
       495-foot elevation.
  These view angles shall be applied at any point at 90 degrees to I-580 except for
  Subpart D where the view angle shall be applied due north from the freeway. The
  view surface created by this application shall establish a proposed building's com-
  pliance with the height envelope maximum determined for preservation of ridge-
  line and hillside views in Subarea 1 of the I-580 Scenic Corridor. (Reso. 2005-178)
(3) View Angle Exceptions
    In addition to the exceptions outlined in Section C, Exceptions/Exemptions to I-
    580 Scenic Corridor Development Requirements, development may take place
    outside of the view angle envelope where it is located within a 1,000 foot radius of
    the future interchange of Isabel Avenue and I-580 as shown on Figure 4-5.
                                                                                                   4-49

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Subarea 2
     Subarea 2 is located on the north side of I-580 approximately 5,000 feet west and 6,500
     feet east of the North Livermore Avenue interchange. This area is located outside the
     North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary, except in the area of Las Colinas Road.
Subarea 3
     a. Subarea 3 is located on the north side of the I-580 freeway. The west boundary of
         Subarea 3 is approximately one-half mile west of the Springtown Boulevard inter-
         change; the east boundary is the I-580 Greenville Road on-ramp. Figure 4-6 estab-
         lishes the boundary of Subarea 3.
     b. Subarea 3 is further divided into four subparts. These subparts reflect different ter-
         rain, visual resources, freeway/view relationships, and degrees of existing develop-
         ment and view obstruction.
         Figure 4-6 also defines the four Subparts of Subarea 3. From east to west, these in-
         clude: Subpart A, between the Greenville Road on-ramp and Herman Avenue; Sub-
         part B, from Herman Avenue to Vasco Road; Subpart C from Vasco Road to Spring-
         town Boulevard; and Subpart D, from Springtown Boulevard to approximately one-
         half mile west of Springtown Boulevard.
     c. Subparts A and B.
         (1) For Subparts A and B, new development shall preserve the views of the distant
               hills. The views to be preserved are the upper one-third of the distant hillsides in
               Subpart A and the upper one-quarter of the distant hillsides in Subpart B.
         (2) The view angles corresponding to these view preservation goals are 1.58 degrees
               for Subpart A and 1.90 degrees for Subpart B. The view surfaces created by these
               view angles establishes the maximum building height elevation for development
               within Subparts A and B.
4-50
                 FIGURE 4 - 6
SCENIC ROUTE SUBAREA 3
      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     (3) Applications for development within Subparts A and B shall demonstrate that the
         heights of proposed structures are below the view surfaces created by the 1.58 degree
         angle for Subpart A and 1.90 degree angle for Subpart B.
     (4) The merger of existing lots is encouraged where the resulting larger lot provides addi-
         tional development options while avoiding or reducing the impacts to the identified
         view surfaces. Where development on the merged lots is proposed above the identi-
         fied view surfaces, the above findings are still required.
     d. Subpart C.
         For Subpart C, the majority of views of the distant hills have been obstructed by ex-
         isting development. Remaining views are minimal and do not require preservation.
         However, in areas where views are obstructed by the existing freeway noise barrier,
         new development shall not be visible above the noise barrier (when viewed at 90 de-
         grees, from a view point along the northerly edge of I-580 four feet above the pave-
         ment).
     e. Subpart D.
         The general landform should be protected and new development shall comply with
         all applicable general regulations contained in goals, objectives, policies and actions
         pertaining to Scenic Corridor Design Requirements under Goal CC-7. Section C.2(a)
         requirements, which limit the percentage of areas of 10-15 percent slope category
         which may be altered, shall not apply to public or private primary access roadways.
         The limitations on the alterations of natural ground contours shall still apply to all
         other development, including the locational criteria of visible development on the
         lowest lying ten percent slope at the base of the hill area. Development on other ar-
         eas of up to ten percent slopes shall not be visible from freeway. Visibility of the de-
         velopment shall be measured as shown on Figure 4-7.
4-52
                    FIGURE 4 - 7
      SUBAREA 3, SUBPART D
VISUAL ANALYSIS LOCATIONS
         LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                 FIGURE 4 - 8
SCENIC ROUTE SUBAREA 4
      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Subarea 4
Subarea 4 is located on the south side of I-580, from the west side of the First Street inter-
change to Greenville Road.
       a. The City recognizes that Subarea 4, as shown on Figure 4-8, contains visual re-
       sources in the form of the Altamont Pass to the east of the distant hills to the south.
       The existing development patterns, infrastructure investment and the development
       potential of the industrial and commercial land within Subarea 4, limit visibility to the
       hills. Therefore, it is not feasible to fully protect all remaining views of the hills in
       this area. For this reason, the built environment and visual appearance of new devel-
       opment within the sub-area is considered equally important to create and maintain an
       aesthetically appealing urban presence in the scenic corridor.
   b. The review of development applications within Subarea 4 shall be conducted to de-
       termine if proposed building locations and landscaping have been optimized to pre-
       serve visual resources where feasible. Because development along Southfront Road
       constitutes a significant portion of the visual resources in the area, special attention
       and consideration shall be given to the following:
       (1) Adjacent building facades and development massing shall be located at varying
            distances from I-580 in order to avoid or reduce the appearance of a uniform
            “wall” of development. Building locations which promote visual corridors and
            glimpses toward the hills, in particular the Altamont Hills for travel in the east-
            bound direction, are encouraged whenever feasible.
       (2) Parking lot layout and landscaping shall be designed to help promote views and
            enhance the corridor's visual character to the greatest extent feasible.
       (3) Building design and architectural treatment shall minimize a wall-like effect paral-
            lel to the freeway and enhance the visual character of the corridor.
       (4) Buildings shall be the visually predominant structures on parcel frontages along
            Southfront Road. Walls, fences and other screening associated with outdoor stor-
                                                                                                         4-55

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
               age areas or security shall be located a minimum of 15 feet back from the building
               facade facing the freeway.
Subarea 5
     a. Subarea 5 is located on the south side of the I-580 freeway. The western boundary of
         Subarea 5 is defined by a point along the I-580 freeway, roughly equidistant between
         North Livermore Avenue and the Portola Avenue overcrossing. The eastern bound-
         ary is defined by First Street. Figure 4-9 establishes the boundary of Subarea 5.
     b. Subarea 5 is further divided into three subparts. These subparts reflect natural divid-
         ing lines using roadways, parcel lines, visual resources, freeway/view relationships and
         areas of existing development and view obstruction. Figure 4-9 identifies the three
         subparts, 5A, 5B and 5C.
     c. Subarea 5 contains rolling hills in close proximity to the freeway. These hills are con-
         sidered individual visual resources, and are identified as Hills A through F in Figure
         4-11. The height and location of each hill provides the basis for establishing view an-
         gles within Subarea 5.
     d. Subpart 5A.
         For Subpart 5A, the following shall apply:
         (1) The landform between North Livermore Avenue and the Portola Avenue on/off
               ramp contains a ridgeline and visual features to protect. The ridgeline has two
               zones of primary protection and two zones of secondary protection. (See Figure
               4-10)
               One Primary Protection Zone shall be 550 feet in width measured approximately
               130 feet to the east and 420 feet to the west from the ridge peak (an elevation of
               492.6 feet). Because of previous grading that took place, up to 2 feet of soil shall
               be replaced within this zone and on this ridge for purposes of restoration of the
               natural landform. Such restoration shall be subject to obtaining an approved
               grading permit as part of a City approved development plan.
4-56
                                                                     C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
    The other Primary Protection Zone shall be located from North Livermore Ave-
    nue west approximately 430 feet measured along the ridge line. No restoration is
    permitted within this Primary Protection Zone.
    One Secondary Protection Zone shall be between the two Primary Protection
    Zones. Only 150 feet within this zone (as established by Figure 4-10) shall be
    permitted to be augmented. A berm up to a maximum of 9 feet may be located
    within the 150-foot area per Figure 4-10.
    The second Secondary Protection Zone shall begin at the western boundary of
    the Primary Protection Zone which includes the Area of Restoration. It shall
    continue west for approximately 200 feet. A berm up to a maximum of 7 feet at
    about 40 feet east of the Davidon property line may slope continuously down-
    ward at 0 feet grade at the west end of the Secondary Protection Zone. Landform
    augmentation of any kind is permitted only after the project has met the condi-
    tions as established in Section C.2 and 3 of this Chapter.
(2) Any augmentation and restoration in Subpart 5A shall be subject to a grading
    permit and shall be designed and graded to make the landform on all sides consis-
    tent in natural form such that it cannot be identified as an augmented landform.
(3) All structures south of the ridge, in the portion of Subpart 5A identified in Figure
    4-10, shall be subject to the following:
    (a) The residential units for the Davidon project site that are closest to the north-
        ern boundary shall be single-story or not exceed 20 feet in height except for
        Lot 78 (per Tract Map #6522) which can be two-story but not exceed 27 feet
        in height.
    (b) All remaining residential townhouse structures on the Davidon site shall not
        exceed 27 feet in height.
(c) Whether or not visible from the Scenic Corridor, all roof and building materials
    for residential and commercial developments shall be earth tones, non-reflective
    and blend with the land form and natural setting.
                                                                                                 4-57
                 FIGURE 4 - 9
SCENIC ROUTE SUBAREA 5
      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
              FIGURE 4 - 10
SUBAREA 5, SUBPART 5A
    LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
               (d) All commercial and residential structures on the Connolly project site shall not
                    penetrate the surface established by drawing a line from a point four feet
                    above the I-580 freeway surface and the highest point of the building (27 feet)
                    on the proposed commercial market per the City approved Site Plan or an ele-
                    vation of 496 feet.
               (e) For the Connolly project site only, a 25-foot wide landscape easement shall be
                    created contiguous with and south of the Rose Lawn Cemetery. This land-
                    scape easement shall extend from North Livermore Avenue along the full
                    length of the Rose Lawn Cemetery or approximately 670 feet in length. The
                    purpose of the landscape easement is to provide for protection and continued
                    maintenance of the landscaping within the easement on the property south of
                    the Rose Lawn Cemetery and for the planting of native California species
                    within this same easement for the express purpose of providing for a perma-
                    nent and perpetual foliage screen as viewed from the I-580 Scenic Corridor.
                    For the Davidon project site only, the area of restoration and augmentation
                    shall be revegetated consistent with the landscape plans approved under the
                    Housing Implementation Program (HIP).
         (4) Parcels between the Arroyo and the freeway are designated Open Space in this lo-
               cation, and therefore no additional policies or standards are required.
     f. Subpart 5B
         Subpart 5B is located between North Livermore Avenue and the Las Colinas over-
         crossing.
         (1) For Subpart 5B, new development shall preserve the views of rolling foreground
               hills. The views to be preserved are the upper one-half (50%) of the hill for Hills
               A through D, as measured from the 500-foot contour line to the top of the hill
               (Figure 4-11). For Hill E, views to be preserved are the upper one-quarter (25%)
               of the hill, as measured from the 500-foot contour line to the top of the hill.
4-60
                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
   (2) The view angles corresponding to these hills and view preservation goals for Sub-
        part 5B, as depicted in Figure 4-11, are as follows:
        (a) View angle for Hill A and Hill B     = 2.4 degrees
        (b) View angle for Hill C and Hill D     = 3.8 degrees
        (c) View angle for Hill E                = 5.9 degrees
   (3) The western portion of the ridgeline of Hill A, from North Livermore Avenue to
        approximately 700 feet east, was previously altered. Restoration of this portion of
        the ridgeline is permitted subject to the following criteria:
        (a) The restoration of the ridgeline does not exceed an additional five feet of ele-
             vation from any point along the existing ridgeline;
        (b) The restoration results in an exact recreation of the ridgeline shape as viewed
             from I-580; and;
        (c) The restoration is otherwise consistent with Scenic Route goals and policies.
g. Subpart 5C
   Subpart 5C is located between the Las Colinas overcrossing and First Street.
   (1) For Subpart 5C, new development shall preserve the views of rolling foreground
        hills. The views to be preserved are the upper one-quarter (25%) of each hill, as
        measured from the 510-foot contour line to the top of the hill.
   (2) The view angle corresponding to these hills and view preservation goals for Sub-
        part 5C, as depicted in Figure 4-11, is 5.9 degrees for Hill F and Hill G.
   (3) For the existing commercial development in Subpart 5C, any new structures, addi-
        tions or alternations shall not exceed existing building heights.
    (4) Subpart 5C contains an area east of the Las Colinas overpass that is “visually con-
        strained”, as identified in Figure 4-11. No new policies or standards apply to this
        area.
                                                                                                      4-61

                FIGURE 4 - 11
SUBAREA 5 VIEW ANGLES
     LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
Subarea 6
   a. Subarea 6 is located on the south side of the I-580 freeway. The western boundary of
        Subarea 6 is El Charro Road. The eastern boundary is located roughly equidistant be-
        tween the Portola Avenue overcrossing and North Livermore Avenue. Figures 4-12
        and 4-13 establish the boundaries for Subarea 6.
   b. Subarea 6 is divided into three subparts. These subparts reflect natural dividing lines
        using roadways, visual resources, freeway/view relationships and areas of existing de-
        velopment. Figure 4-12 identifies Subpart 6A, and Figure 4-13 identifies Subparts 6B
        and 6C. Subarea 6 contains views to distant hills and ridgelines low on the horizon.
   c. Subpart 6A extends from El Charro Road to the west to Airway Boulevard to the
        east. The western half consists of the El Charro Specific Plan Area. Las Positas Golf
        Course comprises the eastern half.
      A 2.2 degree view angle is established for this Subpart to preserve views of the ridge-
      lines. Subpart 6A is further separated into four divisions, two of which permit limited
      projections into the view angle subject to specific requirements as described below:
      (1) Division 6A-1, “Gateway Location”, extends to the east approximately 1700 feet
            from the centerline of El Charro Road and makes up about ¼ of Subpart 6A. All
            development within this Division must comply with all of the following require-
            ments:
           a. A 50 foot height limit for all structures;
           b. 90% of projections into the view plane shall be 13 feet or less;
           c. 10% of projections into the view plane may be 25 feet or less;
           d. Projections into view plane shall encompass an area of no more than 0.6% of
               the site area;
           e. Projections into view plane shall have a total of no more than 21% of the site
                frontage.”
                                                                                                        4-63

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
        (2) Division 6A-3, “Public/Quasi-Public Use,” extends to the east approximately
               1300 feet from the eastern boundary of Div. 6A-2 and makes up about 1/8 of
               Subpart 6A. If general development other than institutional development is pro-
               posed for this section, the established view angle is 2.2 degrees.
             If institutional development is proposed for this section, development must com-
             ply with all of the following requirements:
                a.    A 40 foot height limit for all structures;
                b.    100% of projections into the view plane shall be 15 feet or less;
                c.    Projections into view plane shall encompass an area of no more than 2.6%
                      of the site area;
                d.    Projections into view plane shall have a total of no more than 20% of the
                      site frontage.” (Reso. 2007-143)
     d. Subpart 6B extends from Airway Boulevard to approximately 400 feet west of Sutter
         Street. Existing industrial and commercial development is located between Airway
         Boulevard and Kitty Hawk Road. East of Kitty Hawk Road, the Bay Area Rapid
         Transit District (BART) owns approximately 50 acres and is proposed for a future
         BART station. The new Isabel Parkway interchange will be located in this area. Ex-
         isting agriculture lands are located south of East Airway Boulevard and west of Sutter
         Street.
         A 2.2 degree view angle is established for this Subpart to preserve views of the ridge-
         lines with the following exceptions:
         (1) The City-owned parcel located north of Kitty Hawk Road and east of Airway
               Boulevard shall be left undeveloped and the area landscaped.
         (2) The parcel located north of the Extended Stay is constrained by an existing PT&T
               easement that runs east/west through the middle of the parcel. Development
4-64

                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
       shall be located on the western half of the parcel and may include up to a two-
       story building not to exceed 40 feet in height.
   (3) Development of the Caltrans property located adjacent to the freeway on Kitty
       Hawk Road shall include a landscaped buffer of 25 feet along the freeway. Trees
       within this landscaped area shall be placed a minimum of 30 feet apart.
   (4) Future development on the BART property for the proposed station and inter-
       change is encouraged to maintain Arroyo Las Positas in its natural form with
       minimal alterations.
e. Subpart 6C extends from approximately 400 feet west of Sutter Street to approxi-
   mately midway between the overcrossing and North Livermore Avenue. Visual re-
   sources in this area impacted by existing development or by significantly lower free-
   way elevations compared to adjacent parcels. This area is almost fully developed with
   commercial and residential uses. Between the arroyo and the freeway, there is the po-
   tential for one single-family residence only. Building height for residences shall be a
   maximum of 25 feet above existing grade. Building heights for the commercial par-
   cels located on the north side of Portola Avenue opposite Murrieta Boulevard shall
   not exceed 30 feet to ensure preservation of views in this area.
   (1) The City-owned parcel located north of Kitty Hawk Road and east of Airway
       Boulevard shall be left undeveloped and the area landscaped.
   (2) The parcel located north of the Extended Stay is constrained by an existing PT&T
       easement that runs east/west through the middle of the parcel. Development
       shall be located on the western half of the parcel and may include up to a two-
       story building not to exceed 40 feet in height.
   (3) Development of the Caltrans property located adjacent to the freeway on Kitty
       Hawk Road shall include a landscaped buffer of 25 feet along the freeway. Trees
       within this landscaped area shall be placed a minimum of 30 feet apart.
   (4) Future development on the BART property for the proposed station and inter-
       change is encouraged to maintain Arroyo Las Positas in its natural form with
       minimal alterations.
                                                                                                     4-65
                  FIGURE 4 - 12
                  ( R e s o . 0 7 - 14 3 )
SCENIC ROUTE SUBPART 6A
           LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
                         FIGURE 4 - 13
SCENIC ROUTE SUBPARTS 6B AND 6C
               LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
     e. Subpart 6C extends from approximately 400 feet west of Sutter Street to approxi-
         mately midway between the overcrossing and North Livermore Avenue. Visual re-
         sources in this area impacted by existing development or by significantly lower free-
         way elevations compared to adjacent parcels. This area is almost fully developed with
         commercial and residential uses. Between the arroyo and the freeway, there is the po-
         tential for one single-family residence only. Building height for residences shall be a
         maximum of 25 feet above existing grade. Building heights for the commercial par-
         cels located on the north side of Portola Avenue opposite Murrieta Boulevard shall
         not exceed 30 feet to ensure preservation of views in this area.
5. Establishing View Angles
As applicable, each subpart in each Subarea (except Subarea 4) is assigned a view angle
which represents the plane by which building height limits are determined. The City has es-
tablished this view angle utilizing the following objectives and data:
     ♦   Land use policies for each subpart;
     ♦   The elevation of ridges and other visual resources within the subpart;
     ♦   The elevation of the freeway viewing area;
     ♦   Existing development patterns.
A view angle is established for each subpart utilizing view analysis which uses the following
general criteria:
     ♦ View points along the freeway (I-580) are selected at 500-1,000 foot intervals along
         the frontage of each subpart.
     ♦ View direction sight lines from these freeway view points are taken at 90 degrees to I-
         580 with other directions of view to supplement the 90 degrees as determined neces-
         sary.
     ♦ The view angle at each view point is established as a plane line to the ridge at an ele-
         vation point determined appropriate to maintain the view consistent with other su-
         barea objectives.
4-68

                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           C O M M U N I T Y  C H A R A C T E R E L E M E N T
   ♦    The plane is expressed in degrees commencing four feet above the freeway’s outside
        lane elevation as the base point. For sites located on the south side of I-580 the view
        angle is established from the outside eastbound travel lane. For sites located on the
        north side of I-580, the view angle is established from the outside westbound travel
        lane. The viewpoint, on both sides of the freeway, is the existing location as of July 1,
        2008. One or more initial view angles are developed per subpart. In the vicinity of
        the Airway Boulevard Interchange in Subarea 1, a “clothesline” elevation has been es-
        tablished which compensates for the change in elevation under the overpass. The
        clothesline elevation is located between the 404.16 foot elevation on the west side of
        the overpass and the 421.05 foot elevation on the east side of the overpass as illus-
        trated in Figure 4-14. Where several view points/angles are used for initial analysis, a
        single view angle is selected (as a weighted average) representing the most appropriate
        view protection objectives for the subarea. (Reso. 2007-143; Reso. 2008-233)
   ♦ This single view angle, expressed in degrees above horizontal slope, is used to estab-
        lish a sloped view surface covering the total subpart. This view angle is applied at
        multiple view points along I-580 to establish a view surface (said surface will vary de-
        pending upon the elevation of the view point). Where the ridgeline drops below this
        surface, the line is extended across the “gap” creating a “clothesline” connecting the
        ridge segments.
Establishing Maximum Building Heights Via View Angle “Envelopes”
   ♦ The view surface establishes the maximum height of development within various
        parts of the subpart. The height limit will vary between each subpart and within each
        subpart depending on the view surface, site topography, and geographic location, in
        relationship to I-580 and elevation of the existing grades. Generally, lands closer to I-
        580 will have more restrictive height limits. These view surfaces will establish an
        “envelope” of height limits that can be specifically determined and translated to pro-
        ject specific criteria within all Site Plan Approvals. Standards will be calculated and
        measured from existing grade of lands involved. Maximum building heights may be
        adjusted to account for differences between existing and finished grades. In no case,
        however, shall the building heights protrude into the identified view surface or exceed
        other normally required height limits.
                                                                                                         4-69

                                   FIGURE 4 - 14
TRIAD MINIMUM/MAXIMUM BUILDING CLEARANCES
                         LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
7 INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC SERVICES ELEMENT
  The Infrastructure Element provides information and policy guidance related to community infrastructure
  available in Livermore and its Planning Area.
  State law does not require a separate Element covering these topics, however it does require
  the Land Use Element to include “the proposed general distribution and general location
  and extent of the uses of the land for...solid and liquid waste disposal facilities...” and it re-
  quires the Circulation Element to include information on “the general location and extent of
  existing and proposed...public utilities and facilities.” These components are included in this
  Element, which covers the following topics:
     Water Facilities and Service
     Wastewater Collection and Treatment
     Storm water Collection
  In addition, this element covers the following public services:
     Public Utilities
     Police Services
     Urban Fire Protection
     Schools
     Solid Waste Collection
     Community Health Facilities
     Child Care
     Libraries
  Public services are provided by various government entities. In addition to the City itself,
  other agencies such as Alameda County, the Livermore Area Recreation and Park District
  and the Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District provide some of the public services
  discussed in this section. This section provides background information on the services pro-
  vided by both the City and the other agencies. Park and recreation facilities are discussed in
  the Open Space and Conservation Element.
                                                                                                      7-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
I.         WATER FACILITIES AND SERVICE
A. Background Information
City of Livermore Water Supply Sources
Potable water and raw water for agricultural irrigation is provided to the City of Livermore
from a variety of sources. Zone 7 Water Agency (Zone 7) is the water wholesaler. Califor-
nia Water Service Company (Cal Water) and Livermore Municipal Water provide retail ser-
vice, and the City and County of San Francisco’s Hetch Hetchy water supply system pro-
vides water directly to Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Sandia National Labo-
ratory. Cal Water supplies the Downtown area and southern portion of the City, while Liv-
ermore Municipal Water serves the northwest, northeast, and eastern portions of the City.
These water sources are briefly described below.
Zone 7 Water Agency
Zone 7 of the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District supplies
treated water to retail water agencies, such as the City of Livermore, Pleasanton, Cal Water
and the Dublin San Ramon Services District, for municipal and industrial use. Zone 7 also
supplies untreated, or non-potable, water to non-municipal users such as agricultural opera-
tors.
Approximately 70 percent of Zone 7’s water supply comes from the State Water Project, a
statewide system of reservoirs, canals, pipelines, and pump stations that transport surface
water drawn from rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, such as the Del Valle Reservoir. In the Liv-
ermore area, this system is comprised primarily of the South Bay Aqueduct. The balance of
the Zone 7 service area supply is from local runoff conserved in Lake Del Valle, local
groundwater, and supplemental surface water sources, such as the Byron Bethany Irrigation
District (BBID). Zone 7 also has additional water storage capacity in the Semitropic Water
Storage District (Semitropic) in Kern County for storage of surplus water for later use. Dur-
ing dry years, Zone 7 can receive water from Semitropic by way of entitlement exchanges
with Southern California State Water Project contractors, such as the Metropolitan Water
District of Southern California.
7-2

                                                                                 C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                       I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Zone 7 currently has a long-term average sustainable water supply of 84,100 acre-feet/year.
In Livermore, the long-term water demand is estimated to be approximately 22,000 acre-
feet. Zone 7 projects that it can supply sufficient water supplies to meet the City’s future
treated water needs, assuming that it continues to receive its contractual allocation from its
supply sources.
Zone 7 also supplies untreated water to agricultural users and privately-owned golf courses
in Livermore. The current demand for untreated water is approximately 7,500 acre-feet per
year. The City of Livermore anticipates the potential for a large increase in agricultural pro-
duction in the South Livermore Valley, and possibly the North Livermore Valley, over the
next 20 years. Zone 7 meets untreated water demand through deliveries from the South Bay
Aqueduct, which is part of the State Water Project and expects to meet its anticipated future
raw water conveyance needs for future untreated water demands.
California Water Service Company
Cal Water provides water to an area that generally includes the older Downtown area of the
City of Livermore. The Cal Water service area is south of I-580, east of Kitty Hawk Road
(Isabel Avenue) and west of First Street to Trevarno Road, Barber Street to Colgate Way,
Jackson Avenue to East Avenue, North Mines to Tesla Road and Wente Road.
Water supplied by Cal Water to the Downtown area of Livermore comes from the Zone 7
Water Agency and from wells they own and operate. Currently, the average water supply to
the Cal Water service area is 12 million gallons per day (MGD). Cal Water also has 12.09
MGD of storage available in several locations around their Livermore service area. The sys-
tem is divided into 5 pressure zones.
Cal Water fire flows are lower than the fire flows provided by the Livermore Municipal Wa-
ter Division, which meet the requirements of the Livermore Pleasanton Fire District. The
water system may require improvements to meet those standards for redevelopment, par-
ticularly in the Downtown area.
                                                                                                                7-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
City and County of San Francisco Hetch Hetchy Water Supply System
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Sandia Laboratory are served directly
from the City and County of San Francisco’s Hetch Hetchy water supply system. It is an-
ticipated that the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the Sandia Laboratory will
continue to be served directly from the Hetch Hetchy supply system.
Livermore Municipal Water Storage and Distribution System
Livermore Municipal Water is the water retailer in the northwest, northeast, and east por-
tions of the City. The City receives its water from Zone 7 through seven permanent turn-
outs. The turn-outs are located off Zone 7’s Cross Valley Pipeline, which traverses the City
from east to west. Livermore Municipal Water stores water in reservoirs, which are grouped
into three main pressure zones. The City’s water distribution system along with Cal Water’s
service area is shown in Figure 7-1.
In order to meet its short term storage needs, the City is planning two new reservoirs (one
3 million gallon (MG) reservoir for Zone 1 and one 5 MG reservoir for Zone 3), which are
expected to be constructed by the end of 2004. These new reservoirs are expected to en-
hance the City’s current system reliability. In order to meet the City’s projected future stor-
age needs, additional water storage reservoirs will be needed. The exact sizes of these reser-
voirs and the timing of their construction will be dependent on water usage patterns and fu-
ture development and General Plan build out projections.
The City’s transmission and distribution pipelines, in 2002, included 113 miles of pipeline,
which vary in diameter from 6 to 22 inches. The water distribution system delivers water at
sufficient volumes and pressures to service residential, commercial and industrial users. Ad-
ditional water mains will need to be constructed in order to meet the City’s projected water
use.
7-4

                                             CITY SERVICE
                                                 AREA
                                                ZONE 2
         CITY SERVICE AREA
               ZONE 1
                                                   CITY SERVICE
                                                       AREA
                                                      ZONE 3
                           CALIFORNIA WATER
                             SERVICE AREA
N O RT H
                                                                 FIGURE 7 - 1
                                            WATER SERVICE DISTRICTS
                                                      LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-1            Provide sufficient water supplies and facilities to serve the City in the
                      most efficient and financially sound manner, while maintaining the
                      highest standards required to enhance the quality of life for existing and
                      future residents.
Objective INF-1.1             Plan, manage and develop the public water treatment, storage
and distribution systems in a logical, timely and appropriate manner.
      Policies
      P1.        Potable water shall be available to the City’s residents and businesses.
      P2.        The City shall maintain a water system capable of sustaining required fire flows at
                 all times. The City shall work with California Water Service Company to insure
                 its system also meets required fire flows.
      P3.        Support the development of additional sources of irrigation water for vineyards
                 and other cultivated agriculture by investigating recycled water and development
                 of other supply and delivery resources.
      P4.        The City shall work with Zone 7 to consider developing a pump monitoring and
                 cost allocation system to cover the cost of new potable water in the event that ad-
                 ditional supplies are needed.
      P5.        Development will not result in a reduction of water quality below those standards
                 set forth in State and federal laws and regulations.
      Actions
      A1.        Review and update as necessary ordinances, policy procedures and/or fee pro-
                 grams establishing the requirement and mechanisms for collecting financial con-
                 tributions from new development.
7-6

                                                                           C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                 I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
A2. Update the master plan prepared for water as necessary for the areas supplied by
    the City to identify appropriate storage, pumping and distribution systems to sup-
    port the current and proposed land use development projections in the General
    Plan.
A3. Identify and budget for additional operation costs to support the expanded water
    storage, pumping and distribution system.
A4. Implement the capital improvement project recommendations contained in the
    updates to the master plan prepared for water.
A5. Work with Cal Water to improve their existing infrastructure to meet City and fire
    flow, pressure and storage standards.
A6. Prepare a multi-year schedule in the Capital Improvement Program of water in-
    frastructure improvements.
A7. Criteria to be used for the design of the potable water system shall be in the
    master plan prepared for water, including maximum day water demand, peak
    hour/maximum day water demand, fire flow requirements, water storage re-
    quirements, and adequate water pressure.
A8. All new development projects shall be responsible for constructing an adequate
    potable water distribution system and paying water connection fees to construct
    additional necessary storage, pumping and distribution facilities.
                                                                                                          7-7
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Objective INF-1.2             Require coordination between land use planning and water facili-
ties and service to ensure that adequate water supplies are available for proposed de-
velopment.
      Policies
      P1.        The potable water distribution and storage system shall be sized to serve devel-
                 opment anticipated under the General Plan and shall not provide for additional
                 growth and development beyond that anticipated under the General Plan.
      P2.        The approval of new development shall be conditioned on the availability of suf-
                 ficient water supply, storage and pressure requirements from the City, California
                 Water Service Company and Zone 7 for the project as applicable.
      P3.        Structures with plumbing that are located within City limits shall connect to the
                 water system, unless distance from public water system or other factors indicate a
                 need for an exemption.
      P4.        Extensions of water service beyond the City-approved service area shall be pro-
                 hibited. Exceptions shall be made for unusual public health and safety hazards, as
                 determined by the City Council.
      P5.        Water storage and distribution system extensions beyond the approved service
                 area shall be prohibited unless such water services are needed to serve properties
                 within the City’s Urban Growth Boundary (UGB).
      P6.        A water storage tank site study shall be conducted to identify the location of pro-
                 posed water storage tanks. The location selection and construction of these stor-
                 age tanks should seek to minimize the visual and environmental impacts that such
                 facilities could have to the surrounding areas.
      P7.        Major utility lines, such as water supply mains and fire protection mains, shall be
                 carefully planned where they cross a seismic fault. They shall cross at right angles,
                 or nearly so, be accessible for rapid repair, and be provided with safety features
                 such as automatic shutoff valves, switches and expansion joints. Other equip-
7-8

                                                                                 C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                       I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
          ment shall be provided to ensure minimal adverse impact on adjacent and sur-
          rounding areas and to facilitate restoration of service in the event of fault dis-
          placement.
   P8.    The design of water distribution systems shall seek to minimize crossings of wet-
          lands or creeks. Water lines that cross existing creeks should be located at road
          crossings and use sewer bridges to span the creek at crossings, where possible, or
          go under creeks.
   P9.    Installation of the water distribution system should occur concurrently with con-
          struction of new roadways to maximize efficiency and minimize disturbance due
          to construction activity.
   P10.   Rural development using individual wells shall be responsible for conforming to
          applicable health standards and for obtaining the necessary permits from the State
          of California Department of Health Services, Alameda County, and Zone 7.
Objective INF-1.3     Identify potential water conservation and recycling opportunities
that could be served by the City’s existing recycled water system.
   Policies
   P1.    Voluntary reductions by existing users in per capita water use shall be encouraged.
   P2.    Projects deemed appropriate for the use of recycled water shall be required to use
          recycled water, when available, for uses outlined in the State Water Code.
   P3.    The City shall adopt a series of Best Management Practices for water conservation
          measures that will be mandatory in new development and strongly encouraged in
          existing developments.
   P4.    Require compliance with the State and City’s mandatory water efficient landscape
          ordinance.
                                                                                                                7-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      Actions
      A1.        Develop and provide incentives for existing and future customers to reduce water
                 consumption.
      A2.        Develop and institute a City-sponsored program of mandatory water conservation
                 measures for new development. Develop a program for existing developments
                 that is based on a voluntary participation with incentives to achieve specific tar-
                 gets for water conservation. Examples include:
                 (a)    Ultra-low flush toilets
                 (b) Plumbing retrofits
                 (c)    Leak detection
                 (d) Efficiency standards for water-using appliances and irrigation devices, and
                        industrial and commercial processes
                 (e)    Gray water use
                 (f)    Swimming pool and spa conservation measures such as covers to reduce
                        evaporation
                 (g)    Xeriscape landscape design standards
      A3.        Require all new industrial, commercial and office development within pressure
                 Zone 1 to use reclaimed water for landscape irrigation, where available.
7-10
                                                                                  C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                        I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
II.      WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT
The following discussion provides information on the wastewater collection, treatment, and
disposal system in Livermore.
A. Background Information
Within the City of Livermore, sewer service is provided by the City of Livermore’s Public
Services Department. With the exception of two pump stations, all of the wastewater flow
in Livermore is conveyed to the wastewater treatment plant by gravity. The City’s wastewa-
ter treatment plant treats raw sewage to meet regional standards. The majority of treated wa-
ter is then conveyed to an export system which transports the treated effluent to a discharge
point in the San Francisco Bay. A portion of the treated wastewater is used as reclaimed wa-
ter. A brief discussion of Livermore’s wastewater facility is outlined below:
Wastewater Collection
The City of Livermore owns, operates and maintains a wastewater collection system. As of
May 2003, there were over 250 miles of existing sewer lines within the City ranging in size
from six to forty-eight inches in diameter.
In order to determine appropriate collection system sizing, a new Sewer Master Plan will be
prepared. The amount of wastewater generated by various land uses within the City of Liv-
ermore was estimated by using the flow coefficients identified in the City’s 1995 Facilities
Planning Guidelines. Based on projected wastewater flow for the General Plan build out,
there will be a need for extensive improvements to the existing collection system.
Wastewater Treatment
The Water Resources Division of the City’s Public Services Department operates the City of
Livermore’s Water Reclamation Plant. The Water Reclamation Plant’s 2003 capacity is 8.5
MGD (average dry weather flow).
                                                                                                                7-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
The 2001 Livermore Water Reclamation Plant Master Plan identifies a shortfall of capacity
to treat and dispose of sewage flows beyond the current average dry weather flow of 8.5
MGD. New facilities at the Water Reclamation Plant would be needed to handle projected
ultimate flows. The City has planned a Phase VI expansion project to address this need and
has a sanitary sewer impact fee program in place to fund the required improvements. Com-
pletion of the Phase VI project would provide sufficient capacity for the plant to process the
projected ultimate flows.
The 2003 average dry weather daily inflow to the treatment plant is approximately 6.5 MGD
and peak wet weather flows regularly approaches 8.0 MGD. Development already approved
by the City is estimated to generate an additional dry weather inflow of up to 0.6 MGD. It
is estimated that at build-out of the General Plan, sewage flows are estimated to reach 10.0
MGD of average dry weather flow and approximately 12.26 MGD of wet weather flow.
Wastewater Disposal
Wastewater treated at the Livermore Water Reclamation Plant is conveyed to the Livermore
Amador Valley Water Management Agency (LAVWMA) export pipeline via a gravity-flow
pipeline (known as the Livermore sole-use interceptor) that conveys the effluent to a
LAVWMA metering structure. The rated capacity of the Livermore gravity interceptor is 9.2
MGD for both dry weather and wet weather flows. At the metering structure, effluent from
the Livermore Water Reclamation Plant combines with wastewater treatment plant effluent
from the Dublin San Ramon Service District and the City of Pleasanton. The combined ef-
fluent then flows through two flow equalization basins, receives additional chlorination, and
is pumped through the LAVWMA export pipeline to the East Bay Dischargers Authority,
which is responsible for dechlorination and final flow discharge into the San Francisco Bay.
The 2002 peak wet weather flow capacity of the existing LAVWMA export pipeline was 21
MGD. The City shares this overall capacity with Dublin San Ramon Service District and the
City of Pleasanton. Livermore’s portion of the existing LAVWMA pipeline capacity is 8.73
MGD during peak wet weather flow conditions.
7-12

                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
LAVWMA Export Pipeline Facilities Improvement Project
LAVWMA has initiated a project to increase its wastewater disposal capacity by expanding
wastewater export facilities. This project began construction in May 2001 and is expected to
be completed in 2004. This project was taken to the voters of the cities of Pleasanton and
Livermore in November of 1998. Neither Pleasanton nor Livermore has any responsibility
to participate in the expansion portion of the project unless their respective voters approve
their participation, although both cities will participate in the rehabilitation of the existing
pipeline. The City of Pleasanton did vote to participate in the project, but the ballot measure
in Livermore (Measure Q) failed.
Completion of the project will expand LAVWMA’s average dry weather flow disposal capac-
ity from 21 MGD to 41.2 MGD through a combination of replacement pipelines, parallel
pipelines, rehabilitation of the existing export pipeline, and construction of new pumping
stations. The LAVWMA Joint Powers Agreement limits the City to a maximum LAVWMA
allocation of an average daily flow of 11.1 MGD, but this capacity can only be reached if the
discharge line is upgraded and the City’s treatment plant is expanded.
One option to increase effluent disposal capacity is to reconsider participation in the
LAVWMA expansion project. This option, which is open through November 2005, would
increase Livermore’s capacity to a peak wet weather flow of 12.4 MGD and would be capa-
ble of accommodating projected build-out flows under the General Plan.
Water Reclamation
Water reclamation, or recycling, is a potential alternative means for providing additional ef-
fluent disposal capacity at the Livermore Water Reclamation Plant (WRP). The City cur-
rently maintains approximately 10 miles of reclaimed water pipe lines. Water recycling could
be used as an alternative to participation in the LAVWMA expansion project. However, sig-
nificant modifications to the existing system would be needed to provide reliable year-round
additional disposal capacity. Additional recycled water receiving sites must be identified to
provide sufficient disposal capacity. Also, additional storage, pumping and transmission
main facilities must be provided to store and distribute recycled water over the year to match
demand, as the majority of recycled water demands would occur during the irrigation season
between May and October.
                                                                                                                 7-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
The difficulty in using recycled water involves the timing of (1) wastewater flow and (2) irri-
gation demand in Livermore. In order for Livermore to increase the use of recycled water,
the City would need to expand its long-term (seasonal) and short-term (daily) storage capac-
ity and integrate it into its overall water recycling system. Seasonal storage is required when
there is no other alternative disposal option available during the winter months. Short term
or daily storage is required because most recycled water is used during the night for irriga-
tion, although the majority of wastewater is produced during the day.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-2            Collect, treat and dispose of wastewater in ways that are safe, sanitary,
                      environmentally acceptable and financially sound while maintaining the
                      highest standards required to enhance the quality of life for existing and
                      future residents.
Objective INF-2.1             Plan, manage and develop wastewater collection, treatment and
disposal systems in a logical, timely and appropriate manner.
      Policies
      P1.        Municipal sewer treatment shall be available to the City’s residents and businesses.
      P2.        Septic tanks shall be allowed only in agricultural zones if approved by Zone 7 and
                 the Alameda County Health Department.
      P3.        The approval of new development shall be conditioned on the availability of ade-
                 quate long-term capacity of wastewater treatment, conveyance and disposal suffi-
                 cient to service the proposed development.
      P4.        The City shall implement a wastewater disposal master plan designed to provide
                 for the disposal of peak wet weather flows anticipated under buildout of the Gen-
                 eral Plan. No new development entitlements shall be granted once the Average
7-14

                                                                           C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                 I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
    Dry Weather Flow reaches 7.0 million gallons per day at the Water Reclamation
    Plant until a master plan for sewer has been adopted that addresses the capacity
    shortfall, including a schedule for implementation. This master plan may include
    any, or a combination of the following components:
    (a)   Increased water reclamation, storage and disposal via agriculture irrigation
          and/or other uses.
    (b) Increased water reclamation, storage within an approved Zone 7 facility such
          as the Chain of Lakes, and disposal via irrigation within Livermore and the
          surrounding vicinity.
    (c)   The purchase of additional capacity in the LAVWMA export pipeline. This
          option must be approved by the voters of Livermore through a subsequent
          ballot measure.
    (d) Other options as may be developed that are more cost effective and/or en-
          vironmentally superior.
P5. All new development shall demonstrate to the City that the downstream sanitary
    sewer system is adequately sized and has sufficient capacity to accommodate an-
    ticipated sewage flows. If the downstream mains are found to be inadequate, the
    developer shall provide additional facilities to accept the additional sewage ex-
    pected to be generated by the development.
P6. Structures with plumbing that are located within City limits shall connect to the
    public wastewater collection system, unless topography, or distance from the pub-
    lic sewer system indicate a need for an exemption.
P7. Major sewer collection and transmission systems shall be carefully planned where
    they cross a seismic fault. They shall cross at right angles, or nearly so, be acces-
    sible for rapid repair, and be provided with safety features such as automatic
    switches, expansion joints and sufficient drop between manholes to accommodate
    vertical displacement across faults. Other equipment shall be provided to ensure
                                                                                                         7-15
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
                 minimal adverse impact on adjacent and surrounding areas and to facilitate resto-
                 ration of service in the event of fault displacement.
      P8.        Sewer collection and transmission systems shall be designed and constructed in
                 such a manner as to minimize potential inflow and infiltration.
      P9.        The criteria used to design the sanitary sewer system shall be in the master plan
                 prepared for sewer as well as the guidelines for facilities planning, including reli-
                 ance on gravity drainage to minimize pumping to the extent feasible and basing
                 pipe size on the wet weather flow required per the master plan prepared for
                 sewer.
      P10.       All new development projects shall be responsible for construction of a sanitary
                 sewer collection and conveyance system as part of the Citywide infrastructure
                 plan. This system shall be designed to serve developments within the approved
                 General Plan only and shall not be extended to serve uses outside of the Urban
                 Area.
      P11.       The sanitary sewer system shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as
                 to minimize potential environmental impacts.
      P12.       The City of Livermore shall pursue the implementation of Water Reclamation
                 Plant capacity improvements necessary to accommodate the peak hour wet
                 weather flows anticipated under buildout of the General Plan.
      Actions
      A1.        Prepare a master plan for sewer and update as needed, to identify current defi-
                 ciencies and quantify needs based on development patterns established in the
                 General Plan. Identify necessary improvements and establish priorities for these
                 improvements. Issues should include:
                 (a) Identify the most reliable and cost effective disposal options.
                 (b) Comprehensive analysis of the overall collection system.
                 (c) Evaluation of feasibility of alternative rehabilitation techniques.
7-16
                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
    (d) Infiltration and inflow (I/I) analysis and effective ways to minimize I/I.
    (e) Water conservation measures.
A2. Improvements that increase the capacity of the City’s Water Reclamation Plant
    shall undergo environmental analysis pursuant to the California Environmental
    Quality Act, and shall, at a minimum, consider heights limits in proximity to the
    Municipal Airport, effects on the underlying water aquifer, effects on special
    status wildlife habitat, and effects of secondarily treated effluent on the San Fran-
    cisco Bay and Arroyo Las Positas.
A3. In areas of high water table, construction materials and techniques shall be used
    so as to minimize potential inflow and infiltration. Such techniques may include
    use of water pipelines that have joint designs capable of withstanding higher pres-
    sure than standard sewer pipes, using plastic pipe with welded joints, or other pipe
    types approved by the City.
A4. Enforce the City code requiring all properties with plumbing, located within 200
    feet of wastewater sewer, to connect to the public sewer system.
A5. Sewer mains proposed to be constructed parallel to and within creek corridors
    shall be located within a dedicated easement along the outer boundary of the cor-
    ridor to avoid impacting creek habitat.
A6. Design of the sewer collection system shall seek to minimize crossings of wet-
    lands or creeks. Sewer mains that cross existing or proposed creeks should be lo-
    cated at road crossing, use sewer bridges to span the creek at crossing where pos-
    sible (depending on depth of grade), or go under the creek.
A7. Installation of the sanitary sewer system should occur concurrent with construc-
    tion of new roadways to maximize efficiency and minimize disturbance due to
    construction activity.
A8. Sections of impermeable backfill (“trench dams”) should be constructed across
    sewer trenches at the boundaries of preferential flow paths to prevent groundwa-
                                                                                                          7-17

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
                 ter flows within the preferential flow paths from being diverted along the align-
                 ment of the sewer path.
      A9.        The City shall utilize sanitary sewer connection fees collected from new develop-
                 ment and elsewhere within the City to construct necessary improvements to the
                 City’s trunk sewer mains (as identified in the latest master plan prepared for sew-
                 er) in order to accommodate anticipated cumulative development.
Objective INF-2.2             Enforce City wastewater regulations
      Policies
      P1.        Restaurants and others that discharge grease into the wastewater treatment system
                 shall be required to reduce impacts through individual or collective pretreatment
                 facilities that retain wastewater long enough to permit solids to settle and oil and
                 grease to separate.
      P2.        Regulations related to the discharge of mud and silt into the wastewater treatment
                 system shall be enforced.
      Actions
      A1.        Enforce current requirements for industrial and commercial users to install pre-
                 treatment facilities to reduce the loading of toxic and conventional pollutants to
                 the Livermore Water Reclamation Plant.
      A2.        Conduct outreach and education to industrial and commercial users to implement
                 pollution prevention techniques to reduce pollutant loading as much as possible.
7-18

                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
III.    STORM WATER COLLECTION
A. Background Information
Creeks and Arroyos
The existing storm drainage system consists mostly of underground pipes and local creeks.
These facilities carry runoff water within the drainage basin to nearby flood control channels
and arroyos.
The Livermore Valley drains in a westerly direction to the Arroyo de la Laguna, then to
Alameda Creek, near Sunol. The Alameda Creek basin drains an area primarily east of the
Coast Range to San Francisco Bay through Niles Canyon. The Livermore Valley watershed
has four major drainage watersheds, each drained by a major channel: Arroyo del Valle, Ar-
royo Mocho, Arroyo Las Positas and Altamont Creek.
The Zone 7 Water Agency is responsible for flood control and/or stream management of
some portions of Arroyo Las Positas, relocated Arroyo Las Positas, Altamont Creek, a por-
tion of Arroyo Mocho, Arroyo Seco, and Collier Canyon Creek, within the City of Liver-
more.
There are areas where flood control improvements are required, specifically along four sec-
tions of Arroyo Las Positas and one section of Arroyo Mocho. The sections along Arroyo
Las Positas include Altamont Creek to Heather Lane, Kitty Hawk Road to Airway Boule-
vard, I-580 to Kitty Hawk Road, and east of Airway Boulevard to El Charro Road. The sec-
tion along Arroyo Mocho is between Concannon Boulevard and Stanley Boulevard. Rec-
ommended management measures for these sections were identified in the Arroyo Mocho
and Arroyo Las Positas Management Plan completed for the City in December 2000 by Phil-
lip Williams and Associates. Planned flood control improvements are expected to address
flooding concerns though stabilization measures and controlled sediment transport and
deposition. Implementation of the improvements recommended for Arroyo Las Positas
would alleviate recurring flooding at the Las Positas Golf Course. Improvements to the
                                                                                                                 7-19
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Altamont Creek, east of Laughlin Road and north of I-580 are anticipated as development
occurs in this area.
Storm Drain Collection System
The City of Livermore’s storm drain system, shown in Figure 7-2, consists of more than 200
miles of pipeline, ranging in size from 8 to 66 inches in diameter. Most of the drainage
reaches are relatively short due to the proximity of many major channels. A few new deten-
tion basins, constructed with the development of new subdivisions within Livermore, were
established to maintain runoff levels to predevelopment levels and mitigate impacts to sensi-
tive species.
The City’s 1995 Storm Drainage Master Plan identified a large number of capacity-related
deficiencies in the existing storm drainage system. However, many of the deficiencies were
attributable to the adoption of more demanding design criteria since the time the storm
drains were originally built. In most cases, the system handles typical rainfall events well. A
new Storm Drainage Master Plan will be prepared to identify future system improvement
requirements.
7-20

             FIGURE 7 - 2
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
  LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Storm Water Pollution Control
The City of Livermore protects the surface water from pollution by ensuring that storm wa-
ter discharges comply with San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board
(RWQCB) permit requirements, establishing non-point source pollution control measures as
required by federal and State law. Storm water pollution prevention measures for new de-
velopment projects, such as swales, retention ponds, erosion, and sedimentation control, are
incorporated in the planning, design, construction, and operation of projects with the poten-
tial to create pollutants in storm water runoff.
In Alameda County, a countywide storm water program has been established to provide
guidance to cities with respect to establishing programs to implement the Clean Water Act
requirements. The main goal of the program is to reduce the amount of pollution in storm
water runoff. New development planning guidelines are intended to design mechanisms
which prevent pollutants such as soil, petroleum products, pesticides, litter and construction
materials, for example, from entering the storm drain system. In the future, the City of Liv-
ermore will have to abide by stricter requirements for stormwater runoff created by new and
redevelopment projects. New, more stringent requirements were incorporated into the
City’s permit from the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). As of mid-
February 2003, the new requirements were imposed on commercial, industrial and residential
developments that create one acre or more of new impervious surfaces. This includes new
roadway projects and redevelopment projects which create one acre or more of impervious
surface. After 2006, the size threshold triggering the need for storm water treatment con-
trols will decrease to 10,000 square feet of impervious surface. The fiscal impact of these
new requirements will be significant in areas where land is unavailable to provide on-site
stormwater treatment.
7-22

                                                                                  C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                        I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-3    Collect, store and dispose of stormwater in ways that are safe, sanitary,
              environmentally acceptable and financially sound while maintaining the
              highest standards required to enhance the quality of life for existing and
              future residents.
Objective INF-3.1     Plan, manage and develop the City’s stormwater collection sys-
tem in a logical, timely and appropriate manner.
   Policies
   P1.    Design local storm drainage improvements to carry appropriate design-year flows
          resulting from build out of the General Plan.
   Actions
   A1.    Complete a new master plan for storm drainage facilities and update as needed, in
          order to accurately evaluate the storm drainage flows and determine appropriate
          facility improvements consistent with the General Plan.
   A2.    Prioritize storm drainage improvements recommended in the storm drainage mas-
          ter plan and implement the projects through the City’s Capital Improvement Pro-
          gram.
Objective INF-3.2     Encourage coordination between land use planning, site design
and stormwater pollution control.
   Policies
   P1.    All new development projects shall be responsible for constructing a stormwater
          collection system and contributing stormwater collection fees to construct addi-
          tional necessary facilities. These fees include the City storm drain fees as well as
          Zone 7 regional storm drainage fees.
                                                                                                                7-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      P2.        Criteria used to design the stormwater system shall be in the master plan prepared
                 for storm drainage.
      P3.        The City shall take all necessary measures to regulate runoff from urban uses to
                 protect the quality of surface and ground-waters and other resources from detri-
                 mental conditions.
      P4.        Installation of stormwater collection systems should occur concurrently with con-
                 struction of new roadways to maximize efficiency.
      Actions
      A1.        Revise the Subdivision Ordinance and other Municipal Code sections to reduce
                 the creation of impermeable surfaces in new development. Examples of strategies
                 to reach this goal might include:
                 (a) Requiring the use of vegetative swales (biofilters).
                 (b) Requiring detention/infiltration basins.
      A2.        Existing property owners shall be encouraged, or required as appropriate, to re-
                 duce stormwater runoff by reducing impermeable surfaces.
Objective INF-3.3             Maintain creeks and arroyos in as natural a state as possible,
while maintaining the health and safety of residents, providing flood control, preserv-
ing habitat and providing recreational use.
      Policies
      P1.        Stream modifications should only be allowed for development in order to better
                 contain flood flows, re-route stormwater to restore creek conveyance capacity and
                 enhance groundwater recharge, stabilize creek beds and banks and control ero-
                 sion, remove sediment and debris, provide public access for maintenance and
                 emergency vehicles, provide for trails and recreational facilities, restore creek
                 natural habitat and wetlands areas and provide for water filtration.
7-24
                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
P2.   Any stream modifications and flood control structure improvements shall be
      done in accordance with appropriate engineering design, resource agency approv-
      als, and current environmental restoration best management practices.
P3.   Recreational opportunities adjacent to the arroyos and creeks shall be incorpo-
      rated where possible. Primarily bikeways and trails shall be located adjacent to the
      arroyo and creek corridors as outlined in a master plan prepared for bikeways and
      trails.
P4.   Arroyos shall not be channelized (i.e. converted to a trapezoidal form) or concrete
      lined. Modifications should only be allowed for public safety reasons. Flood con-
      trol improvements such as capacity enhancement shall be done in accordance
      with appropriate engineering design and current environmental best practices.
P5.   New development shall be required to incorporate appropriate measures to mini-
      mize the impacts of stormwater runoff to local creeks and channels.
Actions
A1.   Educational opportunities regarding habitat and natural resources on local creeks
      and arroyos may be provided, as appropriate.
A2.   The City will work cooperatively with the parks districts, various County and pri-
      vate groups and organizations as appropriate to determine the site specific design
      criteria and conditions of acceptance as well as the long-term ownership and
      maintenance responsibilities. Expertise, long-term maintenance capability, accept-
      ability of the improvements, type of facility, use, primary purpose of facility are
      among the factors that shall be used to evaluate agency, group or organization re-
      sponsibility.
A3.   The City shall continue to cooperate with Zone 7 to improve and maintain the
      flood control system.
                                                                                                          7-25
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      A4.        The City shall work with other agencies to determine the appropriate ownership
                 and long-term maintenance responsibilities for each creek and arroyo property or
                 easement.
IV.        PUBLIC UTILITIES
This section discusses the utilities needed to support build out of the land uses identified in
the Land Use Element of the General Plan while maintaining and improving existing levels
and service standards for the City’s residents. This section establishes goals and policies that
address the provision of electricity, natural gas, telecommunications, and solid waste services
necessary to maintain the quality of life of existing and future Livermore residents.
A. Background Information
Electricity
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) provides electricity within the Livermore
area. Most of Livermore’s electric power is delivered via a 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission
line running between the Contra Costa Power Plant near Antioch and the Newark Substa-
tion. The power is then distributed to local substations, which reduce the power to a lower
voltage so it can be passed on to consumers. PG&E operates several 69-kV electrical sub-
stations within and in the vicinity of Livermore, including the Livermore Substation near
Stanley Boulevard/First Street, the Las Positas Substation near First Street/I-580, and the
Vasco Substation south of I-580/east of Vasco Road. The Livermore Substation supplies
electricity to customers in the Central Livermore area. The Las Positas Substation serves
customers in the City of Livermore and surrounding unincorporated areas of Alameda
County. The Vasco Substation serves customers in the area east of Vasco Road.
As of 2003, electrical demand throughout the Tri-Valley region is more than 98 percent of
the area’s existing electrical system capacity on an average daily basis. In October 2001, the
California Public Utilities Commission approved PG&E’s Tri-Valley 2002 Capacity Increase
Project. The Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity included the authorization for
7-26

                                                                                    C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                          I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
the following new electrical substations in North Livermore and Dublin, along with associ-
ated transmission lines:
   Construction of two new distribution substations; one in Dublin, named Doolan Can-
    yon, scheduled to be completed in June 2005, and another in North Livermore named
    Cayetano, at the intersection of May School Road and North Livermore Avenue, and
    scheduled to be completed in December of 2003.
   Installation of 7.9 miles of 230-kV overhead double-circuit transmission line in PG&E’s
    existing vacant easement to serve the Dublin and North Livermore Substations.
   Construction of approximately 10 miles of new 230-kV double-circuit transmission line
    in PG&E’s existing vacant easement from the Contra Costa-Newark 230-kV line south-
    east to the Tesla Substation connecting the Dublin and North Livermore substations di-
    rectly to the Tesla Substation.
   Upgrading the Vineyard Substation in Pleasanton.
As of March 2003, the timing of the development of the Cayetano North Livermore substa-
tion was not defined. At this time, PG&E was monitoring loads and conducting peak load
studies to determine approximately when electricity demand in the Tri-Valley region will ex-
ceed capacity. Based on 2002 peak load, PG&E anticipated that the construction of the
Cayetano North Livermore substation will be completed in December 2003 to avoid exceed-
ing the electricity capacity in the Tri-Valley region.
Natural Gas
PG&E has several natural gas pipelines that traverse the East County area, and five oil pipe-
lines that traverse the northeastern portion of Alameda County. The City of Livermore is
supplied natural gas via three main pipelines. A 24-inch natural gas pipeline main traverses
the City of Livermore from southwest to northeast. A 36-inch and a 22-inch natural gas
pipeline main enters the Planning Area north of Vasco Road and extends south until ap-
proximately Tesla Road before heading west through the City. PG&E also maintains six
natural gas regulator stations within the City of Livermore that reduces gas pressure prior to
urban use distribution.
                                                                                                                  7-27

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Alternative Forms of Energy
Several alternative energy sources generated near Livermore also provide energy to Liver-
more. The Altamont Landfill, operated by Waste Management and located just outside Liv-
ermore, captures landfill gases to generate 6,600 kW of energy for all on-site operations, as
well as approximately 6,000 homes in the area.
The Altamont Pass, which includes a number of separate wind energy projects, developed,
owned, and managed by various companies, is one of California’s major wind energy re-
source areas. PG&E is the primary purchaser and user of this energy. The annual energy
output for year 1998 was estimated at 637 million kilowatt hours. Two new projects, with a
total capacity of 136.6 kW, are currently proposed and are anticipated to begin operation in
2004 or later.
Telecommunications and Cable Services
SBC Pacific Bell (SBC) provides residential and commercial telephone service within the Liv-
ermore area. SBC also provides or hosts a variety of other telecommunications services,
such as Digital Subscriber Lines (DSL), Internet Service Provider (ISP), web hosting, virtual
private networking, and wireless/cellular and paging services.
The California Public Utilities Commission requires that SBC anticipate and serve new
growth. To meet this requirement, SBC continually upgrades its facilities and infrastructure,
adding new facilities and technology to remain in conformance with California Public Utili-
ties Commission tariffs and regulations and to serve customer demand in the City. SBC has
indicated to the City of Livermore that it is nearing capacity for additional phone service.
Cable services within the City of Livermore are provided by Comcast Corporation. In No-
vember of 2002, Comcast merged with AT&T Cable Services. Comcast has a franchise
agreement with the City for cable communication services, including television. During the
past three to five years, the Planning Area has undergone cable infrastructure upgrades asso-
ciated with the installation and use of fiber optics. Some of the cable communication ser-
vices offered by Comcast include digital cable, high-speed internet connection, and digital
phone lines.
7-28

                                                                                  C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                        I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-4    Provide utilities in ways that are safe, environmentally acceptable and
              financially sound.
Objective INF-4.1     Facilitate the development and maintenance of all utilities at the
appropriate levels of service to accommodate the City’s projected growth.
   Policy
   P1.    The City shall ensure that utilities, including electricity, natural gas, telecommuni-
          cations, and cable, are available or can be provided to serve the projected popula-
          tion within the City in a manner which is fiscally and environmentally responsible,
          aesthetically acceptable to the community, and safe for residents. However, the
          ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the utilities are available to support new
          development rests on the sponsor of proposed projects.
   Action
   A1.    Assess the adequacy of public utilities in existing developed areas, and support
          needed improvements to service developing portions of the City.
Objective INF-4.2     Provide reliable utility service in a way that balances the public’s
need and Livermore’s natural environment.
   Policies
   P1.    The energy-efficiency of proposed development shall be considered when land
          use and development review decisions are made.
   P2.    Process permits and approvals for utility expansions in a fair and timely manner in
          accordance with the expansion of new development.
                                                                                                                7-29

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      P3.        The City’s design review shall consider solar access, siting structures to maximize
                 natural heating and cooling, and landscaping to aid passive cooling protection
                 from prevailing winds and maximize year-round solar access.
      P4.        Require the placement of personal wireless communication facilities in a manner
                 that minimizes the adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. New freestanding facil-
                 ity towers and structures should only be considered when no feasible alternative
                 exists or when visual intrusion would be less than that associated with placement
                 on an existing structure or building.
      Action
      A1.        Review proposed utility projects to ensure their compatibility with surrounding
                 land uses.
V.         POLICE SERVICE
A. Background Information
The Livermore Police Department (LPD) operates one station, located in the Civic Center at
1110 South Livermore Avenue. Figure 7-3 identifies the Civic Center and other public facili-
ties. As of May 2003, the department has a total paid staff of 170, as well as five unpaid re-
serve officers. As of May 2003, the police department includes 97 sworn officers, along with
73 administrative and support staff. In 2002, this number of officers served a population of
roughly 76,700, at a ratio of 1.14 officers per thousand population. The LPD divides Liver-
more into five areas, or beats, that are regularly patrolled by officers.
Response times within the City limits are divided according to the priority of the call, with
Priority One calls being the most urgent, and Priority Three calls being least urgent. Priority
One calls include Officer needs assistance, any serious crime in progress, any serious
crime which has just occurred, any reported serious injury accident or any crime that has re-
sulted in a citizen detaining a suspect with violence potential. Priority Two calls include any
7-30

                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
non-serious crime in progress, any non-serious crime that has just occurred or a notice for
officers to Be On the Look Out (BOLOs). Priority Three calls include incidents that gener-
ally do not require immediate police presence to prevent potential citizen injury, loss of
property or escape of violators. Priorities four, five and six are not time sensitive, and there-
fore, not presented here.
The LPD does not respond to calls outside of the City limits unless requested to do so by
another agency. The area surrounding Livermore is in the jurisdiction of the Alameda
County Sheriff’s Department and the California Highway Patrol. The Department assists
these agencies occasionally at their request. The LPD has a holding facility at police depart-
ment headquarters, but does not house prisoners there for extended periods. LPD prisoners
are booked at Santa Rita Jail in Dublin.
Community Programs
LPD’s mission statement reflects the department’s goal of being “leaders in law enforcement
through community partnerships.” The department seeks to form both formal and informal
relationships with community members in order to learn what their specific concerns are.
LPD operates a number of community programs designed to prevent and intervene in crimi-
nal activity in Livermore. Many of the programs focus on children and are implemented
through Livermore schools. Some of these programs include:
   Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.), which is aimed at both fifth and seventh
    graders and teaches children decision-making skills and information on the consequences
    of drug and alcohol abuse.
   Police Activities League (PAL), which is an after-school activities program for sixth to
    eighth graders, run in conjunction with the Livermore Amador Parks and Recreation
    District and the Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District.
   Every 15 Minutes, a program created by a nationwide nonprofit organization, in which
    local law enforcement agencies including the police and fire departments participate in a
    detailed re-enactment of a fatal drunk driving accident. The second of these re-
    enactments was presented to high school juniors and seniors at Livermore and Granada
    High Schools on April 24 and 25, 2002.
                                                                                                                 7-31

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
    School Resource Officers, or SRO’s, are assigned to both high schools and all four mid-
      dle schools in Livermore. These officers perform any necessary law enforcement duties
      on the campus and act as a resource for students, teachers, and administrators.
    On-site counseling services provided by Horizons Family Counseling.
Some of the other community programs LPD coordinates are a Neighborhood Watch pro-
gram, bicycle safety and car seat safety courses, a Citizen’s Police Academy, a youth academy
and residential and business consultations aimed at preventing crime.
Crime in Livermore
For record-keeping purposes, the Livermore Police Department (LPD) divides crimes into
three types according to their severity, as established by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Part I crimes include serious threats to health or property, such as homicide, rape, robbery,
aggravated assault, auto theft, and arson. In 2002, the last complete year for which statistics
are available, 2,230 Part I crimes were reported in Livermore. The majority of these, 1,378
incidents, or 62 percent, were cases of larceny. Part II crimes, which include, but are not
limited to, less serious threats to health or property, such as simple assault, child abuse,
drunk driving, narcotics violations and vandalism, accounted for 3,583 of the crimes re-
ported to the police department. The most common Part II crimes reported were vandal-
ism, drunk driving, simple assault, and narcotics violations. Part III crimes include less ur-
gent offenses such as domestic disturbances, juvenile runaways and missing persons reports.
Part III activities also include routine police business such as response to false alarms, inves-
tigation of suspicious activity, or conducting field interviews. 13,931 Part III calls were re-
ported in 2002, 4,882 of which were false alarms, followed by 2,542 field interviews and
3,731 reports of suspicious activity.
The number of calls reported in all categories increased from 2000 to 2001, then remained
almost level from 2001 to 2002. Since 2000, reported Part I crimes in Livermore have in-
creased by 30 percent, Part II crimes by 23 percent, and Part III crimes by 30 percent. In
general, increases and decreases in crime in Livermore over the past decade have tended to
follow national trends, and the LPD does not attribute the increase over the past two years
to any specific local cause.
7-32

                                                                                  FIGURE 7 - 3
                                                                    PUBLIC SERVICES
                                                              City Limit Line
                                                              Civic Center:
                                                                City Hall
                                                                Police Station
                                                                Main Library
                                                              Fire Station
                                                              Las Positas
                                                              Community College
                                                              Valley Memorial Hospital
                                                              Library
                                                              Water Reclamation Plant
                                                            M City Maintenance Facility
                                                              Elementary/Middle
                                                          M   School
                                                              High School
                                                              Potential Future
                                                              Elementary/Middle School
                                                              Potential Future High School
                                                              Open Space Areas (e.g., parks,
                                                              golf courses, agriculture,
                                                              senestive habitates, etc.)
n    0    1/4      1/           1 Mile
                     2
Source: City of Livermore, LVJUSD, LARPD, Thomas Brothers
                                                                LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
back of FIGURE 7-3: Public Services
7-34
                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-5      Maintain a safe environment in Livermore through enforcement of the
                law, prevention of crime and the function of partnerships with the com-
                munity.
Objective INF-5.1      Promote coordination between land use planning and law en-
forcement.
   Policies
   P1.     Major land use development proposals shall be reviewed for site design criteria
           and other law enforcement concerns.
   P2.     The City shall request notification from the County of development projects
           within the unincorporated part of the Planning Area that could call for law en-
           forcement services from the City.
   P3.     It is the policy of the City to review annual LPD staffing levels and development
           trends to determine whether additional police staffing or facilities are needed.
Objective INF-5.2      Maintain and improve law enforcement and crime prevention
services to keep pace with Livermore’s changing population.
   Policies
   P1.     Information on crime prevention should continue to be disseminated to the com-
           munity.
   P2.     Livermore’s crime rates and types of crime should continue to be monitored to
           determine the most appropriate methods to target and reduce crime in the City.
                                                                                                                 7-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      Actions
      A1.        Maintain adequate crime prevention programs to serve Livermore’s existing popu-
                 lation as well as any future growth.
      A2.        Maintain crime prevention programs that reach out to a variety of Livermore’s
                 residents, including seniors, students, and business owners.
VI.        URBAN FIRE PROTECTION
This section addresses urban fire service issues. Wildland fires are addressed in the Public
Safety Element.
A. Background Information
Livermore is served by the Livermore-Pleasanton Fire Department (LPFD). The Livermore
and Pleasanton Fire Departments consolidated through a joint powers authority in 1996, in
order to provide more efficient and effective service to the two communities. The LPFD
budget is divided between the cities of Livermore and Pleasanton through a cost-sharing
plan that enables each City to pay its fair share of the department’s operating expenses.
Each City builds and maintains its own fire stations and purchases and maintains its own
light-duty vehicles and fire apparatus.
In addition, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) has its own fire depart-
ment on-site. The LPFD has mutual aid agreements with both the LLNL fire department
and the Alameda County Fire Department.
The LPFD maintains 10 stations and one training center. The training center, headquarters,
and five of the stations are located in Pleasanton. An additional five stations, are located in
Livermore. Their locations are listed in Table 7-1, and shown on Figure 7-3.
7-36

                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
As of May 2003, the LPFD had a total staff of 128, including one fire chief, one fire deputy
chief, four division chiefs, including one training chief officer, one fire administration man-
ager, one emergency medical services disaster preparedness manager, one disaster prepared-
ness coordinator, one information systems manager, one fire marshal, one assistant fire mar-
shal, one hazardous materials coordinator, two hazardous materials inspectors, four fire pre-
vention inspectors, four office support staff, 30 fire captains, 30 fire engineers, and 45 fire-
fighters.
TABLE 7-1        FIRE STATION LOCATIONS IN LIVERMORE
 Facility                                        Location
 Headquarters                                    3560 Nevada Street, Pleasanton
 Station #6                                      4550 East Ave.
 Station #7                                      951 Rincon
 Station #8                                      5756 Scenic Ave.
 Station #9                                      1919 Cordoba St.
 Station #10                                     330 Airway Blvd.
The department operates a total of 52 vehicles. These include ten staff and command vehi-
cles; 10 fire prevention vehicles; 11 Type I fire engines (the “classic” fire engine, with a mini-
mum 1,000 gallon per minute pump, 400 gallon water tank, and 20-foot ladder); four Type
III vehicles (a large four-wheel drive engine for wildland fires, with a minimum 120 gpm
pump and 300 gallon water tank) and eight Type IV vehicles (similar to a large pickup truck,
also for use in wildland fires, with a minimum 50 gpm pump and 200 gallon water tank); two
ladder engines; and seven utility vehicles, such as rescue vehicles and a volunteer van.
                                                                                                                 7-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-6            Minimize loss of life and property from fires, medical emergencies and
                      public emergencies.
Objective INF-6.1             Plan for ongoing management and development of fire protec-
tion services.
      Policies
      P1.        The City shall continue to participate in the joint powers authority agreement
                 governing the consolidated Livermore-Pleasanton Fire Department.
      P2.        The City shall continue to provide fire fighting equipment, facilities and man-
                 power sufficient to assure:
                 (a)    quick response to all calls by the “first due” company
                 (b) availability of additional companies for serious fires in high value areas
                 (c)    capability for handling simultaneous fires
                 (d) a water system capable of sustaining prerequisite fire flow at all times.
      P3.        The City shall maintain its mutual aid agreements with both Lawrence Livermore
                 National Laboratory and Alameda County in order to provide adequate fire pro-
                 tection to unincorporated parts of the Planning Area.
      P4.        The City will continuously strive to improve performance and efficiency in the
                 Fire Department.
      P5.        It is the policy of the City to review annual LPFD staffing levels and development
                 trends to determine whether additional fire staffing or facilities are needed.
7-38

                                                                                  C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                        I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
   Action
   A1.    Expand cooperation between the Fire Department and the Community Devel-
          opment Department, Public Services Department, and California Water Service
          Company regarding the effects of planned water system improvements on fire
          flows.
Objective INF-6.2     Promote coordination between land use planning and fire protec-
tion.
   Policies
   P1.    Major land use development proposals in fire hazard areas shall be reviewed for
          site design criteria and appropriate preventive and self-protective measures.
   P2.    The City shall request notification from the County of development projects
          within the unincorporated part of the Planning Area that could call for fire pro-
          tection services from the City.
   P3.    Future stations should be located on sites of at least 5/8 to 3/4 acre in size. This
          allows adequate on-site parking and turn-around and storage space for equipment.
          A somewhat larger site is desirable if a central office, multi-purpose community
          meeting room, training center, maintenance yard or fire prevention bureau is to be
          included as a part of the station.
   Action
   A1.    Continue to monitor traffic conditions and development in Livermore to deter-
          mine if any fire stations need to be relocated, or if there is a need for a new sta-
          tion(s).
                                                                                                                7-39
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Objective INF-6.3             Enforce codes related to fire protection.
      Policies
      P1.        The City shall continue to cooperate with State, County and LLNL fire protection
                 agencies.
      P2.        The City shall build and require roadways that are adequate in terms of width, ra-
                 dius, and grade to facilitate access by City fire-fighting apparatus, while consider-
                 ing maintenance of Livermore’s character.
      P3.        The City shall work to reduce demand for public fire protection services through
                 emphasis on fire prevention education and on fire protection measures for private
                 and public structures.
      Action
      A1.        Maintain a regular program of fire inspection for commercial, industrial buildings,
                 multi-family and apartment complexes.
VII.       SCHOOLS
A. Background Information
The City of Livermore is served by the Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District
(LVJUSD). LVJUSD covers a 240-square-mile area including the City of Livermore and
parts of the Planning Area. The District includes twelve elementary schools serving students
from kindergarten through fifth grade, four middle schools serving students from sixth to
eighth grade, and two comprehensive high schools and three alternative high schools serving
students from ninth to twelfth grade. These schools and their locations are listed in Table 7-
2. District enrollment records indicate that a total of 13,978 students were enrolled in
LVJUSD
7-40

                                                                                     C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
during the 2002/2003 school year. Total capacity in District schools was 15,567. The Dis-
trict does not calculate capacity for alternative programs such as continuing education and
the alternative high schools. While the District was not overcrowded in 2002, the remaining
capacity of existing facilities was likely to be filled as enrollment continued to grow, and will
likely be exceeded within 3 to 10 years. According to these projections, elementary school
capacities would be exceeded by 2006, middle school capacity by 2010, and high school ca-
pacity will be reached in 2004. In 2002, East Avenue Middle school was already over capac-
ity, and Mendenhall Middle School was anticipated to reach capacity by 2004. Livermore
High School is anticipated to exceed capacity in the 2003-2004 school year, and Granada
High School will serve projected enrollment until 2005-2006.
TABLE 7-2: SCHOOL LOCATIONS, CAPACITY, AND ENROLLMENT
                                                                             2002/2003               2002/2003
             School                               Location                     Capacity             Enrollment
Elementary
Almond Elementary                     1401 Almond Avenue                                 610                     552
Altamont Creek Elementary             6500 Garaventa Ranch Rd                            674                     559
Arroyo Mocho Elementary               1040 Florence Road                                 674                     614
Arroyo Seco Elementary                5280 Irene Way                                     680                     581
Croce Elementary                      5650 Scenic Avenue                                 784                     701
Jackson Elementary                    554 Jackson Avenue                                 586                     478
Marylin Elementary                    800 Marylin Avenue                                 540                     465
Michell Elementary                    1001 Elaine Avenue                                 576                     406
Portola Elementary                    2451 Portola Avenue                                574                     499
Rancho Las Positas Elementary         401 East Jack London Blvd                          610                     594
Smith Elementary                      391 Ontario Drive                                  544                     476
Sunset Elementary                     1671 Frankfurt Drive                               650                     570
Middle Schools
Christensen Middle School             5757 Haggin Oaks Avenue                            977                     676
East Middle School                    3951 East Avenue                                   837                     869
Junction Middle School                298 Junction Avenue                              1,055                     873
                                                                                                                   7-41
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D      P U B L I C     S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
                                                                                     2002/2003   2002/2003
School                                                  Location                      Capacity   Enrollment
Mendenhall Middle School                                1701 El Pedro Drive                 952          886
High Schools
Granada High School                                     400 Wall Street                   2,242        1,860
Livermore High School                                   600 Maple Street                  2,062        1,995
Alternative Programs
Vineyard School, grades 1-12                            543 Sonoma Avenue                    --*         153
Del Valle Continuation High                             2253 Fifth Street                     --          87
School
Phoenix Continuation High                               2253 Fifth Street                     --          85
School
* LVJUSD does not calculate capacity for its alternative programs.
As of 2003, LVJUSD is planning several modernization and expansion projects to provide
additional capacity over the next ten years, which will add capacity for 2,750 students. A
new elementary school in South Livermore is scheduled to open in approximately 2005-
2006, and the District is planning to open a second new elementary school somewhere in
Livermore in 2009-2010. While capacity will not be added to any existing middle schools, a
new middle school may open in 2010-2011. The location of this school has not yet been de-
termined. At the high school level, the District is planning to add capacity for 570 students
to Granada High School to accommodate enrollment through approximately 2012. Addi-
tionally, a new high school is determined to more than likely be needed to serve long-term
enrollment increases unless other alternative high school arrangements were found.
The only source of funding for capital improvements to serve new students in the District is
developer fees. Statutory fees are determined by the State Allocation Board and are adjusted
for inflation every two years. In January 2002, the State increased statutory fees from $2.05
to $2.14 per square foot for residential development and from $0.33 to $0.34 per square foot
for commercial development.
7-42
                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
The fees levied on a new development are intended to fund the facilities needed to provide
schooling for the children that will be living in that development. While “new children in
new homes” constitute the majority of the increased enrollment in the District, recently the
number of “new children in old homes” has increased as young families move into less ex-
pensive older housing stock. New children in old homes present a challenge to the District
because there are no funding mechanisms in place to support these students.
The City’s ability to plan for school facilities is limited to some degree by State law. Public
school districts are not required to follow local General Plans, and State legislation limits the
ability of local governments to condition the approval of new development on the availabil-
ity of school facilities. However, school districts are required to present potential school
sites to the Planning Commission. Further, local zoning requires a Conditional Use Permit
for non-public school facilities located in non-Education zoned areas. While classroom fa-
cilities are exempt from local zoning regulations, and issuance of a building permit is exempt
from local control, some local control is maintained; for example, through application of lo-
cal codes concerning access, grading and flood control.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-7       Provide education facilities sufficient to meet the demands of existing
                 and new development.
Objective INF-7.1      Assist the Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District in de-
veloping new school facilities to serve Livermore’s current and future population.
     Policies
     P1.     To the extent allowed by State law, the City shall ensure that school facilities to
             serve new development are available concurrently with need.
                                                                                                                 7-43

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      P2.        The City will collaborate with the Livermore Valley Joint Unified School District
                 to ensure the provision of educational facilities sufficient for the existing and an-
                 ticipated K-12 population.
      P3.        The City shall support efforts to expand State funding of the public school sys-
                 tem, as long as it is not to the detriment of municipal funding.
      P4.        The City shall support School District efforts to develop a technical high school.
      Action
      A1.        Work with the School District to develop a process that can provide timely in-
                 formation about new development and its impact on school capacity.
Objective INF-7.2             Coordinate land use planning with the school facility planning
function of the Livermore Valley Unified School District.
      Policies
      P1.        The City shall give the School District the opportunity to review proposed resi-
                 dential developments and make recommendations based on school-child projec-
                 tions, existing school capacity, access, traffic issues, need for additional facilities
                 and other such factors in order to assist the City in acting on the proposal.
      P2.        The City shall consider the comments of the School District concerning availabil-
                 ity of educational facilities before approving new residential development.
      Actions
      A1.        Inform the School District of upcoming development to allow the School District
                 the opportunity to acquire school sites before new public or private development
                 occurs.
      A2.        Assist the School District in tracking changes in student generation rates.
7-44
                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Objective INF-7.3     Work with the Livermore Joint Unified School District to identify
appropriate locations for schools and means of school expansion in order to prevent
negative impacts on the health, safety and welfare of students.
   Policies
   P1.    Elementary schools should be located centrally to the student populations they
          will serve. Sites shall serve areas bounded by major streets so that children do not
          have to cross such streets to get to school.
   P2.    Elementary school sites should be located away from major streets to avoid ve-
          hicular noise and traffic hazards which interfere with the educational process.
   P3.    Wherever possible, school sites should be integrated with recreation parks and
          community recreation/non-motorized transit corridors to permit recreational ex-
          periences as part of the educational process and to allow pedestrian and bicycle
          access.
   P4.    Intermediate and high schools should be located centrally to the student popula-
          tions they will serve. Sites shall have access to collector or major streets to permit
          access by pedestrians, bicycles and public transit with a minimal impact on sur-
          rounding residential areas.
   P5.    The City shall work with the School District to identify potential future school
          sites.
   P6.    The City recognizes that the School District has the final authority to determine
          appropriate locations for future school sites.
   P7.    If the School District cannot identify an appropriate future high school site within
          the urban growth boundary, the City shall support the efforts of the School Dis-
          trict to seek a high school site outside the urban growth boundary, in accordance
          with the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative (NLUGBI).
                                                                                                                 7-45
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
      Action
      A1.        As part of General Plan Land Use Amendment considerations, identify the gen-
                 eral type of additional school facilities necessary to support the proposed land use.
VIII. SOLID WASTE
This section describes the City’s solid waste collection and disposal system. It includes a dis-
cussion of the public and private responsibilities for solid waste, as well as the regulatory
context of solid waste.
A. Background Information
Public and Private Responsibilities for Solid Waste
In Alameda County, responsibility for the collection and disposal of solid waste is held
jointly by the Alameda County Waste Management Authority and local jurisdictions. The
Alameda County Waste Management Authority operates under a joint exercise of powers
agreement among the County of Alameda, each of the fourteen cities within the county, and
two sanitary districts that also provide refuse collection services. Funding for the Authority
is derived from waste import mitigation fees and disposal fees at the Altamont, Vasco Road
and Tri-Cities landfill sites.
Pursuant to California Law, the Authority is responsible for the preparation of Alameda
County’s Integrated Waste Management Plan and Hazardous Waste Management Plan and
provides support and assistance to its member agencies in the implementation of those
plans. The Authority also manages a long-range program for development of solid waste
facilities and offers a wide variety of programs in the areas of waste reduction, market devel-
opment, technical assistance and public education.
In August of 2002, the City of Livermore entered into a 7-year franchise agreement with
Waste Management of Alameda County, Inc. (Waste Management) with three one-year op-
7-46

                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
tions to extend, for the exclusive right to collect, transport, or process and dispose of solid
waste, recyclable materials, and compostable materials in the City. As a part of this agree-
ment, Waste Management provides all single-family residents with a refuse cart, a recycling
cart, and a green waste cart. Waste Management also provides weekly service for refuse, re-
cycling, and green waste.
Waste Management’s recycling program includes:
   Three on-call clean up events for residents per year.
   Bulky item collection for residential customers for an additional fee.
   Weekly curbside collection of used motor oil for residential customers.
   An annual electronic-waste collection event for residents.
   Collection of abandoned waste and unmarked shopping carts in the public right-of-way.
   Advertising for an annual community garage sale event.
   A six-month pilot food waste program for 500 residential customers and 60 commercial
    businesses, starting November 2002.
Currently, Waste Management transports solid waste from Livermore to the Republic Ser-
vices Vasco Road, LLC Landfill for disposal. The Republic/Vasco Road Landfill is desig-
nated as a Class III disposal site that permits the disposal of municipal solid waste, with
separate disposal areas required for asbestos and auto-shredder waste. The Republic/Vasco
Road landfill also has areas designated for recycling construction and demolition debris,
green waste, wood, concrete, bricks, and a residential recyclable materials area. In 2002,
Waste Management hauled approximately 81,000 tons of solid waste to the Vasco Landfill
from Livermore.
Waste Reduction and Recycling Regulations
In an effort to reduce the amount of solid waste sent to landfills, the California Integrated
Waste Management Act (CIWMA), Assembly Bill 939, was enacted in 1989. Under the Act,
all city and county governments are given increased responsibility to reduce the amount of
                                                                                                                 7-47

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
waste being landfilled and increase the recycling of waste. Local governments are required
to establish Integrated Waste Management Plans. In 1995, the CIWMA mandated a 25 per-
cent reduction in the amount of solid waste being landfilled, which then increased to 50 per-
cent by the year 2000. Cities and counties failing to meet these goals may be fined as much
as $10,000 per day by the State of California.
The Department of Conservation, Division of Recycling administers the California Beverage
Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act enacted in 1986. The primary goal of this Act
is to achieve and maintain high recycling rates for each beverage container type, e.g., alumi-
num, glass and plastic. The Division provides a number of services to achieve these goals,
including enforcement, auditing, grant funding, technical assistance and education.
In 1990, Alameda County voters approved the Alameda County Waste Reduction and Recy-
cling Initiative (Measure D) with the goal of diverting 75 percent of solid waste from land-
fills. Measure D also created the Alameda County Source Reduction and Recycling Board,
which is responsible for programs in the areas of waste reduction, recycled product pro-
curement, market development and grants to non-profit organizations. Funding for the Re-
cycling Board is derived from a disposal surcharge at landfills. Measure D applies a sur-
charge at the Altamont and Vasco Road landfills, which funds both the Recycling Board and
source reduction and recycling programs for local jurisdictions. The Measure D fee is usu-
ally increased annually. Effective January 1, 2002, the fee was $6.59/ton.
The Waste Management Authority and Recycling Board operate as an integrated Agency,
which is committed to achieving a 75 percent and above diversion goal and promoting sus-
tainable consumption and disposal patterns.
Construction and Demolition Materials Recycling Program
In July 1997, the Vasco Road Sanitary Landfill began accepting construction and demolition
materials for diversion. In 2002, 143,209 tons (including greenwaste) of construction and
demolition materials had been diverted from the landfill; 39,811 tons, or 28 percent of these
diversions were from Livermore. The City of Livermore adopted a Construction and
Demolition Debris Ordinance in June 2002, which became effective August 1, 2002. This
ordinance is expected to increase the amount of construction and demolition waste being
7-48
                                                                                    C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                          I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
diverted from the landfill, as it allows for competitive hauling of construction and demolition
debris. As of March 2003, information was not available as to the efficacy of the ordinance.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-8     Collect, store, transport, recycle and dispose of solid waste in ways that
               are safe, sanitary and environmentally acceptable.
Objective INF-8.1     Promote the recovery of recyclable materials and energy from
solid waste generated within Livermore.
    Policies
    P1.    The City will seek to meet or exceed State requirements with regard to waste di-
           version and recycling.
    P2.    The City shall seek to meet the Alameda County Measure D waste diversion goal.
    P3.    Livermore’s businesses shall be encouraged to expand their recycling efforts and
           to reduce packaging.
    Actions
    A1.    Implement source reduction and recycling programs to minimize waste at the
           point of manufacture or use.
    A2.    Seek ways to incorporate on-site storage facilities for recycled materials as build-
           ings are improved, altered or expanded.
    A3.    Work with the Livermore Area Recreation and Parks District to expand recycling
           of glass and aluminum at LARPD facilities.
                                                                                                                  7-49

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Objective INF-8.2             Reduce the amount of solid waste that must be recycled or dis-
posed.
      Actions
      A1.        Encourage the purchase and use of post-consumer recycled content products and
                 other recycled materials in all City operations.
      A2.        Seek ways to implement State requirements for recycled container enclosures for
                 new, altered, or expanded facilities.
      A3.        Encourage LVJUSD participation in reuse and recycling programs.
      A4.        In all City operations, encourage the development of procedures and purchase of
                 equipment that result in recycling products rather than sending them to the land-
                 fill.
IX.        COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES
A. Background Information
Livermore is served by two main medical facilities, both operated by ValleyCare Health Sys-
tem: ValleyCare Medical Center in Pleasanton and Valley Memorial in Livermore. Valley-
Care Medical Center provides a 24-hour emergency room, an intensive care unit (ICU), a
critical care unit (CCU) and offers surgery rooms, a maternity ward, a neo-natal intensive
care unit, pediatric medicine, outpatient surgery, in-patient physical therapy and radiation
therapy facilities, a skilled nursing facility, and preventative health and wellness programs.
Valley Memorial, located on East Stanley Boulevard in Livermore, is a private, not-for-profit
facility. Valley Memorial houses a 30-bed in-patient skilled nursing facility, usually used for
short term recuperation, a 12-bed geriatric psychiatric unit, along with outpatient services
such as urgent care, a laboratory, radiology facilities, physical therapy facilities; electrocardio-
gram (EKG) and electroencephalogram (EEG) equipment. Valley Memorial also provides
7-50
                                                                                     C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
health and wellness programs, cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation programs, diabetes edu-
cation, and weight reduction assistance.
In addition to these existing facilities, both ValleyCare and Kaiser Permanente have new pro-
jects underway in Livermore as of May 2003. ValleyCare has proposed to return the hospi-
tal’s administrative offices from Pleasanton to 1133 Stanley Boulevard in Downtown Liver-
more, adding 65,000 plus square feet of medical office space, and including a 66,500-square
foot wellness center. This facility will be called the Valley Care Medical Plaza. Outpatient
services such as urgent care, outpatient surgery, outpatient laboratories, diagnostic imaging
and occupational health services will move from Valley Memorial to the Valley Care Medical
Plaza. The Medical Plaza is scheduled to open in June 2003. Kaiser Permanente has also
begun construction of a 72,000 square foot medical facility on Las Positas Road that will
house adult and pediatric medicine, women’s health, optometry and optical sales, a phar-
macy, dermatology, an allergy lab, and imaging services. The facility is scheduled to open by
winter 2004.
Low-income and uninsured populations in Livermore are served by the Valley Community
Health Centers. The Valley Community Health Center in Livermore provides routine medi-
cal care for all age groups, including immunizations. This facility is funded largely by Ala-
meda County, which has primary governmental responsibility for the provision of public
health care in Livermore. Additional funding for Valley Community Health Centers comes
from City governments, state and federal agencies, and grants from foundations. The Valley
Community Health Center in Livermore has experienced recent decreases in service: during
the fall of 2001, it was only open sporadically, and closed completely during December,
January and February 2002. As of the end of June, 2002, the center increased its hours of
operation from one half-day per week to half-days Monday through Friday.
In addition to this routine care, specialized services for low-income individuals are offered in
Pleasanton. Valley Community Health Centers for Women, Infants and Children offers
family planning education; gynecology and obstetrics for teens and adult women; and preg-
nancy testing. Another Valley Care Health Center provides mental health services, includ-
ing drug and alcohol abuse recovery services, smoking cessation education, and counseling
                                                                                                                   7-51

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
for individuals and families. The Valley Mental Health Center, a non-profit facility in Plea-
santon not affiliated with the Valley Community Health Centers, provides psychiatric care
for adults and children, including psychotherapy, medication, education and behavior man-
agement.
B.         Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-9            The City shall support access to health care in Livermore.
Objective INF-9.1             Facilitate access to health care for all Livermore residents.
      Policy
      P1.        The City shall support and encourage the construction of healthcare facilities ade-
                 quate to meet the needs of all residents and employees in Livermore.
X.         CHILD CARE
A. Background Information
Child care in Livermore is available through either professional day care centers, or through
care providers who work out of their homes. In 2002, a total of 4,192 spaces are available in
child care facilities in Livermore. Two-thirds of these, 2,763, are in private child care cen-
ters, and the remaining one-third, 1,429, are in home-based facilities. During 2001, overall
need for child care in the Tri-Valley area decreased slightly.
In addition to private center- or home-based care providers, the Livermore Area Recreation
and Park District operates child care programs for preschoolers, elementary and middle
school students through cooperative arrangements with the Livermore Valley Joint Unified
School District and the City of Livermore. LARPD offers parent-participation pre-school
for children six months to six years old at several park facilities and elementary schools in
the City. Elementary school students are eligible to participate in the Extended Student Ser-
7-52
                                                                                   C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                         I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
vices (ESS) and Kid’s Zone programs, which are open five days per week, year-round.
These programs offer learning activities in areas such as art, music, science, language, crafts,
and outdoor play. Over 800 students participated in the ESS and Kid’s Zone programs dur-
ing 2001, including 134 children from low-income homes. For middle school students,
LARPD has recently implemented the TeenNRG PAL program. This program is held from
2:30 to 6:00 pm five days per week at all four middle schools in Livermore. The program
offers a healthy snack, recreational activities, and one hour of mandatory homework time.
Over 150 students participated in the program in 2001.
The highest demand for child care in Livermore, as in the Tri-Valley area as a whole, is for
spaces for children five to ten years old. There are approximately 2,150 spaces needed for
five-to-ten-year-olds in Livermore, and slightly less than that number of spaces is available.
For two-to-five-year-olds, the only age group in Livermore in which the supply of child care
spaces exceeds the demand, there are about 1,550 spaces available, and about 1,450 of those
are filled. For children under two years old, there are only 500 spaces available, but there is
demand for over 700 spaces.
Almost 20 percent of parents interviewed by Child Care Links reported that they were un-
able to find child care due to prohibitive costs. Other reasons parents were unable to find
care included a lack of vacancies (17 percent), inability to find a care provider with a suitable
schedule (14 percent), and facilities that were unacceptable (13 percent).
In 2002, average weekly costs of care in Livermore vary by the neighborhood the facility is
located in, as well as by the age of the child. For home-based facilities, the average weekly
cost for care for a child under two years old is $160.00. For children ages two through five,
the weekly cost averages $143.00, and for children five to ten, the cost is $102.00. In child
care centers, costs are higher for infant care, with weekly costs averaging $220.00. However,
child care centers cost roughly the same as home-based facilities for two- to five-year-olds, at
$151.00, and centers are less expensive sources of care for five- to ten-year olds, at $78.00
average cost per week. Average weekly costs for home-based child care in Livermore are
slightly higher than the Tri-Valley averages, while center-based costs in Livermore are below
the cost of care in Dublin and Pleasanton.
                                                                                                                 7-53

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-10 Ensure an adequate range and supply of childcare services to meet the
                      needs of all Livermore residents.
Objective INF-10.1 Plan for needed childcare facilities when considering new devel-
opment.
      Policies
      P1.        The City shall continue to assist LARPD in providing after-school and extended
                 daycare programs year round through before and after school care and day camps
                 in the summer and during holidays and vacations.
      P2.        The City shall consider the impact of development on the supply of childcare.
      Actions
      A1.        Triennially, concurrent with the development of each three-year Housing Imple-
                 mentation Program, assess the impact of development on the provision of child-
                 care services.
      A2.        Study the options for providing childcare including, but not limited to, providing
                 on-site or off-site facilities, in-lieu fees to provide facilities and/or supplement
                 childcare provider training, or other measures to address supply, affordability, or
                 quality of childcare.
7-54
                                                                                    C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                          I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
Objective INF-10.2 Combine childcare facilities with other services and amenities in
order to improve access and availability.
    Policies
    P1.    The City shall encourage the siting of child care and other care facilities in areas
           with compatible land use and character, and shall encourage such facilities to be
           located near employment centers, homes, schools, community centers, recreation
           facilities, and transit hubs.
    P2.    The City shall support the establishment of childcare centers at or near commer-
           cial and light industrial districts in order to enhance Livermore’s attractiveness as
           a business destination.
    Actions
    A1.    Partner with LVJUSD and civic organizations to use schools as community cen-
           ters to provide a range of services, including childcare.
    A2.    Study feasibility of an impact fee for the development of childcare facilities on the
           project site or payment of an in-lieu fee.
XI.     LIBRARIES
A. Background Information
The Livermore Public Library was established in 1878, and has been a full department of the
City government since 1979. Today Livermore is served by three libraries: the main library
located in the Civic Center complex, and two branch libraries in the Springtown and Rincon
areas. Each of these libraries contributes to the Library department’s stated mission – “The
Livermore Public Library encourages the development of lifelong interest in reading and
learning by providing materials and services of popular interest, emphasizing and encourag-
                                                                                                                  7-55

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
ing reading by children, supplementing the educational needs of the community and furnish-
ing timely, accurate information.”
In 2003, the main library, located at 1000 South Livermore Avenue, is open seven days a
week for a total of 63 hours. The main library will be relocated to 1188 South Livermore
Avenue in early 2004. As of May 2003, the Rincon branch library, located at 725 Rincon
Avenue, is open six days a week for a total of 43 hours, and the Springtown branch library,
located at 998 Bluebell Drive, is open six days a week for a total of 43 hours.
In addition to making physical and electronic media available, the library provides a variety
of other services to the community, including free computers with Internet access, Internet
classes, lecture series, art exhibitions, and a passport application service. The Internet in par-
ticular is one of the major use items in the department. The library also provides space for
free tax assistance, legal advice services, meeting rooms, and a community bulletin board.
Use of the library has been steadily increasing over the past ten years, growing by approxi-
mately six to seven percent each year. Between 60 and 70 percent of Livermore residents are
“registered borrowers” at the library, which means they have used the library at least once in
the past two years. Moreover, the library department’s average circulation rate of 10 items
per capita each year is well above the national median rate for libraries of its size, which gen-
erally circulate about 6.5 items per capita each year.
A new main library, part of Livermore’s new Civic Center, was under construction in 2003
and will consist of 52,000 square feet and will house an adult library, children’s library, peri-
odical reading room, story time/craft room, teen center, computer training lab, a community
meeting room, three quiet study rooms, a public–use computer lab, and a small café and
bookstore, in addition to storage space and administrative offices. Twenty million dollars in
funding for the construction of this facility was approved by Livermore voters as part of
Measure L, passed in March 1999. Groundbreaking on the site took place in February 2002,
and the library is expected to open in fall 2003.
7-56

                                                                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                      I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C  S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal INF-11 Provide sufficient library service to meet the information, cultural and
              educational needs of the population of Livermore.
Objective INF-11.1    Continue City support of the Livermore Public Library.
   Actions
   A1.    Maintain or expand City funding of library operations as the City budget allows.
   A2.    Expand library services for areas north of I-580, including the construction of a
          larger library branch.
                                                                                                              7-57
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A N D P U B L I C S E R V I C E S E L E M E N T
                                             This page intentionally left blank.
7-58
8 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Open Space and Conservation Element is to ensure the comprehensive and long-range
  preservation and management of open space land for the protection of natural resources, for economic uses, for
  outdoor recreation and as a scenic resource. The Open Space and Conservation Element seeks to maintain
  Livermore’s rural, small-town setting by preserving open space and natural resources.
  Livermore is in many ways characterized by the environmental resources within and around
  it. The open hillsides to the north and south of the City, productive vineyards, and the ar-
  royos play an important role in shaping Livermore’s sense of place. Similarly, the quality of
  these resources – the integrity of the area’s watersheds, views across grasslands, and produc-
  tivity of agricultural lands – has an indelible effect on the quality of life experienced by resi-
  dents and employees in the City. The Open Space and Conservation Element is based on
  the premise that the wise management of these natural resources is critical to maintaining the
  integrity of plant and animal communities, including human communities. The continuing
  challenge as the City grows is to direct human development and growth in a way that pro-
  tects natural resources.
  State law requires all General Plans to include an Open Space Element and a Conservation
  Element. The Open Space Element is concerned with the management of open space re-
  sources within the Planning Area. The Conservation Element is concerned with the conser-
  vation of natural resources, including plants and animal wildlife, rivers, lakes, and water-
  sheds, forests, soils and minerals. Since the air is a natural resource, issues related to air qual-
  ity are also addressed in this Element.
  Since most natural resources are located in open space land, the Livermore General Plan
  combines these two elements into one. Combining the State-mandated Open Space and
  Conservation Elements avoids redundancy by allowing the similar and often overlapping as-
  pects of these two elements to be explored in a single place in the General Plan.
  Open space is any parcel or area of land and water that is essentially unimproved. Govern-
  ment Code Section 65560 describes four categories of open space: Open Space for the Pres-
  ervation of Natural Resources, Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources, Open
  Space for Outdoor Recreation, and Open Space for Public Health and Safety. Information
  in this Open Space and Conservation Element is organized according to these categories.
                                                                                                            8-1

 C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
 G E N E R A L P L A N
 O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N                E L E M E N T
 The types of open space that are included in these categories are described in Table 8-1,
 along with examples of each taken from Livermore.
TABLE 8-1 GOVERNMENT CODE OPEN SPACE CLASSIFICATIONS
 Category                                                                                                 Examples in Livermore
 Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources
 •    Plant and animal habitat areas                                                                          • Arroyos and creeks
 •    Rivers, streams, lakes and their banks                                                                  • Alkali meadows
 •    Watershed lands
                                                                                                              • Riparian woodlands
 •    Areas required for ecologic and other scientific study
      purposes
 Open Space Used for the Managed Production of Re-
 sources                                                                                                      • Vineyards
 •    Agricultural lands                                                                                      • Grazing land
 •    Rangelands                                                                                              • Sand and gravel extraction
 •    Forest and timber lands                                                                                    areas
 •    Mineral resource production areas
 Open Space for Outdoor Recreation
                                                                                                              • Brushy Peak
 •    Areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value*
 •    Parks and other areas used for recreation                                                               • Lake Del Valle
 •    Scenic corridors and trails                                                                             • Scenic routes and hillsides
 •    Links between different open space areas
 Open Space for Public Health and Safety**
                                                                                                              • Flood prone areas
 • Areas requiring special management or regulation be-
      cause of risks presented by natural hazards such as                                                     • Fault hazard zones
      earthquakes or flooding
 * Areas of historic and cultural value in Livermore are not discussed in this element, but are included in the Community Character Element.
 **This category of open space is not discussed in this element; it is covered in the Public Safety Element.
 8-2

                                                                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                    O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Not all aspects dictated by State law are discussed in this element, because they are included
elsewhere within the General Plan. For example, open space for public health and safety is
discussed in the Public Safety Element, and areas important for the preservation of historic
and cultural resources are identified in the Community Character Element.
I.       OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
A. Background Information
Biological Resources
Livermore includes a diverse range of vegetation and habitat types, several of which are pro-
tected by local, State, and federal regulations. These vegetation and habitat types, which are
described below and shown in Figure 8-1, host a wide range of wildlife and plant species and
reflect the Bay Area’s generally high level of biodiversity. The current challenge for Liver-
more is to allow for planned growth while preserving sensitive biological resources.
Eight separate vegetation and habitat types located in or adjacent to the City of Livermore
are described below.
Urban Developed Areas
Urbanized environments, which comprise the majority of Livermore, do not generally pro-
vide habitat for native plants. However, there are many wildlife species that utilize urban
areas for foraging, roosting, and/or nesting. These species include native animals that have
adapted well to living in close proximity to humans, such as Pacific treefrog (Hyla regilla),
western fence lizard (Sceleroporus occidentalis), and barn swallow (Hirundo rustico), in addition to
non-native species, such as house sparrow (Passer domesticus) and European starling (Sturnus
vulgaris). In addition, a few protected species live in urban developed areas, such as burrow-
ing owl (Athene cunicularia) and some species of bats.
                                                                                                              8-3

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Agricultural Areas
Depending on the type and intensity of agriculture, farmland varies in the degree to which it
supports native plant and animal species. Grazing lands typically support the greatest diver-
sity of species since the land is not as intensively managed and altered. Wildlife that may use
grazing land in the Livermore region include California ground squirrel (Spermophilus beecheyi),
black-tailed deer (Odocoileus hemionus), coyote (Canis latrans), red fox (Vulpes vulpes), San Joa-
quin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica) and many bird species, including birds of prey, such as
red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos). Intensively farmed
lands do not typically support native plant communities. However, wildlife species, particu-
larly migrating waterfowl and raptors, use these fields for foraging and/or roosting. The
edges of agricultural fields, where disturbance is minimized, may provide opportunities for
burrowing animals, such as California ground squirrels and burrowing owls. In addition, ag-
ricultural areas are often some of the few sites with readily available water, irrigation ditches,
and stock ponds that are not heavily disturbed, and often support various species of reptiles
and amphibians.
Grasslands
Three types of grassland exist within Livermore and its vicinity: non-native annual grassland;
valley needlegrass grassland; and alkali meadows. Non-native annual grassland is the most
common vegetation type in the vicinity of Livermore. It is generally found in areas that have
been grazed, or in abandoned agricultural fields, and is usually dominated by annual, intro-
duced grasses, mustards (Brassica sp.), and filaree (Erodium sp.), such as wild oats (Avena fatua)
and fescue (Vulpia myuros).
As a result of grazing, intensive agriculture, reduction in fire frequency and the introduction
of exotic species, native grassland has been reduced to 10 percent of its former area in Cali-
fornia. However, some native grasslands still remain. Valley needlegrass grassland is a per-
ennial, native grassland community that is typically dominated by purple needlegrass (Nassella
pulchra) and often includes a variety of native and non-native spring wildflowers. Valley nee-
dlegrass grassland exists only in a few small remnants in the Planning Area. Because of the
scarcity of valley needlegrass grassland, the habitat type is considered a Significant Natural
Community by the California Department of Fish and Game.
8-4
                                                                              C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                  O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Alkali meadows can be found within some grassland areas in the vicinity of Livermore, and
favor a unique set of species such as saltgrass (Distichilis spicata), dwarf carrot (Daucus pusilla),
and palmate-bracted bird’s beak (Cordylanthus palmatus), a federally- and State-listed endan-
gered plant. Alkali meadows are formed in shallow basins where the soil is particularly alka-
line relative to surrounding grasslands. Many wildlife species use both non-native and native
grasslands, including western rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis), horned lark (Eremophila alpestris),
and black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus).
Riparian Areas
Riparian vegetation refers to the native scrub or woodlands occurring along streams and riv-
erbanks. Riparian areas provide important breeding and foraging habitat for many amphibi-
ans, reptiles, birds, and mammals, and comprise one of the most biologically-diverse habitats
in the region. Riparian vegetation used to be found along most perennial and intermittent
streams in the Livermore area. However, this vegetation type has become rare due to dis-
turbance by agriculture, development, and the past filling or channelization of small streams.
There are two kinds of riparian vegetation in the Livermore area: riparian scrub and riparian
woodland. Riparian scrub is dense, brushy, and dominated by willows (Salix sps.). Riparian
woodland has more large trees, fewer willows, and slightly more understory than riparian
scrub. There are several arroyos in the Livermore area that still support riparian habitat.
Arroyo Mocho is relatively undisturbed and, as a result, supports some mature riparian
woodland with Fremont cottonwood (Populus fremontii), California sycamore (Platanus ra-
cemosa), and alder (Alnus sp.). Arroyo del Valle, particularly within the Sycamore Grove Re-
gional Park, also supports mature riparian woodland. Other arroyos, such as Arroyo Las
Positas and Arroyo Seco, have, in the past, been largely modified for flood control purposes
and impacted by grazing. As a result, the riparian vegetation is sparse and has been replaced
in some areas by aquatic vegetation like cattails and rushes as well as exotic species from the
surrounding grasslands.
Wetlands
Wetlands are natural communities that depend on year-round or seasonally-dependable
sources of water. The Livermore area supports several different types of wetlands: freshwa-
                                                                                                            8-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
ter marsh; freshwater seep; northern claypan vernal pool; and alkali meadow/alkali sink
scrub.
Valley freshwater marshes occur in areas that are wet year-round and are typically associated
with ponds (natural or man-made), the shallow edges of lakes, and large pools in riparian ar-
eas. Marshes typically support cattails (Typha sp.), sedges (Carex sp.), rushes (Juncus sp.), wil-
lows (Salix sp.), and bulrushes (Scirpus sp.), and provide habitat for species such as California
red-legged frog (Rana aurora draytonii), western pond turtle (Clemmys marmorata), and muskrat
(Ondatra zibethica).
Freshwater seeps may be found in grasslands or meadows or associated with freshwater
marshes. They have permanently wet or moist soil as a result of the water table being near
the surface and typically contain sedges and rushes.
Vernal pools are seasonal wetlands that occur in grasslands. In order to form, they require
slight depressions over bedrock or hardpan soils that allow water to pool during the winter
and spring rains. Since vernal pools are a unique habitat and tend to be isolated from each
other, they often support species that are endemic (i.e. restricted) to vernal pools or even to
pools in that particular region. As a result of this endemism and the dramatic decline of ver-
nal pools due to agriculture and development, vernal pools are listed as a Significant Natural
Community by the California Department of Fish and Game and many vernal pool depend-
ent plants and animals are special-status species protected by the State or federal govern-
ment.
Alkali meadow/alkali sink scrub, which is also a Significant Natural Community, is typically
found in the valley bottoms where the highly alkaline Rincon Solano, Clear Lake, and
Pescadero soil series are present. The soils are seasonally saturated and slow to drain, sup-
porting vegetation that is distinct from the surrounding grasslands or woodland. Similar to
vernal pools and native grasslands, the extent of this habitat has diminished greatly with only
small pockets left in the vicinity of Livermore.
8-6
                                                                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                    O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Open Water
Permanent open water bodies are mostly restricted to the former sand and gravel pits west
of the City, such as the lake within the Shadow Cliffs Regional Recreation Area. Other open
water habitats may exist as small natural or man-made ponds and reservoirs. Although open
water does not provide habitat for many plant species, it is important for wildlife and fish
species such as bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana), bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), bass (Micropterus sp.),
steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss), and California red-legged frog.
Woodland Forest
Woodland and forested habitats are largely restricted to the north and east-facing slopes or
higher elevations to the south and west of Livermore. The moist microclimate produced by
the altitude, steepness and/or aspect of these areas has allowed the establishment of dense
stands of trees. Two woodland/forest communities are present in the Livermore Planning
Area, depending on the microclimate of the site: coast live oak woodland and mixed ever-
green forest.
Coast live oak woodland is typically found higher on slopes and on ridgetops where there is
a drier microclimate and well-drained soils. The dominant tree species is coast live oak
(Quercus agrifolia). Species found in coast live oak woodlands include a variety of reptiles and
amphibians, acorn woodpeckers (Melanerpes formicivorus), dusky-footed woodrats (Neotoma fus-
cipes), and black-tailed deer.
Mixed evergreen forest occurs in the cooler, moister canyons and the east or north-facing
slopes. The mixed evergreen forest varies from the coast live oak woodland by having a
more closed canopy, greater vegetation diversity, and greater density of understory vegeta-
tion. Common tree species in this habitat type include coast live oak, California bay (Umbel-
lularia californica), big leaf maple (Acer macrophyllum), and madrone (Arbutus menziesii). The un-
derstory vegetation typically includes poison oak (Toxicodendron divesilobum), hazelnut (Corylus
cornuta), creambush (Holodiscus discolor), and coffeeberry (Rhamnus californica). Mixed evergreen
forest is host to a wide range of amphibians, and bird and mammal species similar to those
found in coast live oak woodland.
                                                                                                              8-7
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Scrub
Scrub communities in the Livermore Planning Area generally occur on arid, south-facing
slopes and above woodlands on the ridges and provide a transition between woodland and
grassland. Three types of scrub community have been identified in the vicinity of Liver-
more: diablan sage scrub, coastal sage scrub, and baccharis brushland. The vegetation com-
position of these habitats is similar but chamise (Adenostoma fasciculatum) dominates the diab-
lan sage scrub; California sage (Artemesia californica) dominates the coastal sage scrub; and
coyote bush (Baccharis pilularis) dominates the baccharis brushland. Because they are gener-
ally warm, the scrub communities are home to a number of reptile species, including the fed-
eral and State-listed Alameda whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus), western rattlesnake,
common kingsnake (Lampropeltis getulus), western fence lizard, and northern alligator lizard
(Elgaria coerulea). Many bird species common to these habitats include California thrasher
(Toxostoma redivivum), wrentit (Chamaea fasciata), spotted towhee (Pipilo maculatus) and Califor-
nia quail (Callipepla californica). Mammals that are likely to use this habitat for cover and for-
age include black-tailed deer, coyote, gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), black-tailed jackrabbit,
and various rodents.
Water Resources
Livermore’s water resources include its creeks and arroyos, surface water, and groundwater.
These resources are closely interrelated.
Waterways
Several creeks and arroyos cross the Livermore Valley. Livermore’s watershed and principal
waterways are shown in Figure 8-1, and include Arroyo Las Positas, Cayetano Creek, Arroyo
del Valle, Arroyo Mocho, and Arroyo Seco. Most of these waterways flow from east to
west. The Arroyo del Valle drains a relatively small area of the central and southern portion
of the City. Arroyo Mocho flows through the southern portion of the City, draining much
of the
8-8

                                                                                                               N. Livermore Ave.                                                                                          We
                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                         I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                               ific
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pac
                                                         I-580                                                                                                                      hern
                                                                                                                                                                               Sout
                                                                                                                                                                                               Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                   Western
                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                           t St
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Greenville Rd.
                                                                                                       Firs
                                                                                                                                   S.
                                       ic                                                                                               Li
                         Western Pacif                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                             rm
                                                                                                                                               or
                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                        e.
                                                                                          Holmes St.
                                                                                                                                                                 Tesla Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                   ine
                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                          d.
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                 s
                                                                              ito
                                                                       l   lec
                                                                  Va
                                                                 E.
            0       .5           1
N O RT H    MILES                      SOURCE: LSA ASSOCIATES, INC., 2003.
           agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE 8 - 1
           developed
           grassland/pasture
                                                                                                                                                             BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
           seasonal wetland/grassland
           scrub/ woodland
           open water
           creeks/riparian vegetation
                                                                                                                                                             LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Downtown area. Arroyo Las Positas generally flows along I-580 through Livermore. The
major tributaries to Arroyo Las Positas include Arroyo Seco, Altamont Creek, Cayetano
Creek, Collier Canyon Creek and Cottonwood Creek.
Surface Water Quality
Major sources of pollution in and around Livermore include runoff from urban and agricul-
tural areas. These sources contribute petroleum hydrocarbons, metals, fertilizers, insecti-
cides, and other chemicals to the water system. The Regional Water Quality Control Board
(RWQCB) periodically reviews available data on surface water bodies and evaluates whether
beneficial uses for the water body may be impaired. If a water body is designated as “im-
paired” for a particular pollutant, then the water body is listed under Section 303(d) of the
Clean Water Act. In 2002, Arroyo Del Valle was listed as impaired for the pesticide diazi-
non.
Groundwater Quality
The City’s groundwater comes from a part of the Livermore Valley Groundwater Basin un-
derlying Livermore known as the Main Basin. In general, the City’s groundwater meets pri-
mary drinking water standards, however, there are concerns over other parameters such as
total dissolved solids and hardness. Salts are initially introduced into the Main Basin with
imported water supplies and via runoff from saline/alkali soils. Additional in-valley sources
of salt include the use of recycled water and water softener regeneration. Although the water
may leave the Main Basin by evaporation, evapotranspiration, or through surface and
groundwater outflow, much of the salts stay behind, potentially leading to a build-up of salt
in the soil and groundwater. Excessive salt loading can result in a degraded water supply,
particularly if concentrations exceed the Secondary Drinking Water standard of 500 milli-
grams per liter (mg/L). Zone 7 estimates that if the salt loading continues unchecked, the
usability of the groundwater in the Main Basin could be substantially affected. Preserving
and enhancing existing groundwater quality will hinge on the success of the Salt Manage-
ment Plan, which has been prepared by Zone 7 to implement strategies that fully offset salt
loading in the Main Basin.
8-10

                                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                 O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
B.     Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal OSC-1     Conserve the value and function of Livermore’s open space as a bio-
               logical resource.
Objective OSC-1.1      Maintain biodiversity within the Planning Area with special em-
phasis on species that are sensitive, rare, declining, unique or represent valuable bio-
logical resources.
   Policies
   P1.     Priority shall be given to land acquisition efforts that would result in the creation
           and expansion of linkages between existing protected natural resource areas.
   P2.     The City shall support efforts to preserve and maintain Corral Hollow, important
           as the most northerly range of desert plants and animals, as open space.
   P3.     The City shall support efforts to preserve and maintain Cedar Mountain, impor-
           tant for its restricted stand of Sargent Cypress, var., Duttoni, as open space.
   P4.     The City shall require all projects that impact a federal or State listed threatened
           or endangered species, federal or State listed candidate species, State species of
           special concern, or State designated sensitive habitats, to mitigate for identified
           impacts in a way consistent with mitigation and avoidance measures published
           and distributed by the federal and/or State resource agencies at the time of the
           specific plan or project-level review. Monitoring requirements also shall be con-
           sistent with published requirements for each species or habitat. For listed or can-
           didate species, species of special concern, or sensitive habitats for which no miti-
           gation or avoidance measures have been published, the City shall require evidence
           of coordination with the responsible agencies prior to acceptance of mitigation or
           avoidance measures or monitoring requirements.
   P5.     The City shall support efforts to preserve and protect the Brushy Peak Regional
           Preserve consistent with the goals of EBRPD’s Master Plan for the Preserve. The
                                                                                                          8-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
              City’s efforts shall include coordination with EBRPD and LARPD during prepa-
              ration of a specific plan for the BART TOD to address concerns relating to po-
              tential impacts to the protection of the Preserve.
     P6.      The City shall preserve and maintain Frick Lake and the Springtown Alkali Sink
              area as important wildlife and plant habitats through preservation of open space
              in and around these areas.
     Actions
     A1.      Require all development to comply with State and federal regulations to preserve
              and protect the habitats of rare and endangered species.
     A2.      Encourage agricultural interests to maintain or develop areas of natural habitat
              with wildlife-compatible farm management practices.
Objective OSC-1.2          Minimize impacts to sensitive natural habitats including alkali
sinks, riparian vegetation, wetlands and woodland forest.
     Policies
     P1.      Habitats of rare or endangered species shall be preserved.
     P2.      Use and development of riparian areas should enhance the appearance of the
              creekside environment and protect and enhance native vegetation.
     P3.      Require appropriate setbacks, to be determined in coordination with resource
              agencies, LARPD, EBRPD, and other responsible agencies, adjacent to natural
              streams to provide adequate buffer areas that ensure the protection of plant and
              animal communities.
     P4.      Riparian woodlands and freshwater marshes shall be preserved. Developers shall
              be required to mitigate possible adverse impacts upon these resource areas. Con-
              sistent with the North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, no development shall be
8-12

                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     allowed that would have a substantial adverse impact or significant effect on such areas
     (NLUGBI).
P5.  Grading and excavation in woodland areas shall avoid disturbances to subsurface
     soil, water or rooting patterns for natural vegetation.
P6.  The City shall require all development to comply with State and federal regula-
     tions to preserve and protect the habitats of rare and endangered species.
P7.  The City shall require project proponents to identify and map sensitive biological
     and wetland resources on each development parcel and identify the measures nec-
     essary to avoid and/or minimize impacts on sensitive biological and wetland re-
     sources prior to approving the development. Mitigation for impacts to sensitive
     biological and wetland resources shall replace the functions and values of the re-
     sources as well as gross acreage.
P8.  The City shall require development to avoid take of species listed as threatened,
     endangered, or candidate under federal and state endangered species acts by im-
     plementing measures determined in consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
     Service and the California Department of Fish and Game.
P9.  Development, conversion to cultivated agriculture, or keeping of animals is not permitted if the
     quantity or biological quality of wetlands would be reduced materially. “Wetlands” are areas
     permanently or periodically covered by water, where hydrophytic vegetation is present under nor-
     mal circumstances, or that have soils primarily hydric in nature. (NLUGBI)
P10. No building may be located in a riparian corridor. No development, conversion to cultivated ag-
     riculture, or keeping of animals may be permitted that materially reduces the quantity or quality
     of water in a corridor. Dams to store water for agriculture may be permitted, however, provided
     water is released in quantities and at times so as not to impair aquatic life or riparian vegetation.
     “Riparian corridors” are areas within 200 feet from the center of a permanent or intermittent
     stream. (NLUGBI)
                                                                                                         8-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     P11.     No development or conversion to cultivated agriculture shall be permitted by the City which will
              cause a reduction or impairment contrary to federal or State law of habitat for animals or plants
              that are listed by the federal or State governments as endangered or threatened. (NLUGBI)
     P12.     The City shall require the maintenance of adequately-sized terrestrial and aquatic
              movement corridors that connect natural open space areas.
     P13.     The City shall preserve the sycamore alluvial woodlands along the Arroyo Mocho
              and Arroyo del Valle as important wildlife and plant habitat through the preserva-
              tion of open space and appropriate buffers in and around these areas.
Objective OSC-1.3           Conserve Livermore’s native trees and vegetation, which are im-
portant biological resources within the Planning Area.
     Policy
     P1.      Require new developments to incorporate native vegetation into their landscape
              plans, and prohibit the use of invasive non-native plant species. Propagules
              (seeds or plants) of native plants shall be from native sources.
     Actions
     A1.      Restore areas adjacent to existing open space areas with native plant and animal
              communities. Restoration should be accomplished with native plants from local
              sources.
     A2.      Develop and implement an urban forest preservation ordinance, inclusive of an
              inventory of ancestral trees, to require the preservation of trees of significant
              value.
8-14

                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Objective OSC-1.4      Coordinate with other levels of government and interested agen-
cies to preserve natural resources.
   Policies
   P1.     The City shall encourage the County of Alameda, East Bay Regional Park District,
           and the Livermore Area Recreation and Parks District to preserve and protect ar-
           eas outside the Urban Growth Boundary.
   P2.     The City shall encourage and cooperate with the County of Alameda to undertake
           a study to: (1) map the precise distribution of the rare and endangered species as
           to their number and sites; and (2) determine the sensitivity of these species to de-
           velopment, so that effective management programs can be developed.
   P3.     The City shall encourage and cooperate with the County, EBRPD, LARPD, and
           other agencies and organizations to establish a program to preserve representative
           examples of natural and near-natural landscape communities, such as the Spring-
           town Alkali Sink, Brushy Peak, Corral Hollow, Cedar Mountain and Sycamore
           Grove.
   P4.     The City shall monitor, on an on-going basis, open space easements received as
           part of its regulatory authority or through other acquisition, and work with other
           easement holders to maintain the values of the easement.
   Actions
   A1.     Work with local, regional, and State natural resource agencies and area non-profit
           organizations to develop programs to fund preservation of sensitive biological re-
           sources, including arroyos, wetlands, and grasslands.
   A2.     Work with other agencies such as Zone 7 and RWQCB to develop an intergov-
           ernmental program to reestablish the riparian community along major drainage
           ways in the Planning Area.
                                                                                                         8-15
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     A3.      The City shall develop a list of priorities and implementation plan regarding ac-
              quisition and/or preservation of open space areas to assist with the use of open
              space and other preservation fees or funds received by the City.
Goal OSC-2 Conserve Livermore’s waterways, tributaries and associated riparian
                  habitats.
Objective OSC-2.1          Continue efforts to ensure that development does not harm the
quality or quantity of Livermore’s surface or ground water.
     Policies
     P1.      Require the implementation of Best Management Practices (BMPs) to minimize
              erosion, sedimentation, and water quality degradation resulting from the construc-
              tion of new impervious surfaces.
     P2.      The City shall take all necessary measures to regulate runoff from urban uses to
              protect the quality of surface and ground water.
     P3.      The City shall work with Zone 7 to develop a recharge area map to guide future
              development. Developments proposed in areas identified as “valuable” to the re-
              charge area shall mitigate adverse impacts to the greatest extent possible.
     P4.      The City shall continue to work with Zone 7 to address on-going aquifer salt-
              loading in the basin.
     P5.      The City shall contribute its fair share to the cost of implementing the plan devel-
              oped by Zone 7 for salt management.
     Action
     A1.      Implement a program for integrated pest management (IPM) for City-managed
              landscaping areas that minimizes the use of pesticides and herbicides, and strives
8-16

                                                                            C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
            toward an organic pest-management approach. Provide incentives for the adop-
            tion of IPM practices on private land.
II.     OPEN SPACE USED FOR THE MANAGED PRODUCTION OF RE-
SOURCES
A. Background Information
Soils and Agricultural Resources
Although agricultural production in Alameda County comprises only about 0.1 percent of
agricultural production in California, farmland is an important component of open space
preservation around Livermore. Agricultural lands not only provide visual relief from urban-
ized areas, but in combination with planning and zoning regulations, they restrict the out-
ward growth of the City. In addition, a vibrant agricultural sector is an important amenity
that attracts visitors to Livermore, improves quality of life, and results in a more diversified
local economy. Although grape and wine production is a relatively small component of the
Livermore economy, viticulture in the area is expanding.
Farmland Patterns
Much of the area within Livermore’s City limits has been urbanized. Population and job
growth in the Livermore Valley has resulted in pressure to develop housing and commercial
establishments on lands historically used for agriculture. However, agricultural resources
remain. As of 2002, approximately 1,061 acres of land within the Livermore City limits were
in agricultural uses. Contiguous agricultural resources are more extensive outside the City
boundaries. Unincorporated areas to the north, east, and west of Livermore are currently
used for rangeland, dry farmland, irrigated cropland, and uncultivated farmland. Agricultural
uses south of Livermore include extensive vineyards, orchards (mainly olives and nuts),
rangeland, and uncultivated farmland.
                                                                                                         8-17

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Farmland Classifications
Farmland is classified and mapped by the State Department of Conservation, Division of
Land Resource Protection for the purposes of tracking farmland development throughout
the State. Farmland is mapped into categories ranging from Prime Farmland, which has the
best combination of physical characteristics able to sustain long-term agricultural production,
to Grazing Land, which allows for the grazing of livestock. As shown in Figure 8-2, lands to
the north and west of Livermore are generally mapped as Grazing Land. Prime Farmland,
Farmland of Statewide Importance, and Unique Farmland are primarily located south of
Livermore’s City limits.
Mineral Resources
Public Resources Code Section 2761 states that the Conservation Element of the General
Plan must include mineral resources policies that address the conservation and development
of identified mineral deposits of Statewide importance, balance the value of these deposits
against competing land uses, and minimize the impact of mining activities. Areas within the
vicinity of Livermore are underlain by alluvial deposits, which contain significant reserves of
sand and gravel deposits suitable for use as aggregate in the production of Portland Concrete
Cement. In some cases, the areas above these deposits are experiencing development pres-
sures as Livermore continues to grow outward. These mineral resources are important to
the economy of both Livermore and the State, and should be protected.
Mineral Resource Designations
Due to the high value of sand and gravel deposits in the vicinity of Livermore, the California
Geological Survey (formerly the California Division of Mines and Geology) has mapped and
classified the aggregate resources of the Livermore-Amador Valley. Most of the valley floor
south of I-580 is classified as an area of significant mineral resources. This portion of the
valley floor includes areas classified as Mineral Resource Zone 2 (MRZ-2) and Mineral Re-
source Zone 3 (MRZ 3). An MRZ-2 is an area where adequate information indicates that
significant mineral deposits are present. Areas classified as MRZ-3 are considered to contain
mineral deposits, but the significance of the deposits cannot be determined on the basis of
available information.
8-18

                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 8 - 2
                                                                                                                                            IMPORTANT
                                                                                                                                             FARMLAND
                                                                                                                                   Prime Farmland
                                                                                                                                   Farmland of Statewide Importance
                                                                                                                                   Unique Farmland
                                                                                                                                   Grazing Land
                                                                                                                                   Urban and Built-up Land
                                                                                                                                   Other Land
                                                                                                                                   Water
                                                                                                                                      0           1          2
                                                                                                                          N O RT H
                                                                                                                                      MILES
SOURCE: FARMLAND MAPPING AND MONITORING PROGRAM, DIVISION OF LAND RESOURCE PROTECTION, DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION, 2002.
                                                                                                                         LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
As part of the California Geological Survey Mineral Lands Classification Program, areas clas-
sified as MRZ-2 are considered in the determination of “resource sectors” (sectors). Sectors
are areas where mineral extraction is occurring and areas that have current land uses that are
similar to areas where mining has occurred. As shown Figure 8-3, the Planning Area con-
tains six resource sectors and a portion of one other sector. Aggregate resources within
these sectors are estimated to be approximately 100 million tons. One sector, located north
of Alden Lane and East of Isabel Avenue, has already been urbanized, limiting the availabil-
ity of the aggregate resources from that source.
Areas of Regional Significance
The resource sectors within the Planning Area were designated by the State Mining and Ge-
ology Board in 1987 as “areas of regional significance.” Under the State Mining and Recla-
mation Act (SMARA), specific actions are required during consideration of land use plan-
ning in areas designated as “areas of regional significance” in order to conserve important
mineral deposits. SMARA Section 2763 requires that, prior to permitting land uses which
would threaten the potential to extract minerals within areas of regional significance, a lead
agency must prepare a statement specifying its reasons for permitting the proposed use. The
State Mining and Geology Board Reclamation Regulations define incompatible land uses as
“land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or that require public or private invest-
ment in structures, land improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining be-
cause of the greater economic value of the land and its improvements.”
8-20

 SOURCE: CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF CONSERVATION, DIVISION OF MINES AND GEOLOGY, 1996.
                                                                                                         FIGURE 8 - 3
                                sector boundary
  N O RT H
                                properties owned or controlled
                                by aggregate producers                               MINERAL RESOURCE SECTORS
0          .75   1.5            depleted resources                                   WITHIN THE PLANNING AREA
miles                           areas urbanized or urbanizing
                                                                                              LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal OSC-3 Protect agricultural open space in the Planning Area and the City.
Objective OSC-3.1          Preserve agricultural land, a vital part of Livermore’s open space
network and an irreplaceable natural resource.
     Policies
     P1.      Undeveloped lands that are State-designated as Prime Farmland, Farmland of
              Statewide Importance, and Unique Farmland shall be preserved, to the greatest
              extent feasible, for open space or agricultural use.
     P2.      The City shall encourage the County to preserve agricultural activities outside the
              Urban Growth Boundary.
     P3.      The City shall take all possible steps to preserve and expand the vineyards.
     P4.      Expansion of viticulture on lands rated “good and very good” for the production
              of wine grapes, as defined by the National Resources Conservation Service, shall
              be encouraged.
     P5.      The City shall encourage agricultural landowners to enter the agricultural preserve
              program established under the Land Conservation Act, particularly in areas adja-
              cent to patterns of urbanization encouraged by the General Plan.
     Actions
     A1.      Work with land trust organizations, other conservation groups, and water purvey-
              ors to preserve agricultural uses outside the Urban Growth Boundary.
     A2.      Work cooperatively with organizations that promote and market agricultural
              products grown or processed in and around Livermore.
8-22

                                                                          C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                              O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
   A3.    Identify potential funding mechanisms to support the preservation of agricultural
          uses.
Objective OSC-3.2    Preserve valuable agricultural soils in the Planning Area.
   Policies
   P1.    The City shall consider potential impacts of mineral extraction on air and water
          quality, on agriculture, vegetation and wildlife, and on scenic, visual, and recrea-
          tion resources in the review of any extractive proposal. Any activity that would
          have an irremediable adverse impact or significant effect on the values of such re-
          sources shall be considered incompatible with the maintenance of these values.
   P2.    Encourage soil conservation practices, as recommended by the Natural Resources
          Conservation Service (formerly USDA’s Soil Conservation Service).
   P3.    The City shall pursue application for United States Department of Agriculture
          (USDA) grants to provide funding for stabilization of creeks and creek banks.
Goal OSC-4 Preserve and utilize mineral resources in the City and its Planning Area,
              while ensuring minimal adverse impacts on environmental resources
              and surrounding uses.
Objective OSC-4.1    Achieve a balance between the need to utilize mineral resources
while minimizing negative environmental impacts of resource extraction to the
greatest extent feasible.
   Policies
   P1.    When considering land use proposals, the City shall take into account potentially
          available mineral resources on the property or in the vicinity.
   P2.    Prior to approval of any new or expanded mining operation, the City shall ensure
          that the operation will not create significant nuisances, hazards, or adverse envi-
          ronmental effects. The City shall require environmentally sound quarry opera-
                                                                                                       8-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
              tions by ensuring compliance with all applicable City policies and standards of the
              City’s Municipal Code and noise standards in the Noise Element of the City’s
              General Plan.
     P3.      New or substantially expanded mining operations in the Planning Area must ad-
              here to the following standards:
              (a) Demonstrate no significant adverse impacts from the mining operation on ad-
                  joining areas and uses, including, but not limited to, noise, dust, and vibration;
              (b) Demonstrate no substantial increase in hazards to neighboring uses, water
                  quality, air quality, agricultural resources, and biological resources;
              (c) Demonstrate that the proposed plan complies with existing applicable County
                  and State waste management plans and standards;
              (d) Implement a landscaped buffer zone between quarrying operations and noise-
                  sensitive adjacent uses to ensure consistency with standards established in the
                  City’s Noise Element of the General Plan.
              (e) Use berms, barriers, sounds walls, and other similar measures to assure that
                  noise from quarrying does not cause exceedance of ambient noise level stan-
                  dards relevant to noise-sensitive adjacent uses.
     P4.      Allow continued operation and minor expansion of existing mining operations
              within the Planning Area only where impacts to environmental resources and sur-
              rounding residential uses can be mitigated to less-than-significant levels.
     P5.      Ensure reclamation of mining areas for reuse consistent with the land use desig-
              nation for the area in accordance with the California Surface Mining and Reclama-
              tion Act (SMARA) when mining use is phased out.
8-24

                                                                                C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                    O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
III.    OPEN SPACE FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION
A. Background Information
Livermore is served by an extensive network of parks, ranging from large regional parks,
covering several hundred acres, to small neighborhood parks with tot lots. Existing parks
within the City are shown in Figure 8-4. The parks in the City offer Livermore residents a
wide variety of open space and recreational opportunities, including formal sports fields,
tennis courts and aquatic facilities, open play fields, hiking and bicycle trails, tot lots, picnic
areas and space for public events. In addition to public open space, Livermore has a number
of community facilities, including three public library branches, a senior center, and several
spaces available for public events and community group activities.
The City of Livermore owns and operates several of the smaller parks in the City. The Liv-
ermore Area Parks and Recreation District (LAPRD), however, has the primary responsibil-
ity to provide, plan for, and maintain parks and community facilities, as well as many miles
of scenic multi-use trails in Livermore and the surrounding area. The East Bay Regional
Parks District (EBRPD), an additional park and recreation district, also provides and is re-
sponsible for developing and maintaining parks and public open space in the Livermore, par-
ticularly in the larger Planning Area environs.
LARPD has developed the standards listed in Table 8-2 to determine the amounts of differ-
ent types of parkland needed to serve Livermore residents. According to standards set by
LARPD, the amount of Regional, Neighborhood, and Special Use parks currently provided
for Livermore residents is adequate. However, in 2002, there was shortfall of approximately
110 acres of Community Parks in Livermore, equal to three or four parks of 30 to 40 acres
each.
As of 2002, LARPD had begun an update of its 1995 Master Plan. The updated Master Plan
will re-evaluate park, bicycle, and trail facilities, as well as recreational programs covered in
                                                                                                             8-25
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
TABLE 8-2 LARPD PARK STANDARDS
 Park Type                 Description                                      LARPD Standard
 Neighborhood              6 - 10-Acres. Service Area: ¾ to 1 mile. No      2 acres/1,000 resi-
 (N)                       permanent restrooms, no sports lighting. In-     dents or
                           cludes open play fields, small picnic areas, tot 1 park/3,000-5,000
                           lot.                                             residents
 Community (C)             +30-Acres. Service Area: 2-miles. Includes 2 acres/1,000 resi-
                           sports fields with lighting where possible, dents
                           permanent restrooms, on-site parking, tennis
                           courts, aquatic facilities, large group picnic
                           areas.
 Regional (R)              250-acre minimum. Service Area: within 1 15 acres/1,000 resi-
                           hour drive. Minimal improvements, site must dents
                           provide habitat for plants and animals, per-
                           manent restrooms only when feasible.
 Special Use (S)           No Minimum Size. Service Area: may include 3 acres/1,000 resi-
                           the whole community. Activities may include dents
                           rodeos, soccer, softball and concerts.
the 1995 document. The updated Master Plan will expand its analysis to include a broader
range of goals, objectives, and policies of the agency, along with implementation timelines .
8-26

Source: LARPD, Thomas Brothers
                                                        FIGURE 8 - 4
                               PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
                                             LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
back of figure 8-4
8-28
                                                                           C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                               O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
Goal OSC-5 Develop a full complement of parks and other recreational lands for
              public use and enjoyment.
Objective OSC-5.1     Provide a comprehensive system of parks and recreation facilities
in Livermore.
   Policies
   P1.    Livermore’s existing parks shall be maintained and enhanced, as appropriate.
   P2.    Require developers to provide land or in lieu fees for parks, as governed by the
          terms of the Quimby Act.
   P3.    The City shall implement a standard of five acres of publicly-owned parkland per
          thousand population and require new development to provide new park acreage
          or in-lieu fees at this ratio.
   P4.    Where feasible and safe, the City shall provide recreational access to properties on
          which new public facilities are sited.
   P5.    To the extent allowed by State law, the City shall coordinate with LARPD regard-
          ing the timing on completion of park improvements. Recommendations from
          LARPD shall be considered by City decision-makers and incorporated into condi-
          tions of approval, as appropriate. Park improvements shall be coordinated with
          other public improvements (such as water, sewer, and roads) needed to serve new
          development.
   P6.    The City shall coordinate and cooperate with LARPD and EBRPD in developing
          adequate regional park space around Livermore to serve foreseeable population
          increases in Livermore and its environs.
   P7.    The City and LARPD shall work to update the in-lieu park fee ordinance, which
          will include an evaluation of park needs Citywide, as well as the Downtown Area.
                                                                                                        8-29

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
              The update shall include the development of park in-lieu fees for all residential
              types, as well as commercial and industrial development, within the community.
              The City and LARPD shall work together to develop park locations in the City, as
              well as the Downtown Area.
     P8.      The City shall coordinate with LARPD to develop adequate neighborhood, com-
              munity, and other appropriate park space within Livermore to serve foreseeable
              population increases.
     P9.      If LARPD cannot identify an appropriate future community park site within the
              urban growth boundary, the City shall support the efforts of LARPD to seek a
              community park site outside the urban growth boundary, in accordance with the
              North Livermore Urban Growth Boundary Initiative (NLUGBI).
     P10.     The City shall support the efforts of LARPD to identify sites to address the com-
              munity park shortfall existing in 2002 and shall coordinate with LARPD to iden-
              tify funding options for parkland acquisition and improvements.
     Actions
     A1.      Work with LARPD on the update of its master plan for the development of
              parks, including the identification of sites for future parks and recreation facilities.
     A2.      Conduct a facilities study of the City’s public buildings and uses to assess current
              and future needs for additional facilities.
     A3.      Begin development of a Memorandum of Understanding with LARPD to address
              the use of park fees Citywide, as well as in Downtown, before the end of 2003.
8-30

                                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                 O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Objective OSC-5.2     Provide a full range of recreational activities within Livermore’s
park system.
    Policies
    P1.    The City shall work with LARPD to provide facilities within neighborhood parks
           that will meet the needs of nearby residents.
    P2.    The City shall work with LARPD to provide a full range of public park and rec-
           reation facilities that reinforce community identity and are efficient, convenient to
           users, and appropriately distributed throughout the community.
Objective OSC-5.3     Augment and develop Livermore’s cultural and community facili-
ties.
    Policy
    P1.    The development of cultural facilities and activities for all residents shall be en-
           couraged.
Objective OSC-5.4     Maintain and enhance public access to Livermore’s unique natu-
ral resources.
    Policies
    P1.    The City shall continue to encourage public access to, and maintenance of, exist-
           ing recreational trails in the Planning Areas.
    P2.    Recreational access to the open space surrounding the City shall be encouraged to
           the extent that it is compatible with provisions of the Land Use Element.
    Actions
    A1.    Develop public recreational opportunities along the arroyos and creeks while en-
           suring that increased public access is managed so as to protect these areas from
           adverse environmental impacts such as erosion or water pollution.
                                                                                                          8-31

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     A2.      Coordinate development of parkland with LARPD and identify sufficient loca-
              tions for parks on the General Plan Land Use Map.
IV.      AIR QUALITY
Air is a natural resource that is not confined by municipal boundaries. Air pollutants gener-
ated in San Francisco may pass through Livermore due to westerly winds; similarly, pollution
generated in Livermore may flow toward Tracy. Alternately, with northeasterly winds, air
pollution generated in Tracy may affect Livermore and points to the west. Thus air pollu-
tion, like other issues of resource degradation, must be at least partly addressed on the re-
gional level. While local efforts to reduce emissions are necessary, they must be part of a
concerted regional effort in order to be effective in the long run.
A. Background Information
Pollution Potential
The amount of a given air pollutant in the atmosphere is determined by the amount of pol-
lutant released and the atmosphere’s ability to transport or dilute that pollutant. The major
determinants of transport and dilution are wind, atmospheric stability, terrain and, for pho-
tochemical pollutants, sunshine. Because of the sheltered nature of the Livermore Valley,
which is surrounded by hills or low mountains on all sides, air pollution potential is high, es-
pecially for photochemical pollutants in the summer and fall. High temperatures increase
the potential for ozone (O3) to accumulate. Livermore Valley not only traps locally-
generated pollutants but also can be the receptor of O3 and O3 precursors from San Fran-
cisco, Alameda, Contra Costa and Santa Clara Counties. On days with northeasterly winds,
most common in the early fall, O3 may be carried west from the San Joaquin Valley to the
Livermore Valley. During the winter, the sheltering effect of the Livermore Valley, com-
bined with its distance from moderating water bodies and the presence of a strong high-
pressure system contribute to the development of strong, surface-based temperature inver-
sions in the Livermore basin. During these conditions, pollutants such as carbon monoxide
8-32

                                                                             C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                 O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
(CO) and particulate matter (PM10) generated by motor vehicles, fireplaces and agricultural
burning can become concentrated.
Pollution Sources
Livermore’s air quality is most affected by CO emissions from motor vehicles. In the Bay
Area, CO is typically the pollutant of greatest concern because it is created in abundance by
motor vehicles and it does not readily disperse into the air. Because CO does not readily
disperse, areas of vehicle congestion can create “pockets” of high CO concentration called
“hot spots.” While CO transport is limited, it does disperse with distance from the source
under normal meteorological conditions. However, under certain extreme meteorological
conditions, CO concentrations near congested roadways or intersections may reach un-
healthful levels affecting local sensitive receptors (e.g., residents, schoolchildren, the elderly
and hospital patients). Typically, high CO concentrations are associated with roadways or
intersections operating at unacceptable levels of service, or with extremely high traffic vol-
umes.
Other sources of air pollution in Livermore include emissions from automobiles, exhaust
from construction equipment, and fugitive dust generally associated with demolition, land
clearing, exposure of soils to the air, and cut and fill operations. Dust generated during con-
struction varies substantially on a project-by-project basis, depending on the level of activity,
the specific operations and weather conditions. Surrounded by a variety of agricultural op-
erations and subject to moderate levels of winds, Livermore will continue to face the issue of
fugitive dust in the coming years.
Regulation of Air Quality
Livermore is within the jurisdiction of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
(BAAQMD), which regulates air quality in the San Francisco Bay Area. Air quality condi-
tions in the San Francisco Bay Area have improved significantly since the BAAQMD was
created in 1955. Ambient concentrations of air pollutants and the number of days during
which the region exceeds air quality standards have fallen dramatically. The BAAQMD’s
Bay Area Clean Air Plans (CAPs) contain District-wide control measures to reduce carbon
monoxide and ozone precursor emissions. The State Standards for these pollutants are
more stringent than the national standards. The BAAQMD is primarily responsible for
                                                                                                          8-33

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
regulating air pollution emissions from stationary sources (e.g., factories) and from indirect
sources (e.g., traffic associated with new development), and for monitoring ambient pollu-
tion concentrations.
Air Quality in Livermore
The BAAQMD maintains an air quality monitoring station in Livermore that measures O3,
CO, Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) and PM10. From 1993 to 2002, State standards for O3 and
PM10 have been exceeded in Livermore on numerous occasions. Federal and State stan-
dards for CO and NO2 were not exceeded during the 10-year period. As of 2002, levels of
O3 exceeded State standards in the Livermore area. PM10 standards were not exceeded in
2002 in the Livermore area. These pollutants are expected to continue to be important in-
fluences on air quality in both Livermore and the greater Bay Area as vehicular travel in-
creases in the region.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
Goal OSC-6 Protect and improve Livermore’s air quality.
Objective OSC-6.1          Minimize air pollution emissions.
     Policies
     P1.      The City shall require project developers to develop and implement a construc-
              tion-period air pollution control plan, consistent with dust and emission-
              abatement actions outlined in the CEQA handbook of the Bay Area Air Quality
              Management District.
     P2.      The City shall prohibit the location of sensitive receptors (e.g., residential uses,
              schools, hospitals) in the vicinity of industries that generate toxic emissions; con-
              versely, prohibit the location of industries that generate toxic emissions in the vi-
              cinity of sensitive receptors.
     P3.      The City shall work with local and regional municipalities and agencies to reduce
              automobile-related vehicle emissions.
8-34

                                                                       C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
P4.   All industrial uses within Livermore shall meet regional, State and federal air pol-
      lution standards.
P5.   The City shall attempt to increase the employment to population ratio to reduce
      commuting rates and associated vehicle-related pollution emissions. The City
      shall approve only those development proposals, which are designed and located
      to minimize energy consumption and adverse impacts on air, land and water re-
      sources. High-density, transit-oriented developments shall be strongly encour-
      aged and promoted through the use of specific planning, density transfer, the
      planned development concept, and zoning designations.
P6.   The City shall monitor air quality and shall consider implementing a population
      cap if air quality declines.
P7.   The City shall support programs to encourage the development and maximum
      use of regional and local mass transit systems. To this end, the City shall actively
      support:
      (a) the funding and construction of a BART or light/commuter rail extension to
          Livermore;
      (b) the designation of special lanes on I-580 for the exclusive use of commuter
          buses during peak traffic periods; and
      (c) close coordination in the operations of local and regional transit systems in
          order to minimize the travel time between communities and major generating
          areas served by the regional system.
Actions
A1.   Provide incentives to purchase vehicles that have alternative fuel systems with re-
      duced emissions.
A2.   Provide incentives to reduce vehicle trips and increase ridesharing so as to reduce
      pollutants generated by vehicular combustion engines.
                                                                                                    8-35
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     A3.      Seek means to meet State standards for emission of air pollutants so that vegeta-
              tion (including crops), the visual environment, and public health will be protected.
     A4.      Study the implementation and feasibility of a population cap which would be im-
              plemented in the event of a decline in air quality over the next five to ten years.
     A5.      Coordinate with other local and regional agencies (e.g. LARPD, LVJUSD, Ala-
              meda County) to manage and control fugitive dust from sources including, but
              not limited to, quarries, ballfields, construction sites and landscaping and mainte-
              nance activities.
     A6.      Triennially, concurrent with the development of each three-year Housing Imple-
              mentation Program, review and report changes in local air quality levels, based on
              reports published by the Air Quality Management District, to the City Council to
              determine if consideration of a population cap is warranted.
V.       ENERGY CONSERVATION
A. Background Information
In 2000, California experienced an electrical energy supply shortage as a result of the restruc-
turing of the State’s utility industry. This energy shortage resulted in escalating utility rates,
rolling blackouts, and attempts to subsidize wholesale purchases of electricity. While the en-
ergy shortage resulted from high wholesale electricity costs, rather than a shortage of elec-
tricity supply, rolling blackouts and high energy bills hastened a return of energy conserva-
tion, as experienced in the early 1970’s, to the public’s consciousness.
Energy conservation not only has economic benefits, but environmental implications. The
combustion of fossil fuels to produce heat or electricity, or to power internal combustion
engines, has been linked to global warming. In addition, the extraction and processing of
these fossil fuels have added costs, in terms of environmental degradation caused by mining
operations, and the foreign policy obligations that result from importing a large percentage
of the nation’s oil. In Livermore, energy conservation can be achieved via reduction in elec-
8-36

                                                                           C I T Y   O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                               O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
tricity usage and private automobile use, encouraging efficient siting and exposure for build-
ings, encouraging the use and development of alternative sources of energy, and implement-
ing land use and transportation policies that encourage energy efficiency.
A complex relationship exists between land use, transportation, and energy use. In general,
communities with a high residential density, the presence of easily-accessible urban services
such as food markets, doctor’s offices, and schools, and strong public transit systems result
in a lower per-capita energy use than areas where development patterns are dispersed and
that necessitate the use of an automobile to access basic services. Therefore, a crucial com-
ponent of a successful energy conservation program in Livermore will be to encourage pat-
terns of growth that allow for increased transit service and use of alternate modes of trans-
port, such as biking and walking.
B. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
Goal OSC-7 Minimize Livermore’s energy consumption.
Objective OSC-7.1       Promote a variety of approaches to energy conservation in the
public and private realms.
    Policies
    P1.     The City shall promote the construction of energy-producing wind turbines in the
            vicinity of Livermore.
    P2.     The City shall approve only those development proposals which are designed and
            located to minimize energy consumption and adverse impacts on air, land, and
            water resources.
                                                                                                        8-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
     Actions
     A1.      Create and use incentives to encourage commercial, residential, and industrial en-
              ergy users to install on-site alternative energy sources, such as photovoltaic (PV)
              cells.
     A2.      Where appropriate, replace City-owned vehicles with alternatively-fueled or hy-
              brid vehicles.
     A3.      Develop incentive programs to encourage businesses to replace diesel vehicles
              with less polluting alternatives such as compressed natural gas, bio-based fuels,
              hybrids, and electric batteries.
8-38
5 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide the policy framework for regulation and development of
  the transportation systems in Livermore. This Element balances the need to provide efficient ways to move
  people and goods from one place to another with the goals to revitalize the Downtown and to limit non-local
  cut-through traffic on City streets.
  The Circulation Element must be correlated with the Land Use Element. As required by
  Government Code Section 65302(b), this Element contains information on the general
  location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, and
  terminals.
  The Circulation Element in the City of Livermore is intended to do the following:
     Identify anticipated circulation needs through buildout of the General Plan as necessary
        to serve the City and its land uses;
     Indicate the general location and extent of existing and proposed circulation routes and
        facilities necessary to serve those needs;
     Provide clear policies and priorities for circulation system improvements for use by the
        City in preparing budgets for the Capital Improvement Program (CIP), and to
        determine the appropriate conditions for approval of future development proposals.
  In addition, this Circulation Element has been formulated based on the following
  fundamental planning considerations:
     A city’s circulation system is a principal determinant of its physical development pattern.
     The location, design, and component modes of a city’s circulation system have
        significant implications for community appearance, air quality, noise, health, safety,
        vegetation, wildlife, and other environmental factors.
     Circulation element policies should relate adequately to the transportation system
        characteristics and plans of other jurisdictions in the region.
     A safe and efficient circulation system is necessary to support economic development,
        recreational opportunities, and quality of life in the community.
                                                                                                         5-1

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
State law also requires that a Circulation Element contain data and policies related to the
circulation of water, sewage, storm drainage, and other public utilities. These components
are presented in the Infrastructure and Public Services Element.
A. Street Classifications
       0B
The City of Livermore is served by an existing network of freeways, highways, major
roadways, collector streets and local streets. The City defines the highway/roadway system
using the following classification system:
         Freeway
         Highway
         Major Street
         Collector Street
         Local Street
         Intercounty Route
         Special Rural Route
Roadway Classification Descriptions
4B
   Roadway classifications, as outlined above, are used to describe the function and character of
   streets and highways. Different types of streets are intended to handle different types of
   traffic. Traffic movements are channeled through a hierarchical system that progresses from
   a lower classification handling short, locally oriented trips to higher classifications that
   connect regional and inter-regional traffic generators, handling longer trips. The roadway
   classification system is used to generally describe the total volume of traffic on various types
   of roadways, as well as the trip length, trip type, local access (number and type of curb cuts
   and driveway access), posted speeds, parking, median type, traffic control and other
   characteristics. While the classification system describes the general functions of each type
   of roadway, there is often overlap between classifications for certain characteristics. For
   example, not every major street has the same number of curb cuts or carries the same traffic
   volume. In some cases, a lower classified street may even carry higher volume than a higher
   5-2

                                                                                     C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
classified street, but in the future it would be expected that the volume on the higher
classified street will grow to meet the criteria for that street type. Similarly, the roadway
classification system is designed to consider all user types including vehicles, pedestrians,
bicyclists, persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, users and operators of
public transportation, emergency responders, seniors, children, youth, and families. While the
roadway system will not include exclusive element of all modes on every street, the system
will work to balance needs and create safe and efficient travel through a comprehensive and
integrated transportation network (Reso 2014-183).The paragraphs below describe the
general characteristics of each of the street classifications in the City. However, the
characteristics of some of the existing roadways within each classification may vary from the
discussions below.
Freeways
20B
    Freeways are State-designated, high-speed, high-capacity routes (range of 50,000 to 250,000
    vehicles per day) serving Statewide and interregional transportation needs. The only freeway
    in Livermore is I-580, which bisects the City as it traverses east-west through the northern
    portion of town. Direct access to the freeway is limited to the highway (State Route 84) and
    major streets, via freeway interchanges. No land uses adjacent to a freeway take access from
    it.
    Highways
    21B
        Highways are State-designated, relatively high-speed, high-capacity routes (range of 20,000 to
        50,000 vehicles per day) serving needs for interregional through traffic movement and the
        interconnection of the Countywide road system. The only highway in Livermore is State
        Route (SR) 84. Highways also connect major streets with freeway interchanges. Direct
        access is limited to major streets via signal-controlled intersections. Access points to adjacent
        land uses, such as driveways, are prohibited, as is roadside parking.
        Major Streets
        2B
           Major streets are local medium-speed, high-capacity routes (ranging from 20,000 to 50,000
           vehicles per day) for intracity, cross-town travel and local access to freeways, highways, and
           the subregional road system via interchanges and signal-controlled intersections. Major
           streets are typically four- to six-lane divided facilities. Major streets interconnect collector
                                                                                                                5-3
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
and local streets at traffic signal and stop sign controlled intersections, respectively. These
streets may include bike facilities and typically have sidewalks in each direction. Bus routes
typically utilize major streets as a way to traverse through town with stops located at
intersections with collector streets and near employment centers. Sidewalks with accessible
ramps provide access for pedestrians of all abilities to traverse major streets and connect
neighborhoods (Reso. 2014-183). The frequency of direct access to abutting properties is
limited to essential driveway locations away from intersections to avoid interference with the
through traffic flow of these streets. New single-family homes may not front on major
streets. Roadside parking is generally prohibited.
Collectors
23B
    Collector streets are relatively low-speed, medium-capacity streets (ranging from 5,000 to
    20,000 vehicles per day) that facilitate movement between local and major streets. Collector
    streets provide for multimodal circulation between neighborhoods, as well as divert through
    moving traffic from local streets. These streets typically include bike facilities and sidewalks
    in each direction which are used by local pedestrians and bicyclists for recreation purposes,
    to run errands, or to commute to/from school or work. Accessible ramps provide access for
    pedestrians of all ages and abilities to traverse collector streets and create an interconnected
    sidewalk network between neighborhoods. When there is a bus route on an adjacent major
    street, a bus stop is typically situated near the collector/major street intersection to allow for
    convenient neighborhood access (Reso. 2014-183). Direct vehicular access to abutting
    properties (driveway spacing) is sometimes limited. Prohibitions on curbside parking vary
    with roadway widths and traffic conditions. Typically, collector streets are two- to four-lanes
    wide.
    Local Streets
    24B
        Local streets are low-speed, low-capacity streets (up to 5,000 vehicles per day) that provide
        for multimodal circulation with direct access to abutting land uses. Local streets are typically
        two lanes wide with sidewalks in each direction. Due to the lower traffic speeds, local streets
        and sidewalks are used by people of all ages and abilities to walk or bike for recreation and
        are the start and end location of many pedestrian or bicyclist commutes to and from school
        or work. Accessible ramps provide access for pedestrians of all ages and abilities to traverse
        local streets within neighborhoods, and connect to sidewalks on collector streets (Reso.
        5-4
                                                                                  C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                             C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
2014-183). Street design standards and layouts are typically used to discourage cut-through
traffic, avoid high travel speeds and amounts of traffic, and minimize neighborhood noise
and safety impacts. Curbside parking is usually permitted.
Intercounty Routes
25B
    Intercounty routes are medium-speed, medium-capacity rural roads (up to 20,000 vehicles
    per day) on the City’s urban edge that are components of the subregional road system.
    Generally, these routes are at Alameda County standards for two-lane rural routes and
    connect to Contra Costa or San Joaquin County roadways. These roads do not have curbs
    or gutters but typically include bicycle facilities used for commute and recreational purposes.
    Special Rural Routes
    26B
        Special rural routes include highways, major streets, and intercounty routes that pass through
        or by areas designated as having special rural features that warrant protection and
        enhancement measures in the roadway design. Special rural routes are designated entering
        and traveling through City-identified vineyard lands. These routes are to incorporate special
        road design standards that serve to protect and complement the “wine county” character of
        these lands, including width restrictions, landscaping features, and special signs. Special rural
        routes are developed at two-lane rural standards (no curbs, gutters, or sidewalks), but do
        include combined bike, pedestrian, and equestrian trails, which are typically separated from
        the roadway and provide commute and recreation opportunities.
        To protect the rural and agricultural character of the vineyard lands south of the City, all
        roads in this area are to remain two lanes. These roads are designated to have two paved
        travel lanes with paved left turn lanes, where required. In developed portions of South
        Livermore where future traffic volumes may exceed the capacity of a two-lane road,
        additional right-of-way to accommodate roadway capacity expansion is required. This extra
        right-of-way area not used for the functional, two paved lanes are to be landscaped and/or
        used for hiking, biking and equestrian trails.
                                                                                                             5-5

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
B. Existing Conditions of the Circulation System in 2003
1B
   The City of Livermore plans for, designs, funds, constructs, operates, and maintains a safe
   and efficient transportation system for all users. This section discusses the current conditions
   related to all types of circulation (Reso. 2014-183).
   Vehicular Circulation System
   5B
      Livermore’s existing roadway system is radial, with major streets, including Livermore
      Avenue, First Street, East Stanley Boulevard, Holmes Street, Murietta Boulevard, and East
      Avenue converging in the Downtown. Roads Downtown follow a traditional grid pattern,
      but the Downtown and the “lettered” streets northwest of it are not oriented on a north-
      south axis. The major streets and collectors in other areas of the City are on north-south or
      east-west axis, so these streets intersect with the Downtown grid at a diagonal. Most local
      neighborhood streets are curvilinear.
      Regional Routes
      The main regional routes through Livermore are Interstate 580 (I-580) and State Route 84
      (SR 84). I-580 connects the Bay Area with San Joaquin County and is a major inter-regional
      route for commuting, truck commerce, and recreational travel. I-580 currently experiences
      severe congestion during the morning and evening peak traffic hours. The peak commute
      hour varies for each roadway segment. Generally, however, the morning (AM) peak hour
      typically occurs between 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. depending on the roadway segment. Similarly, the
      evening (PM) peak hour typically occurs between 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. depending on the
      roadway segment. Within the City limits, I-580 carries an average daily traffic (ADT) volume
      of 165,000 to 220,000 vehicles, according to the Caltrans I-580 High Occupancy Vehicle
      (HOV) Project Study Report (PSR), dated June 2001.
      SR 84 is a two- to six-lane State highway that connects I-580 in Livermore with I-680 in
      Sunol, located to the southwest of the City. In 2003, SR 84 followed Vallecitos Road and
      Holmes Street north to Downtown, then traveled through Downtown east on First Street to
      its intersection with I-580. However, the City was working with Caltrans to transfer SR 84
      to the Isabel Avenue corridor and relinquish Holmes Street, First Street, and a portion of
      5-6

                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Vallecitos Road to the City. Isabel Avenue is classified as a Highway. The Isabel Avenue
corridor has been identified for the relocation of SR 84 in City and State planning
documents since 1960. The re-routing of SR 84 is intended to facilitate the State’s plan for a
four to six lane expressway along the Isabel Avenue corridor and the City’s desire to remove
non-local truck traffic from the City’s Downtown, enabling the City to alter the nature of the
streetscape in Downtown to further revitalization efforts and recapture Downtown as a
vibrant, pedestrian-oriented environment.
Major Streets
In 2003, major streets (the entire street may be classified as major, or portions of the street
may be another classification) included: Collier Canyon Road, Murrieta Boulevard, P Street,
Vallecitos Road/Holmes Street, Livermore Avenue, Mines Road, Vasco Road, Springtown
Boulevard, and Greenville Road, which provide north-south access through the City. In
addition, North Canyons Parkway, Northfront Road, Jack London Boulevard, East Stanley
Boulevard, Las Positas Road, Patterson Pass Road, First Street, Railroad Avenue, East
Avenue, Altamont Pass Road, Portola Avenue, Fourth Street, Tesla Road and Concannon
Boulevard are major streets providing east-west access. All other facilities are classified as
Collector Streets, Intercounty Routes, Special Rural Routes, or local streets.
Non-Local Cut-Through Traffic
6B
   Cut-through traffic consists of trips that pass entirely through the City without stopping to
   patronize local businesses or job centers. Livermore experiences a significant amount of
   non-local, “cut-through” traffic on arterial roads because large numbers of commuters use
   City streets to bypass the traffic congestion on I-580. Cut-through traffic primarily occurs in
   response to freeway congestion and affects major east-west routes throughout the City. Cut-
   through traffic can occur on arterial streets and also on local and collector streets. When it
   occurs, it can also be accompanied by problems of excessive speeding.
   Congestion on I-580 is predicted to worsen as cities east of the Altamont Pass continue to
   urbanize. City streets with noted cut-through traffic include Livermore Avenue, Concannon
   Boulevard, First Street, Vasco Road, Greenville Road, Stanley Boulevard, Isabel Avenue,
   Northfront Road, Sunflower Court, Bluebell Drive, Southfront Road, and Las Positas Road.
   Growth in regional commuting, combined with increases in congestion on regional freeways
                                                                                                       5-7

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
and highways, such as I-580, is anticipated to increase the amount of cut-through traffic in
Livermore as motorists seek routes other than the freeway to make regional trips. This issue
is discussed in more detail in this Circulation Element with respect to future improvements.
There must be a balance between providing additional capacity on City streets, and the
resulting increase in regional through traffic that will use those improved streets to bypass
the freeway.
Neighborhood Traffic Calming
7B
   The City experiences problems of excessive speeds and traffic volumes on some residential,
   collector and local streets. To address the issue of excessive traffic and speeds on local and
   collector streets, the City adopted the “Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program” (NTCP) in
   March 2002. The purpose of the Neighborhood Traffic Calming Program is to improve the
   livability and quality of life within residential neighborhoods through the deployment of
   traffic calming devices. The goal of the NTCP is to implement measures identified by a
   consensus of the neighborhood to effect driver behavior in such a way that improves safety
   and the quality of life for residents, pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. This is balanced
   with the goal to provide quick response times for emergency vehicles including fire trucks,
   police and ambulances. The NTCP was designed in compliance with the goals, policies and
   programs of the General Plan Circulation Element.
   Level of Service
   8B
      To measure and describe the operation of the roadway network, a grading system called
      Level of Service (LOS) is commonly used. The LOS grading system qualitatively
      characterizes motor vehicle traffic conditions during the AM and PM peak hours associated
      with varying levels of traffic, generally referred to as congestion. These levels range from
      LOS A, which indicates free-flow vehicular traffic conditions with little or no delay
      experienced by motorists, to LOS F which indicates congested conditions where vehicle
      flow exceeds the designed vehicular capacity of the roadway. When LOS falls below a
      particular level (the grade lowers, i.e., from LOS D to LOS F), a road segment or
      intersection can be considered deficient and in need of expansion to increase capacity or
      other improvement to increase or improve traffic flow, such as adjustments to intersection
      signalization.
      5-8

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Intersections typically represent the most critical locations of bottlenecks and congestion
because the roadway must be shared by opposing traffic. Table 5-1 outlines the LOS
concept for signalized intersections. At signalized intersections in 2003, mid-level LOS D
was the upper limit of acceptable level of service. The mid-level LOS D reflects the City’s
intent to maintain stable traffic flow throughout Livermore.
Goods Movement System
9B
   The efficient and safe movement of goods to destinations in the City is an important
   function of the circulation system. Regional goods movement occurs on I-580 , SR 84 and
   rail lines. The goods movement system in the City primarily consists of the roadway system,
   which carries truck traffic, and the rail system, which carries freight rail movements. Truck
   movements can occur on any street if the truck is making a local delivery, however,
   “through” truck movements are limited to designated truck routes. Per State law, the City
   has the authority to designate truck routes for through trucks of a certain weight, or
   conversely, to designate certain routes as non-truck facilities. The City has an adopted truck
   route system, and modifications to that system are included in the Circulation Element.
   Truck Routes
   27B
       I-580 and SR 84 are major corridors for movement of goods and services to and through the
       area. These corridors extend both east-west and north-south through the City from the Bay
       Area to areas outside of Alameda County. According to Caltrans data, in 2001 truck
       volumes on I-580 ranged from 12,000 to 17,000 trucks per day, which is approximately ten
       percent of the traffic volume on this route. Truck volumes on SR 84 in 2001 ranged from
       800 trucks per day near Stanley Boulevard to 1,300 trucks per day near I-580, which is
       approximately three-percent of the overall daily traffic volume at those locations.
       TABLE 5-1 DEFINITION OF LEVEL OF SERVICE FOR SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS
                                                                  Average Total Stopped Delay
         LOS                    Description                                 per Vehicle
                                                                           (in Seconds)
                                                                     Less than or equal to
          A      Most vehicles do not stop.
                                                                                 10
                                                                                                            5-9

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                                 Greater than 10 and
        B       Some vehicles stop.                              less than or equal to
                                                                          20
                A significant number of vehicles stop. A         Greater than 20 and
        C       few vehicles must wait more than one             less than or equal to
                signal cycle.                                             35
                                                                 Greater than 35 and
                Most vehicles stop. A noticeable
                                                                 less than or equal to
       D        number of vehicles must wait more than
                                                                          55
                one signal cycle.
                                                                      Mid-D = 45
                                                                 Greater than 55 and
                Vehicles frequently wait more than one
        E                                                        less than or equal to
                signal cycle.
                                                                          80
                Extreme delays potentially affecting
        F       other traffic movements in the                     Greater than 80
                intersection.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, 2000; and, City of Livermore, 2002.
The City has an adopted truck route system that designates various streets for “through”
truck traffic (referred to as “movements”). In 2003, these designated routes are Holmes
Street, First Street, East Stanley Boulevard and Livermore Avenue south to First Street.
Trucks over three-tons may legally travel on these routes even if they do not have a trip
origin or destination along one of these routes. Trucks may not travel on any other City
street unless that street is a direct route between a truck route and the truck’s origin or
destination. Proposed modifications to the truck route system are described in Circulation
Element Section D.
Rail
28B
    Rail freight through Livermore is served by the Union Pacific Railroad. The east-west route
    originates in Oakland and ties to two major north-south routes in the San Joaquin Valley.
    5-10

                                                                                  C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                             C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Transit Services in 2003
10B
    There are several transit services in the Livermore area. The Livermore Transit Center
    (Transit Center), located on Railroad Avenue near First Street (east of Livermore Avenue),
    acts as a hub for many of the transit operations. Opened in January 1998, the Transit Center
    serves as the major transfer point for local buses, ACE trains, Amtrak motor coaches, and
    Greyhound buses. The transit services that operate within the City are described below.
    Livermore Amador Valley Transit Authority (LAVTA)
    29B
        The Livermore Amador Valley Transit Authority (LAVTA) operates the WHEELS service,
        which provides local public transit to the cities of Dublin, Livermore, and Pleasanton, as well
        as to the adjacent unincorporated areas of Alameda County. LAVTA was created in 1986
        under a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) between the three cities and the County. The service
        area is approximately a 40-square mile area that is home to almost 160,000 residents.
        LAVTA provides a variety of transportation services, including:
          Fixed Route: These are local and intercity transit services within the Tri-Valley
            communities. The fixed route service branches out from two primary locations: the
            Dublin/Pleasanton BART Station, and the Livermore Transit Center. These services
            operate seven days per week, between the hours of 4:30 am to 12:30 am.
          Direct Access Responsive Transit (DART): This service is provided in the northeastern
            Livermore area known as Springtown on Sundays and is available on holidays. DART
            buses use flexible routes, or “Flex Routing,” to extend local passenger pick-up and drop-
            off to areas not served by WHEELS. In general, Flex Routing allows DART buses to
            follow routes that are more direct and make fewer stops than typical fixed route buses.
          Dial-A-Ride: This service provides an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
             paratransit service for elderly riders and individuals with disabilities who are unable to
             use fixed route transportation systems. Dial-A-Ride service is available within three-
             quarter miles of WHEELS fixed route service areas, and is available weekdays,
             weekends, and holidays. Weekday service is available from 5:00 am to 1:00 am.
                                                                                                            5-11

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
      Prime Time: Prime Time provides express bus service for commuters traveling to job
         sites in the Santa Clara Valley, as well as a commuter express route to Walnut Creek.
         Bus service is provided on weekdays only.
      Shuttles: LAVTA provides shuttle service in its service area for various employers and
         special events. Shuttles typically serve the ACE Rail and BART stations, and they
         shuttle employees directly to their job site. There are currently no shuttles that serve
         employers within Livermore. Special event shuttles operate from the ACE Rail and/or
         BART stations directly to the events.
Many transit connections can be made at the two main transit centers in the LAVTA system:
the Livermore Transit Center, and the Dublin/Pleasanton BART Transit Center. The
Dublin/Pleasanton BART station is served on weekdays by nine of LAVTA’s fixed routes.
In 2003, DART service was provided from BART for Dublin and Pleasanton patrons.
The LAVTA Vision 2010 report outlined several potential service changes in mid- and long-
term service. Potential service improvements for the mid-term (2001 to 2005) included an
express service from South Livermore to BART via Jack London Boulevard, plus additional
fixed bus routes in Pleasanton, Dublin, and Livermore. Long-term (2006 to 2010) projects
include service from North Livermore, should development occur at the identified
Greenville BART TOD site (see Land Use Element, New Mixed-Use Neighborhoods).
Altamont Commuter Express (ACE)
30B
    As of 2003, the Altamont Commuter Express (ACE) provides passenger rail service from
    Stockton to San Jose via the Altamont Pass. Three morning and three evening trips provide
    connections to the stations in Livermore and Pleasanton. Livermore has two ACE stations:
    one located on Vasco Road near Brisa Street, the other Downtown on Railroad Avenue
    adjacent to the Transit Center. Shuttles at several of the ACE train stations provide
    connections to surrounding employment centers and other transit systems. Four shuttles
    provide connections to ACE train stations in Livermore and Pleasanton. Downtown is
    served by six of LAVTA’s fixed routes.
    5-12

                                                                               C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Eastern Contra Costa Transit Authority ( ECCTA Tri-Delta Transit)
31B
    The ECCTA’s Tri Delta Transit primarily serves the communities of Bay Point, Pittsburgh,
    Antioch, Oakley, and Brentwood. Tri-Delta Transit has one existing commuter route
    serving the Livermore area. Delta Express is Tri Delta Transit’s express commuter service,
    and provides service from East Contra Costa County to the Lawrence Livermore National
    Laboratory. This weekday service picks up passengers in Antioch, Oakley, Brentwood, and
    Bryon and transports them directly to the gates of the Livermore Labs.
    San Joaquin Regional Transit District (SJRTD)
    The San Joaquin Regional Transit District (SJRTD) provides public transit services (fixed
    and flexible route bus, shuttle, and dial-a-ride) in the Stockton area, as well as intercity,
    interregional, and rural transit services. These services include connections to Sacramento,
    Dublin/Pleasanton BART, and the Bay Area. The weekday Interregional Commuter Service
    serves passengers traveling to Livermore, Dublin, Pleasanton, San Ramon, Sunnyvale, San
    Jose, and Sacramento, including a connection service to BART for employees working in
    San Francisco and the East Bay.
    The interregional service is designed to meet the needs of commuters who travel distances
    greater than 50-miles one-way. Eight SJRDT interregional routes connect to the Lawrence
    Livermore and Sandia Laboratories. Three SJRDT interregional routes connect to
    Dublin/Pleasanton BART.
    Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART)
    32B
        BART provides a system of grade-separated, electric heavy rail trains that, in 2003, operated
        as far east as Dublin/Pleasanton, approximately eight-miles west of Livermore. BART
        operates trains to the Dublin/Pleasanton station on a regular schedule, with service seven
        days per week from 4:00 am to midnight. WHEELS operates connecting shuttle services to
        the Dublin/Pleasanton BART station.
        BART service is anticipated to extend to Livermore, possibly providing service in west
        Livermore near I-580/Isabel Avenue, and east Livermore at Greenville Road. BART has
        acquired land both north and south of I-580 in the vicinity of the Isabel/I-580 interchange.
        In addition, BART has also purchased land near the Greenville/I-580 interchange, where a
                                                                                                         5-13

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
terminal yard and/or station may be located. In 2012, the City was working with BART to
identify the most appropriate alignment and technology for a rail extension to Livermore.
Alternatives include standard BART and diesel multiple units (DMU) along the I-580
median.
Park and Ride Lots
3B
   BART has built an interim, 200-space park-and-ride facility near the corner of Airway
   Boulevard and Kitty Hawk Road. A 100-space Caltrans park and ride lot is available on
   Portola Avenue at Alviso Place.
   Bikeways and Trails Network
   1B
      The City’s Bikeways and Trails Master Plan was adopted in December 2001. It provides a
      comprehensive planned network, a set of goals and policies, data, and implementation
      programs for pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle facility improvement within the City. The
      Bikeways and Trails Master Plan is a fundamental component for competing for and securing
      grants and other funding to implement the identified goals and priorities. The primary
      objective of the Citywide trails and bikeway system is to provide a comprehensive, safe
      network of bikeways and trails for transportation and recreational purposes for a variety of
      non-vehicular users. The Master Plan includes goals related to:
             Network Connectivity and Design
             Planning and Interagency Coordination
             Support Facilities
             Safety, Education, and Promotion
             Maintenance
             Implementation
      The Plan classifies the existing and proposed bike and trail network into the following four
      specific categories of facilities.
           Class I – Multi-Use Trails
           Class I – Multi-Use Trails with separated Equestrian Component
           Class II – Bike Lanes
      5-14

                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
     Class III – Bike Routes
Class I - Multi-Use Trails
These are facilities that are completely separated from the public right-of-way and are for the
exclusive use of bicyclists, pedestrians and equestrians only. Table 5-2 provides a summary
of Class I Trails and Class II Bike Lanes existing as of 2003.
Class I - Multi-Use Trails with Equestrian Component
These are multi-use trails as outlined above, but with a separated path for equestrian use.
Class II - Bike Lanes
Bike lanes are striped lanes on a street or highway for the exclusive use of bicyclists.
However, there are some exceptions: pedestrians are allowed to use bike lanes when there is
no adjacent sidewalk and right-turning vehicles must merge into the lane prior to turning.
Class III – Bike Routes
Bike routes share the roadway with pedestrians and motor vehicle traffic. Because they are
shared, bike routes require no special pavement markings, and typically only bike route signs
are installed.
                                                                                                    5-15

  C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
  G E N E R A L P L A N
  C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
  TABLE 5-2 CLASS I TRAILS AND CLASS II BIKE LANES IN 2003
Class I Trails in 2003
Trail Name/Bike Lane Segment                  From                    To           Miles
Altamont Creek Trail                     Laughlin Road            Vasco Road        0.9
Altamont Creek Trail                   Hartford (east end)     Broadmoor Street     0.5
Arroyo Del Valle (north side)            Isabel Avenue          Lakeside Circle     0.6
Arroyo Las Positas Trail                                     300-ft. west of Vasco
                                       Western City Limits                          2.8
                                                                     Road
Arroyo Las Positas Trail                                     West of N. Livermore
                                      East of Portola Ave.                          0.5
                                                                      Ave.
Arroyo Las Positas Trail                  Vasco Road           Northfront Road      0.4
Arroyo Mocho Trail                                           East end of Robertson
                                         Isabel Avenue                              3.4
                                                                      Park
Arroyo Mocho Trail Extension
                                         Robertson Park        Hillcrest Avenue     0.8
to Civic Center
Arroyo Seco Trail                        Charlotte Way            Vasco Road        0.6
Concannon Boulevard Trail                                     Tesla/S. Livermore
                                          Eastern end                               1.0
Extension                                                           Avenue
Isabel Parkway Trail                   Jack London Blvd.          Alden Lane        2.5
Quezaltenango Parkway                   Hillcrest Avenue        Almond Avenue       0.5
Ravenswood Park                                ---                     ---          0.7
Robert Livermore Park                          ---                     ---          0.5
South Livermore Valley (SLV) Trail
                                          East Avenue             SLV Trail C       1.1
B
SLV Trail C                           Mines Road Trail Ext.       Vasco Road        0.7
Stanley Trail                            Bernal Avenue           Isabel Avenue      2.5
Stealth Street Trail                      Modoc Place       Jack London Boulevard   0.6
Sycamore Grove Trail                     Wetmore Road                 End           1.0
Subtotal – Class I                                                                 21.6
  5-16

                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Class II Bike Lanes in 2003
Trail Name/Bike Lane Segment         From                       To                  Miles
Murrieta Boulevard             Olivina Avenue       Stanley Boulevard                 0.4
North P Street                 Portola Avenue      Spruce/Pine Streets                0.3
South L Street                    Fifth Street        College Avenue                  0.3
S. Livermore Avenue               Sixth Street     Arroyo Mocho Trail                 0.8
First Street                         I-580            Portola Avenue                  1.1
First Street                     Scott Street           Inman Street                  0.4
Springtown Boulevard            Northern end                 I-580                    1.4
Bluebell Drive                Arroyo Las Positas
                                                  Springtown Boulevard                1.2
                                      Trail
Garaventa Ranch Road            N. Vasco Road         Scenic Avenue                   0.9
Broadmoor Street               Dalton Avenue          Scenic Avenue                   0.7
Herman Avenue                   Scenic Avenue        Northfront Road                  0.4
N. Vasco Road                  Dalton Avenue                 I-580                    1.2
S. Vasco Road                  Preston Avenue           East Avenue                   1.7
Charlotte Way                   N. Mines Road           East Avenue                   1.2
Daphne Drive                     Arlene Way           S. Vasco Road                   0.2
Mesquite Way                    S. Vasco Road          Lab Entrance                   0.2
Arlene Way                   Patterson Pass Road      Charlotte Way                   0.8
Westgate Way                    S. Vasco Road          Lab Entrance                   0.2
Greenville Road                Northfront Road       Las Positas Road                 0.5
Greenville Road              Patterson Pass Road        East Avenue                   1.2
North Canyons Parkway            Doolan Road       Collier Canyon Road                0.8
Kitty Hawk Road               Airway Boulevard      Jack London Blvd.                 0.5
Collier Canyon Road          Independence Drive  North Canyons Parkway                0.5
Rincon Avenue                  Portola Avenue            Pine Street                  0.5
Portola Avenue                  North L Street    N. Livermore Avenue                 0.2
Portola Avenue                     Lee Street            First Street                 1.1
Airway Boulevard             North Canyons Pkwy      Kitty Hawk Road                  0.6
                                                                                      5-17
  C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
  G E N E R A L P L A N
  C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Trail Name/Bike Lane Segment                   From                   To            Miles
Las Positas Road                           Hilliker Place   ¼-mile east of Hilliker  0.4
Las Positas Road                            First Street     West to City Limits     0.4
Las Positas Road                          Pullman Street       Greenville Road       1.0
E. Jack London Boulevard              Kitty Hawk Boulevard  N. Murrieta Boulevard    0.7
Pine Street                            Murrieta Boulevard      Junction Avenue       1.5
Hagemann Drive                        E. Jack London Blvd.     Daisyfield Drive      0.7
Olivina Avenue                          Hagemann Drive           Tanager Road        0.2
East Avenue                             Madison Avenue            Vasco Road         1.3
Vineyard Avenue                       Pleasanton City Limit     Isabel Avenue        0.1
El Caminito                             Stanley Boulevard       Holmes Street        1.4
Lexington Way                             Holmes Street         Superior Drive       0.5
Murdell Lane                            Stanley Boulevard         Alden Lane         1.5
Superior Drive                            Lexington Way          Arroyo Road         0.5
Altair Avenue                         Concannon Boulevard         Alden Lane         0.3
Wall Street                                 El Caminito       Stanley Boulevard      0.6
Encino Drive                               Murdell Lane           El Caminito        0.3
Junction Avenue                             Pine Street         Old First Street     0.7
Third Street                              South R Street        South L Street       0.5
Third Street                          S. Livermore Avenue        Church Street       0.2
N. Mines Road                            Highland Street         East Avenue         1.5
Highland Street                           N. Mines Road         Portola Avenue       0.4
Seventh Street                             Arroyo Road           East Avenue         1.0
Scenic Avenue                             Bluebell Drive      Saddleview Court       1.8
Vancouver Way                             Holmes Street          Arroyo Road         0.7
Arroyo Road                              College Avenue         Superior Drive       0.5
Patterson Pass Road                         Mines Road         Greenville Road       2.5
Concannon Boulevard                       Isabel Avenue       Normandy Circle        2.6
E. Stanley Boulevard                      Isabel Avenue      Murrieta Boulevard      1.0
Maple Street                             Railroad Avenue         East Avenue         0.5
South R Street                             Second Street          Third Street       0.1
  5-18

                                                                                 C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Trail Name/Bike Lane Segment                       From                              To                  Miles
Church Street                                   Second Street               Fourth Street                  0.2
Subtotal – Class II                                                                                       46.1
Total in 2003 – Class I & II                                                                              66.5
 Air Transportation
 12B
     The Livermore Municipal Airport (Airport) is the only airport in the Tri-Valley area and is
     the fourth busiest airport in the Bay Area. As such, the Airport provides an important
     service to both residents and industries that extend beyond the Tri-Valley area. The location
     and availability of services at the Airport has assisted in facilitating the economic growth of
     the Tri-Valley area. As the Tri-Valley continues to experience industrial and residential
     growth, the Airport will provide much needed services to support this growth and a strong
     local economy.
     As a general aviation airport, most aircraft served by the Airport are small, privately-owned,
     single and twin-engine propeller, and turbo prop aircraft (e.g., Cessna 182). In 2008, these
     smaller aircraft comprised approximately ninety-nine percent of all aircraft served by the
     Airport. The remaining one-percent of aircraft being served by the Airport were small and
     medium sized corporate jets (e.g., Challenger 601, Lear 35, Hawker 25, etc.) and helicopters.
     In 2008, the Airport experienced approximately 159,500 total aircraft flights. The Airport
     does not provide commercial airline service. (Reso. 2010-061)
                                                                                                           5-19

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
C. Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions
2B
   Goal CIR-1        Provide safe, efficient, comfortable, and convenient mobility for all
                     users.
   Objective CIR-1.1 Plan for Complete Streets that support all transportation systems
   throughout the City.
       Policies
       U
         P1.    The City shall consider and balance the needs of all users when implementing
                Complete Streets, including pedestrians, bicyclists, persons with disabilities, motorists,
                movers of commercial goods, users and operators of public transportation, emergency
                responders, seniors, children, youth, and families.
         P2.    The City shall cooperate and coordinate with all other transportation providers
                when implementing Complete Streets to ensure integration of facilities for all
                abilities.
         P3.    The City shall evaluate the most efficient, effective, and sustainable way of
                providing mobility for all users.
         P4.    The City shall consider all types of Complete Streets elements but will not
                necessarily include exclusive elements for all modes on every street.
   Objective CIR-1.2         Implement Complete Streets that are context sensitive to local
   conditions and needs.
         Policies
         U
           P1.  The City shall be context sensitive in accommodating different modes of travel in order
                to fit the public right-of-way and surrounding uses.
           P2.  The City shall implement Complete Streets in such a way that the character of the
                project area and the values of the community are fully considered.
   5-20
                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
   P3.      The City shall outreach to residents, merchants, and other stakeholders to assure
            Complete Streets implementation promotes a strong sense of place.
   Actions
   U
     A1.    Consult stakeholders as early in the development process as possible to support
            implementation of the City’s Complete Streets Policy.
     A2.    Evaluate projects using the latest design standards and innovative design options
            with a goal of balancing user needs.
Objective CIR-1.3       Make Complete Streets practices a routine part of everyday
operations.
     Policies
     U
       P1.  The City shall incorporate Complete Streets into all planning, funding, design,
            approval, and implementation processes for any construction, reconstruction,
            retrofit, expansion, maintenance, operations, alteration, or repair of streets.
       P2.  The City shall coordinate interdepartmentally to make Complete Streets practices
            a routine part of everyday operations and to maximize opportunities for Complete
            Streets practices.
       P3.  The City shall approach transportation projects, programs, and practices as
            opportunities to improve streets and the transportation network for all categories
            of users.
       P4.  The City shall cultivate relationships and actively participate in cross jurisdictional
            decision-making and policy work with other agencies, transit districts, and
            jurisdictions to facilitate multi-modal transportation infrastructure and increase
            connectivity across jurisdictional boundaries.
       P5.  The City shall consider Complete Streets when adopting or amending the General
            Plan, Specific Plans, Zoning Ordinances, Master Plans, or the Capital
            Improvement Program.
                                                                                                      5-21

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
      Actions
      U
        A1.    Review transportation capital improvement projects and development projects
               during the planning/design phase to determine appropriate Complete Streets
               implementation.
        A2.    Establish performance measures and perform evaluations of how well the street
               and transportation networks are serving various users.
        A3.    Exempt projects from Complete Streets analysis if the project is not a roadway
               improvement project, or is a routine maintenance activity that does not change
               the roadway geometry and is designed to keep assets in serviceable condition.
        A4.    Except projects from Complete Streets analysis, with approval by the City
               Engineer and written findings which explain why accommodations for all users
               and modes were not included, if the use by a specific category of users is
               prohibited by law, construction is not feasible due to significant or adverse
               environmental impacts, there is an absence of current and future need by a user
               group now and in the future, and/or the cost of accommodation is excessively
               disproportionate to the need or probable use of the affected area. (Reso. 2014-
               183)
Goal CIR-2           Promote multi-modal transportation.
Objective CIR-2.1            Provide viable alternatives to single-occupant vehicle travel.
        Actions
        U
          A1.  Promote increased local transit ridership as an alternative to driving by supporting
               LAVTA services.
          A2.  Preserve options for future transit use when designing improvements for
               roadways and other land use approvals.
5-22
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
   A3.      Continue to explore other rail transit options along the existing railroad right-of-
            way through the City. Preserve adequate right-of-way for this option.
   A4.      Preserve right-of-way adjacent to I-580 to allow widening for HOV lanes,
            auxiliary lanes, and BART.
   A5.      Advocate the expansion of the ACE passenger railroad service through
            Livermore.
   A6.      Work with regional transit providers to situate transit stops and hubs at locations
            that are convenient for transit users and promote increased transit ridership
            through the provision of shelters, benches, and other amenities.
   A7.      Advocate for a first-stage extension of BART along the I-580 freeway to a station
            at Isabel Avenue/I-580 with an eventual extension to a station at Greenville
            Road/I-580 as the City’s preference. (Reso 2011-130)
Objective CIR-2.2       Encourage vehicle trip reduction.
   Actions
   U
     A1.    Work with employers to encourage ridesharing (carpools and vanpools), public
            transit, bicycling, walking, flexible working hours, and preferential parking.
     A2.    Coordinate with Caltrans and transit providers to identify and implement park
            and ride sites with convenient access to public transit.
Objective CIR-2.3       Provide a bicycle, pedestrian, and trails network.
     Policies
     U
       P1.  Develop a comprehensive bikeway and trails system as a viable alternative to the
            automobile for all trip purposes in order to maximize the number of daily trips
            made by non-motorized means for residents of all abilities.
                                                                                                     5-23

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
      P2.      Consider bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian access in all aspects of City Planning
               and coordinate with other agencies to improve non-motorized access within the
               City of Livermore and to surrounding regional areas and facilities.
      P3.      Provide related facilities and services necessary to allow bicycle and pedestrian
               travel to assume a significant role as a local alternative mode of transportation.
      P4.      Improve the safety of bicyclists and pedestrians by educating all Livermore
               residents about bicycle and pedestrian safety and by enforcing bicycle and
               motorist laws and regulations effecting bicycle and pedestrian safety. Increase
               bicycle and pedestrian mode share by increasing public awareness of benefits of
               bicycling and walking and of the available bike and trail facilities and programs.
      P5.      Maintain all roadways and multi-use trails so that they provide safe and
               comfortable bicycling, walking, and equestrian conditions.
      P6.      Implement a bikeway system with community input on the priorities and with a
               minimal impact on the environment.
      Actions
      U
        A1.    Develop, periodically review, and update a master plan for a Citywide bicycle,
               pedestrian, and trails network.
        A2.    Develop bicycle routes and multi-use trails in accordance with the City’s adopted
               master plan for a bikeway and trails network, as shown in Figure 5-4.
        A3.    Where other public works projects (roadways, buildings, or utilities) precede
               adopted trail development in an area, combine easement, property, or right-of-
               way acquisition, where feasible, to acquire necessary land for planned trails.
        A4.    Special attention shall be made to make freeway interchanges, overpasses, and
               other grade separations safe for bicycles and pedestrians. (Reso. 2014-183)
5-24

                                                                            C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Objective CIR-2.4       Provide a pedestrian network that encourages walking for
transportation and recreation.
   Policies
   U
     P1.    The City shall ensure the safe and convenient movement of pedestrians
            throughout the City and within neighborhoods.
     P2.    The City’s design guidelines for public and private facilities shall aid and
            encourage pedestrian activity.
     P3.    The City shall require development to meet the requirements of the Americans
            with Disabilities Act to further facilitate the mobility of persons with accessibility
            needs.
Goal CIR-3      Identify and develop a circulation system consistent with the Land Use
                Element.
Objective CIR-3.1       Plan, manage, and develop the local circulation system to
support the Land Use Element.
     Policies
     U
       P1.  The City shall consider the impacts to the existing and proposed circulation
            system when considering changes in land use.
       P2.  Development projects shall be reviewed for impacts on the adjacent circulation
            system. Identified impacts shall be addressed and mitigated to the greatest extent
            feasible.
       P3.  High traffic-generating land uses shall be located along or close to major streets.
       P4.  Mixed-use development shall be located near transit nodes and adjacent to
            residential neighborhoods, as identified in the Land Use Element.
                                                                                                      5-25

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Objective CIR-3.2            Minimize adverse impacts of regional cut-through traffic.
      Policies
      U
        P1.      The City shall recognize that increasing capacity on major streets leading to I-580
                 could increase regional cut-through traffic and shall maintain a balance between
                 serving local and regional needs.
        P2.      The City shall not base roadway system improvements solely on the local effects
                 of regional cut-through traffic. Other issues including facility improvement costs
                 and desirability shall be determinants to improving the intracity roadway network.
Objective CIR-3.3            Minimize local cut-through traffic in residential neighborhoods.
        Policies
        U
          P1.    The City shall provide adequate capacity to the extent possible on major and
                 collector streets to prevent traffic diversion of local cut-through traffic onto
                 neighborhood streets.
          P2.    The City shall consider using traffic calming methods to reduce local cut-through
                 traffic, where appropriate.
Goal CIR-4           Provide a local roadway system for the safe, efficient, and convenient
                     movement of vehicular traffic.
Objective CIR-4.1            The City shall provide adequate road linkages throughout
Livermore.
          Policies
          U
            P1.  The City shall maximize the carrying capacity of major streets by providing a well-
                 coordinated traffic/signal control system, controlling the number of intersections
                 and driveways, limiting residential access points, and requiring sufficient off-street
                 parking.
5-26
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
   P2.      The City shall ensure that adequate roadway connections are provided between
            areas north of I-580 and areas south of I-580.
   P3.      The City shall pursue and protect adequate right-of-way to accommodate future
            circulation system improvements.
   P4.      The City shall provide neighborhoods and commercial areas with adequate
            freeway access.
   Actions
   U
     A1.    Maintain, update and validate a Citywide traffic model, at a minimum five-year
            increment, for purposes of evaluating development-related and external traffic
            impacts on the City’s existing and proposed circulation system.
     A2.    Construct missing roadway links to complete the roadway system designated in
            the Circulation Element when warranted by roadway operating conditions.
Goal CIR-5      Maintain relatively free-flowing traffic, except where the City has
                identified intersections or areas of the City that are exempt from the
                Citywide standard.
Objective CIR-5.1      Maintain adequate levels of service for all areas of the City.
     Policies
     U
       P1.  For the purposes of development associated traffic studies, road improvement
            design, and capital improvement priorities, the upper limit of acceptable service at
            signalized intersections shall be mid-level D, except in the Downtown Area and
            near freeway interchanges.
       P2.  There shall be no level of service standard for the Downtown Area (see General
            Plan Land Use Map for Downtown Area location).
                                                                                                   5-27

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
      P3.      The upper limit of acceptable level of service at selected intersections near
               freeway interchanges shall be LOS E. These intersections include:
               (1)      Airway Boulevard/North Canyons Parkway
               (2)      Airway Boulevard/I-580 westbound ramps
               (3)      Airway Boulevard/I-580 eastbound ramp-Kitty Hawk Road
               (4)      Isabel Avenue/Portola Avenue
               (5)      Isabel Avenue/I-580 westbound ramps
               (6)      Isabel Avenue/I-580 eastbound ramps
               (7)      Isabel Avenue/Airway Boulevard
               (8)      North Livermore Avenue/I-580 westbound ramps
               (9)      North Livermore Avenue/I-580 eastbound ramps
               (10)     North Livermore Avenue/Arroyo Plaza
               (11)     North Livermore Avenue/Las Positas Road
               (12)     Springtown Boulevard/Bluebell Drive
               (13)     Springtown Boulevard/I-580 westbound ramps
               (14)     First Street/I-580 eastbound ramps
               (15)     First Street/Southfront Road
               (16)     First Street/Las Positas Road
               (17)     Vasco Road/Northfront Road
               (18)     Vasco Road/I-580 westbound ramps
               (19)     Vasco Road/I-580 eastbound ramps
               (20)     Vasco Road/Preston Avenue
               (21)     Vasco Road/Industrial Drive
               (22)     Greenville Road/Northfront Road-Altamont Pass Road
               (23)     Greenville Road/I-580 westbound ramps
               (24)     Greenville Road/I-580 eastbound ramps
               (25)     Greenville Road/Southfront Road
               (26)     Northfront Road/I-580 westbound ramps, (until I-580/Greenville
                        Interchange Reconstruction Project is completed)
               (27)     Southfront Road/I-580 eastbound ramps, (until I-580/Greenville
                        Interchange Reconstruction Project is completed)
5-28
                                                                    C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
P4.   The City accepts the need to balance competing objectives, including providing a
      system for safe, efficient and convenient movement of traffic (Goal CIR-2);
      minimizing cut-through traffic (Obj. CIR-1.2) and preventing or minimizing
      physical or environmental constraints (Obj. CIR-5.2), and therefore recognizes
      that certain intersections, located at freeway ramps and along east/west major
      streets carrying a high percentage of regional cut-through traffic, may exceed the
      established LOS standard. These intersections include:
      (1)      First Street/N. Mines Road
      (2)      Isabel Avenue/Airway Boulevard
      (3)      Isabel Avenue/Jack London Boulevard
      (4)      Vasco Road/Northfront Road
      (5)      Vasco Road/I-580 Eastbound Ramps
      (6)      Concannon Boulevard/S. Livermore Avenue
      (7)      Holmes Street/Fourth Street
      (8)      Stanley Boulevard/Murietta Boulevard (Reso. 2009-055)
P5.   The City shall place highest priority in City annual capital improvement planning
      and budgeting on feasible improvements to road components where existing
      traffic flows exceed the acceptable LOS standard.
P6.   The City shall improve traffic flow on the local roadway system to achieve these
      Citywide LOS policies.
Actions
U
  A1. Urge Caltrans to prioritize local freeway interchange improvements based on
      maintaining LOS E or better.
  A2. Improve intersections exceeding the City’s established LOS, as established above
      in CIR-4.1.P4, to the extent feasible to minimize impacts and support the
      community character.
                                                                                              5-29

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Goal CIR-6           Protect neighborhood quality and community character through
                     circulation planning.
Objective CIR-6.1            Use circulation improvements to enhance Livermore’s
community character and maintain the quality of life in residential neighborhoods.
      Policies
      U
        P1.      The City shall provide a street system that minimizes traffic on local streets in
                 order to create and preserve a high-quality residential environment.
        P2.      In designing and evaluating future improvements to designated special rural
                 routes, the City shall endeavor to protect and enhance the “wine country”
                 character of the area.
        Actions
        U
          A1.    Use police enforcement to mitigate speeding and other traffic impacts in
                 residential areas of the City.
          A2.    Utilize traffic calming, as appropriate, to control the traffic volume and speed.
Objective CIR-6.2            Plan and maintain the circulation system to prevent or minimize
environmental impacts.
          Policies
          U
            P1.  Require local roadway improvements to minimize adverse land use, air quality,
                 noise, community appearance, health, safety, vegetation and wildlife, drainage, and
                 other environmental impacts.
            P2.  The City shall evaluate the effects on transportation systems of public utility
                 improvements, including extensions of underground pipelines and overhead
                 transmission lines and associated utility rights-of-way.
5-30

                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
    P3.     Require all residential, commercial, and industrial areas to provide efficient and
            safe access for emergency vehicles.
Goal CIR-7      Develop a Downtown circulation system that is pedestrian-oriented and
                supports Downtown as a destination.
Objective CIR-7.1      Design and maintain a safe and interconnected pedestrian-
oriented Downtown circulation system.
    Policies
    U
      P1.   Promote pedestrian activity as the primary mode of travel on First Street in
            Downtown. (Reso. 2009-055)
      P2.   Provide a roadway system that is subordinate to the pedestrian environment,
            except for Livermore Avenue, L Street, Railroad Avenue, and Fourth Street,
            where pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic needs are balanced to ensure
            adequate access to the Downtown for all modes of travel. (Reso. 2009-055)
      P3.   Prohibit through trucks on First Street in the Downtown Area and divert truck
            traffic away from the Downtown Area.
      P4.   Establish alternative routes for through truck traffic and for truck delivery.
      P5.   Reduce the speed of roadway traffic moving through the Downtown Area to be
            more compatible with pedestrians.
      Actions
      U
        A1. Reduce the number of lanes along First Street to provide additional on-street
            parking, and to slow roadway traffic moving through the Downtown Area.
        A2. Encourage alternatives modes of travel to and within the Downtown Area,
            including transit and bicycles.
                                                                                                     5-31
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Goal CIR-8           Ensure a well-coordinated regional transportation system that serves
                     Livermore and the surrounding region
Objective CIR-8.1            Coordinate Livermore’s transportation policies and programs
with other jurisdictions in the region.
      Policies
      U
        P1.    Support State and regional efforts to improve I-580 within the Tri-Valley with
               HOV lanes, auxiliary lanes, and ramp metering.
        P2.    Support State and regional efforts to improve State Route 84 (along Isabel
               Avenue) to expressway standards between I-580 and I-680.
        P3.    Cooperate and work with Alameda County in the planning of subregional arterial alignments.
               Also, cooperate and work with Contra Costa County in the planning of the Vasco Road
               alignment. (NLUGBI)
        P4.    Establish Plan Lines that identify the right-of-way along I-580 freeway to support
               regional transportation improvements, including Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART)
               extensions and high occupancy vehicle lanes. Infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
               frontage road and utility relocations) necessary solely for the I-580 regional
               transportation improvements will be the responsibility of the implementing
               agency. Such improvements will be coordinated with adjacent development.
               (Reso. 2008-232)
        Actions
        U
          A1.  Participate in programs to address regional traffic congestion.
          A2.  In evaluating proposed developments and land use decisions, identify impacts on
               regional as well as local transportation facilities.
5-32

                                                                          C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
   A3.      Support regional air quality objectives through effective management of the City’s
            transportation system.
Objective CIR-8.2       Implement measures to support and plan for the transfer of State
Route 84 to the Isabel Avenue/I-580 Interchange.
   Policies
   U
     P1.    Protect right-of-way for the Isabel/I-580 freeway interchange.
     P2.    Protect right-of-way for the Portola Avenue extension.
     P3.    Prevent new access points to Isabel Avenue/Kitty Hawk.
     P4.    Provide for the eventual removal of existing driveways from SR 84, when feasible.
     P5.    Preserve the integrity of Isabel Avenue as a future expressway by prohibiting the
            installation of additional longitudinal utilities and by partnering with State and
            regional agencies on developing future projects to relocate existing longitudinal
            utilities.
     P6.    Relocate State Route 84 from Airway Boulevard to the Isabel Avenue/I-580
            Interchange.
Goal CIR-9       Support and protect safe and efficient aviation operations at the
                 Municipal Airport.
Objective CIR-9.1       Ensure that aviation operations, uses, and development are
protected from incompatible adjacent land uses, as well as meet the needs of the
local and regional economy.
     Policies
     U
       P1.  Future development and operations at the Municipal Airport shall be in
            conformance with an approved Airport zoning district and the Livermore Airport
                                                                                                    5-33

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
               Land Use Compatibility Plan (“ALUCP”), dated August 2012. The overall scale
               of operations at the Municipal Airport shall not exceed the thresholds listed
               below. (Reso. 2013-113)
               (a) Livermore Municipal Airport is a general aviation airport. Scheduled
                     passenger service flights shall be prohibited. (Reso. 2010-061)
               (b) Annual aircraft operations are forecasted for 220,100 operations by year 2030.
                     In the event that flight operations exceed forecasts, including itinerant and
                     local operations, the City shall re-evaluate the environmental effect of
                     increased operations. (Reso. 2010-061)
               (c) To the greatest extent feasible, the total number of based aircraft to be
                     stored/parked at the Municipal Airport shall not exceed 720, including hangar
                     and apron space areas. In the event that demand for based aircraft exceeds the
                     storage supply, the City shall re-evaluate the environmental effects of allowing
                     additional based aircraft. (Reso. 2010-061)
               (d) No more than 60-percent of the Airport area designated Community Facility-
                     Airport (CF-AIR) shall be covered with impervious surfaces, including but not
                     limited to, buildings, taxiways, runways, parking areas, fuel areas, and wash
                     areas. (Reso. 2010-061)
               (e) Night-time flights between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be discouraged to
                     the greatest extent feasible. (Reso. 2010-061)
               (f) Aircraft and airport operation noise levels shall be consistent with the
                     thresholds established in the General Plan Noise Element. (Reso. 2010-061)
      P2.      To protect the Municipal Airport from encroachment by incompatible uses, the
               City shall encourage development of property within the immediate vicinity of the
               Airport for light industrial and transportation uses to the extent that noise
               standards and flight clearance requirements are maintained, the ALUCP is
               adhered to, and environmental impacts are adequately mitigated. (Reso. 2013-113)
5-34

                                                                                C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                           C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
   P3.          New residential land use designations or the intensification of existing residential
                land use designations shall be prohibited within the Airport Protection Area, as
                shown on Land Use Element Figure 3-5.
   Action
   U
     A1.        Develop and periodically update an Airport zoning district for the Airport to
                implement Policy CIR-8.1.P1. (Reso. 2010-061)
Goal CIR-10 Provide adequate safe and convenient short-and long-term vehicle and
                    bicycle parking for all land uses in the City.
Objective CIR-10.1         Minimize spillover vehicle parking impacts by ensuring adequate
parking enforcement and requiring sufficient parking for new development.
     Policy
     U
       P1.      The City shall ensure that new developments provide adequate safe and
                convenient short-and long-term parking.
       Action
       U
         A1.    Encourage, and where possible facilitate, the use of shared parking arrangements
                to ensure that existing parking is efficiently utilized, especially in the Downtown
                Area.
Objective CIR-10.2 Limit excess off-street parking development.
         Action
         U
           A1.  Consider adoption of “maximum allowed” parking standards for various uses
                within the Livermore Development Code to limit development of impervious
                surface and to limit undesirable open-land activities (i.e., product storage,
                temporary uses etc.)
                                                                                                          5-35

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Objective CIR-10.3 Strive to expand bicycle parking facilities throughout the City.
      Policy
      U
        P1.        On- and off-street bicycle parking facilities should be provided near destinations
                   for all bicycle users, including commuters, residents, shoppers, students, and
                   others.
        P2.        Encourage businesses in the Downtown Area to provide valet bicycle parking.
        Action
        U
          A1.      Identify locations where more bike parking would be beneficial and install bicycle
                   racks and bicycle storage facilities, as funding becomes available. (Reso. 2014-183)
Goal CIR-11 Support goods movement within the City.
Objective CIR-11.1            Provide adequate roadway and rail systems to accommodate the
safe and efficient movement of goods.
          Policy
          U
            P1.    The City shall encourage the expansion of rail transportation facilities and services
                   to meet the needs of commerce as growth occurs.
Objective CIR-11.2            Minimize adverse impacts to residents or businesses from rail
and truck traffic.
            Policies
            U
              P1.  No through truck traffic shall be allowed in residential areas.
              P2.  The City shall require and implement improvements at rail grade crossings as rail
                   and vehicular traffic conditions warrant.
5-36
                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
        Action
        U
          A1.   Enforce the City’s designated truck route system and ordinances.
D. Proposed Circulation Network
           3B
The Circulation Element recommendations are intended to result in a transportation system
which supports the Land Use Element of the General Plan, without unnecessarily
accommodating or encouraging non-local cut-through trips on the City’s street system. This
transportation plan includes recommendations for roadway widening improvements and for
more specific improvements at intersections, such as added turn and through lanes and
installation of traffic signals. Intersection improvements proposed in the Circulation
Element are conceptual. The actual intersection turning movement volumes and levels of
service upon buildout of the General Plan may differ from the forecasts identified in the
Circulation Element. Therefore, intersection recommendations are intended as guidelines
for future improvement. Further research and refinement of these improvements will occur
through project-level environmental studies, specific plans, and other studies as development
occurs and growth patterns emerge. This section describes the proposed system
improvements, as well as locations where the City’s level of service goals may not be
achieved.
City Traffic Model
13B
    A City-specific traffic model was developed for the 2003-2025 General Plan to estimate and
    identify future traffic congestion levels, issues, and recommendations to ameliorate impacts
    from the buildout of the City’s land use plan. The traffic model also estimated the level of
    future cut-through traffic on key roadways in the City. As indicated by the data, on critical
    arterial routes near the freeway, including Isabel Avenue, Livermore Avenue, First Street,
    Vasco Road, and Greenville Road, approximately 10 to 40 percent of traffic will be non-
    local, cut-through traffic. Most of the locations identified experience 15- to 25-percent cut-
    through traffic. Understanding the impacts of cut-through traffic is important when
    considering the type and extent of transportation improvements to propose in the General
    Plan, as well as to prioritize implementation of these improvements in the future.
                                                                                                       5-37

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Roadway Functional Classifications
14B
    As described earlier in this section, the City of Livermore is served by an existing network of
    freeways, highway, major roadways, collector streets, local streets, intercounty routes, and
    special rural routes.
    The traffic model analysis results have been used to determine the appropriate functional
    classification for each roadway in the City. The classification is based on future projected
    travel demand, as well as the character of the street, adjacent land uses, and other factors.
    Figure 5-1 illustrates the proposed functional classification system, and Table 5-3
    summarizes the roadway classifications.
    5-38
                                                     C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Table 5-3 ROADWAY FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS
Roadway Segment         From                  To
Freeway
I-580                   El Charro Road        Greenville Road
Highway
SR 84 (Isabel Avenue)   I-580                 Vallecitos Road
Vallecitos Road         Isabel Avenue         Southern City Limit
Major Streets
Airway Boulevard        North Canyons Parkway Portola Avenue
                                              Los Positas College
Collier Canyon Road     North Canyons Parkway
                                              Entrance
Concannon Boulevard     Isabel Avenue         S. Livermore Avenue
East Avenue             S. Livermore Avenue   Vasco Road
East Stanley Boulevard  Western City Limits   First Street
El Charro Road          I-580                 Jack London Boulevard
First Street            Holmes Street         I-580
Fourth Street           Holmes Street         Inman Street
Greenville Road         Altamont Pass Road    East Avenue
Inman Street            Fourth Street         First Street
Isabel Avenue           North Canyons Parkway I-580
Jack London Boulevard   El Charro Road        Murrieta Boulevard
Las Positas Road        Livermore Avenue      Greenville Road
Livermore Avenue        I-580                 Southeastern City Limit
Mines Road              First Street          East Avenue
Murrieta Boulevard      Portola Avenue        Holmes Street
North Canyons Parkway   Dublin Boulevard      Collier Canyon Road
Northfront Road         Vasco Road            Greenville Road
Patterson Pass Road     Mines Road            Greenville Road
Portola Avenue          Collier Canyon Road   First Street
Railroad Avenue         Stanley Boulevard     First Street
Springtown Boulevard    I-580                 Bluebell Drive
                                                                               5-39
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Roadway Segment                     From                   To
Vallecitos Road/Holmes
                                    First Street           Southern City Limit
Street
Vasco Road                          Northern City Limit    Tesla Road
Collector Streets
Alden Lane                          Murdell Lane           Holmes Street
Arlene Way                          Patterson Pass Road    Charlotte Way
Bluebell Drive                      Hartford Avenue        Springtown Boulevard
Brisa Street-National Drive         Vasco Road             Greenville Road
Broadmoor Street                    Dalton Avenue          Scenic Avenue
Catalina Drive                      El Caminito            Holmes Street
Central Avenue                      Northfront Road        Scenic Avenue
Charlotte Way                       Mines Road             S. Vasco Road
Chestnut Avenue                     P Street               Junction Avenue
College Avenue                      Fourth Street          S. Livermore Avenue
Daphne Drive                        Arlene Way             Vasco Road
El Caminito                         East Stanley Boulevard Holmes Street
Encino Drive                        Murdell Lane           El Caminito
Franklin Lane                       Southfront Road        Preston Avenue
Galloway Street                     Springtown Boulevard   Bluebell Drive
Garaventa Ranch Road                Vasco Road             Scenic Avenue
Hagemann Drive                      Jack London Boulevard  Daisyfield Drive
Herman Avenue                       Scenic Avenue          Northfront Road
Hillcrest Avenue                    Fordham Way            Devon Place
Isabel Avenue                       Portola Avenue         Las Positas College
Jensen Street                       Madiera Way            East Avenue
Junction Avenue                     Pine Street            Old First Street
L Street-Arroyo Road                Portola Avenue         Southern City Limit
Las Colinas Road-Redwood
                                    Las Positas Road       Springtown Boulevard
Rd.
Laughlin Road                       Northern City Limits   Northfront Road
5-40
                                                        C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Roadway Segment           From                   To
Lexington Way             Trinity Hills Lane     Superior Drive
Madeira Street            Jenson Street          Fourth Street
Maple Street              First Street           East Avenue
Mines Road                Las Positas Road       First Street
Murdell Lane              Stanley Boulevard      Alden Lane
Northfront Road-Sunflower
                          Vasco Road             Bluebell Drive
Ct.
Old First Street          First Street           Junction Avenue
Olivina Avenue            Hagemann Drive         P Street
P Street                  Portola Avenue         Fourth Street
Pine Street               Murrieta Boulevard     Junction Avenue
Preston Avenue            Franklin Lane          Southfront Road (east)
Rincon Avenue             Portola Avenue         Olivina Avenue
Scenic Avenue             Bluebell Drive         Laughlin Road
Southfront Road           First Street           Franklin Lane
Southfront Road           Preston Avenue         Greenville Road
Springtown Boulevard      Galloway Street        Bluebell Drive
Superior Drive            Arroyo Road            Lexington Way
Vancouver Way             Holmes Street          Arroyo Road
Wall Street               East Stanley Boulevard El Caminito
Wetmore Road              Arroyo Road            Vallecitos Road
Wisteria Way              Central Avenue         Bluebell Drive
                                                                                  5-41
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Roadway Segment                       From                               To
Rural Routes
Arroyo Road                           Marina Avenue                      Southern City Limits
Concannon Boulevard                   Normandy Way                       S. Livermore Avenue
Greenville Road                       East Avenue                        Tesla Road
Marina Avenue-Wente Street            Arroyo Road                        S. Livermore Avenue
Mines Road                            Tesla Road                         South
S. Livermore Avenue                   Concannon Boulevard                Tesla Road
S. Vasco Road                         East Avenue                        Tesla Road
Tesla Road                            S. Livermore Avenue                East
Vallecitos Road                       Wetmore Road                       Isabel Avenue
Vineyard Avenue                       Vallecitos Road                    Western City Limit
Wetmore Road                          Arroyo Road                        Vallecitos Road
Non-local Cut-Through Traffic
15B
    The City currently experiences cut-through traffic on key major streets as a result of freeway
    congestion. This problem will worsen over time due to increasing pressure on the regional
    system and increasing travel and congestion on I-580. Analysis of future cut-through traffic
    indicates that several key routes near the freeway will experience significant percentages of
    cut-through traffic. In addition, east-west routes in and near the City will experience
    significant cut-through traffic volumes as commuters continue to seek ways to avoid freeway
    congestion. Affected routes near the freeway will include Isabel Avenue, Livermore Avenue,
    First Street, Vasco Road and Greenville Road. Affected streets in other parts of the City
    (not directly adjacent to I-580) include Vallecitos Road, Tesla Road, Stanley Boulevard and
    Vasco Road (portion north of the freeway). Studies indicate cut-through traffic percentages
    (the percent of total traffic that is not locally oriented and merely passes through the City
    without stopping) on key affected routes will range from approximately 10 to 40 percent
    near the freeway and potentially higher on certain other facilities.
    Based on traffic modeling results, the forecasted traffic volumes at buildout of the General
    Plan at several locations indicate the need for eight lanes of traffic (four in each direction) on
    5-42
                                                                           C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
some of the roadway segments noted above, including Vasco Road and Greenville Road.
To prevent further intrusion or increase in cut-through traffic in these particular locations,
roadways will be limited to four to six lanes in certain locations in order to make the routes
less desirable for regional traffic and freeway by-pass traffic. This action will help to prevent
use of City streets by non-local cut-through traffic, but a consequential effect of this
limitation could be an increase in traffic congestion and some cut-through traffic into other
nearby streets.
Management of the overall traffic congestion issue will require regional roadway
improvement solutions, including additional freeway capacity, additional effective transit
services, vehicular trip reduction measures, improvements to key streets in adjacent
jurisdictions, and other cooperative regional improvements. The action of simply widening
Livermore streets to accommodate regional traffic will not solve the long-term congestion
problems of the City and the region because of the magnitude of regional influence of this
problem directly impacting City streets and traffic.
Future Roadway Improvements
16B
    Table 5-4, Proposed Future Roadway and Interchange Improvements, identifies the
    recommended street improvement locations. These recommendations are based on the
    results of the traffic model analysis conducted for the 2003-2025 General Plan. The priority
    for making these improvements will be determined in the City’s Capital Improvement
    Program (CIP). Specific transportation improvements (i.e., additional turn lanes, etc.) will be
    determined as part of the bi-annual CIP projects analysis needs determination. These
    improvements are discussed in the following sections, along with proposed regional
    improvements including the I-580 freeway and interchanges in Livermore. Regional and
    proposed local improvements are described in the following sections.
                                                                                                     5-43

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                    This page intentionally left blank.
5-44
                                                                                                                                 COLLIER CANYON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M ONT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GARAVENTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A LTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BROADMOOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAUGHLIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIVERMORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N C H RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SCENIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV                                    RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VA S C O                                                                      T   HF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BL                                                AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N   OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HERMAN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                    LAS POSITAS
                                                                          To Dublin Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPRINGTOWN                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NT
                                                                                                                                                                    COLLEGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GOLF COURSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR                   WISTERIA WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SO
                                 FALLON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CENTRAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO
                                                                                                                      PKW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WE
                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                      AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                N C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                             E                                                                                         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T R                     ON                                                OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R   ON                    EST                                                 SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          580                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F                                 PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA S                                                               NATIONAL DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CO                     ISA
                                                                 L A S P O S I TA S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAS PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SITAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BR
                                                                 GOLF COURSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ACE
                                                                                                                            A I R WAY                        BL                                                                                                                                                                                                          ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                             KITTY HAWK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PATTERSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B LV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PASS
                                                                           L I V E R M O R E M U N I C I PA L A I R P O R T                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OL
                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A                 AV
                                                   RO
                                               HAR
                                                                                                                                                                  JACK LONDON BL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WY
                                          EL C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PINE        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NC                                                                ST                                                                                                                                           DAPHNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TIO                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                                         DR                                                                                      “P”                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAY NISSEN                                                                                                                                                                                                         CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MURRIETA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                               AR                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                                                                         A ST                                                                                              LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TTE                          LEN                                   L AW R E N C E L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                                                                    HAGEMANN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AV                                                    MAD                                                                                                                                  WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR                                       N AT I O N A L L A B O R ATO RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RINCON
                                                                                                                                            AVE                                                                                                                               STN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OLIVINA                              ST                                                  MA       STATION                                                                                                                                                                          EMILY WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PL                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AV                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JENSEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIVERMORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RAIL                                                                                                     EAST                                             AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DOLORES ST                                          HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                              LV D
                                                                                                                                                                                  STA NL EY B                                                                                         4TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIVIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COLLEGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WALL ST     GRANADA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MOCHO ST                                                                                                                     LI
                                                                 VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GREENVILLE
                                                   ST AN LE Y BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RM
                                                                                                                                                                               LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL                                                                                                           ROBERTSON                                                             OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PARK                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                       C  A
                                                                                                                                                                                          ENCINO DR           M                                                                                                                                                                                                AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IT                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VANCOUVER      WY               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TESLA                     RD
                                                                                                                                      ISABEL                                              MAX BAER
                                                                                                                                                                                          PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CATALINA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WENTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C ONCANNON                                     BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                               M URDELL
                                                                                           VINEYARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MARINA RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ALDEN                  LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HO LME S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUPERIOR DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              XIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE
                                                                                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RAVENSWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ARROYO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INDEPENDENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WETMORE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         L   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      VA
N O RT H
           Freeway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIGURE 5 - 1
           Highway
           Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROADWAY FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS
           Collector Street
           Intercounty Route
           Special Rural Route                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN

                                                                    C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Table 5-4 Proposed Future Roadway and Interchange Improvements
                                                                             Proposed No.
                                                           Existing             Lanes with
                                                              No.             General Plan
Street                                    Limits            Lanes            Improvements
Roadways
Chestnut Street                P to Junction                   4                      2
First Street                   P to Railroad-Maple             4                      2
Greenville Road                Northfront to National          4                      6
                               National to Patterson
Greenville Road                                                2                      4
                               Pass
Holmes Street                  Wetmore to Alden                3                      4
Isabel Avenue                  Portola to Airway               0                      6
Isabel Avenue                  Stanley to Vallecitos           2                      4
Isabel Avenue                  Airway to Jack London           4                      6
Isabel Avenue                  Jack London to Stanley          2                      6
Jack London Boulevard          Isabel to El Charro            2/0                     4
                               east of First to west of
Las Positas Road                                               0                      4
                               Vasco
Las Positas Road               Vasco to Lawrence               2                      4
Las Positas Road               N. Livermore to First          2/3                     4
Las Colinas Road               Las Colinas to Redwood          0                      2
N Livermore Ave                I-580 to Las Positas            4                      6
North Canyons Pkwy-Dublin
                               Doolan Canyon to Fallon         0                      4
Boulevard
North Canyons Pkwy             Airway to Collier Canyon        4                      6
P Street                       Pine to Chestnut                4                      2
Portola Avenue                 Isabel to I-580                 0                      4
Portola Avenue                 Murrieta to L                  2/4                     4
Portola Avenue                 Collier Canyon to Isabel       4/0                     6
Railroad Avenue                L to First                      2                      4
                                                                                              5-47
C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                                    Proposed No.
                                                           Existing   Lanes with
                                                             No.     General Plan
Street                                        Limits        Lanes   Improvements
                                    Maple to Old First
Railroad Avenue                                               4            4
                                    (Realign Road)
Scenic Avenue                       east end to Laughlin      0            2
                                    Western City limits to
Stanley Boulevard                                             4            6
                                    Murrieta
                                    Isabel to west of Ruby
Vallecitos Road                                               2            4
                                    Hills
Vallecitos Road                     Pigeon Pass               2            4
                                    Patterson Pass to Las
Vasco Road                                                    4            6
                                    Positas
Vasco Road                          Las Positas to I-580      4            8
Vasco Road                          I-580 to Scenic           4            6
Interchanges
I-580/Portola Avenue
                                                ---        Existing     None
Interchange
I-580/Greenville Road
                                                ---        Existing    Ultimate
Interchange
I-580/Vasco Road
                                                ---        Existing    Ultimate
Interchange
I-580/First Street Interchange                  ---        Existing    Ultimate
I-580/Isabel Avenue
                                                ---        Existing    Ultimate
Interchange
I-580/El Charro Road
                                                ---        Existing    Ultimate
Interchange
(Reso. 2009-055)
5-48
                                                                         C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Regional Improvements/Freeway Improvements
The 2001 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) for the San Francisco Bay Area (revised in
November 2002) was developed by the Metropolitan Transportation Commission. The
RTP is a long-range planning document, which specifies a detailed set of investments and
strategies to maintain, manage and improve the surface transportation network in the nine-
county Bay Area. The RTP includes a list of projects on regional facilities in and near the
City of Livermore that will affect circulation in the City. Key projects have been included in
the analysis and in the transportation model for the Circulation Element update. Each
project in the RTP has an associated funding description, called “Committed,” “Track 1” or
“Blueprint.” Committed project funding is specifically programmed for, and will be used to
implement specific projects. Committed project funding includes all regionally significant
projects with 100 percent local funding. Track 1 projects are those for which funding is
anticipated to be available over the term of the RTP, but is not specifically programmed.
Blueprint projects are those projects for which new funding sources must be identified in
order to be implemented in the next 25 years. The regional improvements in the City and
vicinity, and their funding status in the RTP, are:
   Vasco Road/I-580 interchange improvements (Committed funding status)
   Rehabilitate and widen SR 84 (First Street) from I-580 to Scott Street (Committed)
   I-580 eastbound auxiliary lane between Santa Rita Road and Airway Boulevard
     (Committed)
   Extend North Canyons Parkway westerly to Dublin Boulevard (Committed)
   I-580/North Livermore Avenue interchange improvements (Committed, but not
     included in model analysis)
   I-580/First Street interchange improvements (Committed)
   Isabel Avenue/SR 84/I-580 partial interchange construction (Phase 1) (Track 1)
   Isabel Avenue/SR 84/I-580 interchange improvements; build second bridge to provide
     six-lanes over I-580 (Phase 2) (Committed)
   I-580/Greenville Road interchange improvements (Committed)
   Extend Las Positas Road between First Street and Vasco Road (Committed)
   Widen Isabel Avenue to four lanes (along SR 84 alignment) from I-580 south to
     Vallecitos Road and improvements along SR 84 through Pigeon Pass (Committed)
                                                                                                   5-49

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
       Ramp metering from I-580/I-680 interchange east to Altamont Pass (Committed)
       Widen I-580 to add High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes in each direction east to
         Vasco Road (initial segment) and ultimately to Greenville Road (Blueprint)
The above improvements that are either Committed or Track 1 funding status are included
in the modeling analysis of future buildout conditions, with the exception of the I-
580/North Livermore Avenue interchange improvements, which will not be needed.
Blueprint funding status improvements, including the High-Occupancy Vehicle lanes on I-
580, are not included in the analysis since full funding is not identified. Similarly, widening of
SR 84 (Vallecitos Road) to four-lanes between I-680 and Isabel Avenue was not included in
the analysis because full funding is not identified.
Roadway Widening Improvements
There are roadway segments in the City where additional roadway capacity will likely be
needed to maintain acceptable service levels based on traffic modeling and engineering
analysis. On some roadway segments, widening will be required to add one additional lane
of travel in each direction. However, on other roadway segments, particularly those near I-
580 that serve high percentages of non-local cut-through traffic, additional roadway
widening is not proposed. This is due to the City’s goal to not encourage increased cut-
through traffic in the City or not to create regional by-pass routes on local streets. A
discussion of cut-through traffic is provided in Section B (non-local) and below (local).
Table 5-4 lists the location of each proposed roadway widening, the existing number of lanes
for through traffic and the proposed future number of lanes. The timing of implementation
of these improvements will be described in the City’s capital improvement program.
Intersection Improvements
17B
    At some intersection locations, mid-block roadway widening as noted above will not be
    adequate to maintain desired levels of service. This is because intersections represent
    “bottleneck” points in the transportation system. At intersections, the right-of-way must be
    shared by two intersecting roadways, and the effective capacity of each roadway to move
    traffic is reduced. In some locations, additional lanes of traffic are required to maintain
    acceptable service levels. This may include additional through lanes, additional turning lanes
    5-50

                                                                             C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                     G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
(exclusive left and/or right turn lanes), installation of traffic signals at currently unsignalized
locations, modification of traffic signal timing and operations and other measures. Table 5-4
lists roadway segments that will be improved to accommodate buildout of the land use plan.
Figure 5-2 illustrates the locations of the proposed intersection and roadway improvements.
The figure also illustrates the locations of regional improvements, including freeway and
interchange reconstruction, that have been included in the plan. At some locations,
however, it is not possible to provide enough lane capacity to achieve mid-level LOS D or
LOS E (threshold varies depending on location) because environmental constraints, right-
of–way constraints or cut-through traffic volumes or other City policies prevent the
implementation of improvements which would achieve mid-level LOS D/LOS E (as
applicable) or better. Those locations are:
     First Street/N. Mines Road
     Isabel Avenue/Airway Boulevard
     Isabel Avenue/Jack London Boulevard
     Vasco Road/Northfront Road
      Vasco Road/I-580 Eastbound Ramps
      Concannon Boulevard/S. Livermore Avenue
      Holmes Street/Fourth Street
     Stanley Boulevard/Murrieta Boulevard (Reso. 2009-055)
                                                                                                       5-51

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                    This page intentionally left blank.
5-52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I-580 & Greenville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Interchange                                                              RD
                   Add one HOV lane in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reconstruction
                                                                                                               I-580 & Isabel Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I-580 & Vasco Road
                   each direction from
                                                                                                               Interchange                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RON
                   Western City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DALTON AV
                                                                                                               Construction                                                                                                                                                                            I-580 & 1st Street                                                                                        Reconstruction                                                                                                                                                                                                  NORTHF
                   to Greenville Road                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interchange
                                                       I-580 & El Charro                                                                                                                               I-580 & Portola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST                                              G ARAVENTA
                   interchange                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reconstruction                                                                                                                                                            BROADMOOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA
                                                       Rd Interchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N C H RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LIVERMORE
                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ave Interchange
                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LAUGHLIN
                                                       Reconstruction                                                                                 N R
                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B LV D                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                            DOOLAN                                                                                     Removal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SCENIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                    YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6                     HERMAN AV
                                                                                                                                                            IER CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S P R IN G T O W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EL
                                                                                                                                                        COLL
                                                                                                                                                                                LAS POSITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SPRINGTOWN                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NT
                                                                                                                                                                                COLLEGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GOLF COURSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SLTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WISTERIA WY
                                                                    RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DR                                                                                        SO
                                              FALLON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CENTRAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NF                                                              PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                        PKW
                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WE
                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                 ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                              Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                            NY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                  D U BL IN B LV D
                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                         CROAK                                                       N CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD                                US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TRIA                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO                                        IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               THF  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              580                                                                                                                           SOU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A d x ilia ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A u ne s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    La
                                                                             L A S P O S I TA S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6                   LAS PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VA S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                             GOLF COURSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ACE
                                                                                                                                              A I R WAY                   BL                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STATION
                   Add Auxiliary Lanes                                                                                                                                                                      ALAMEDA               DR                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                          KITTY HAWK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PATTERSON
                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B LV                             PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                           L I V E R M O R E M U N I C I PA L A I R P O R T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PASS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OL
                                                         EL C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVE                      A                                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AV                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1S
                                                             RO                                                                                                                JACK LONDON BL
                                                          HAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JU
                                                                         4                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PINE          ST                                              NC                                                                                                                                                                                                            DAPHNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TIO                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                      DR                                                                                         “P”                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV
                                                            RD                                                                                                                                                                                               MAY NISSEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MURRIETA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LO                                                                    L AW R E N C E L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                                                                                                                                                                                      T                         LEN
                                                                                                                                                                                 HAGEMANN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV                                                                                                                                                                                                 WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AR                                           N AT I O N A L L A B O R ATO RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RINCON
                                                                                                                                                          AVE                                                                                                                                  STN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OLIVINA                             ST                                                                 STATION                                                                                                                                                                    EMILY WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MA                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AV                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JENSEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LIVERMORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RAIL                                                                                                        EAST                                                    AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DOLORES ST                                      HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                  6                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CIVIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COLLEGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WALL ST   GRANADA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MOCHO ST                                                                                                                         LI
                                                                             VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GREENVILLE
                                                                STA NL E Y BL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RM
                                                                                                                                                                                            LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EL                                                                                                                  ROBERTSON                                                              OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PARK                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C    A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ENCINO DR                  M                                                                                                                                                                                               AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IN                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ITO                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VANCOUVER       WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                      ISABEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TE S LA               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MAX BAER
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PARK                                                 CATALINA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CONCANNON                                      BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                            MURDELL
                                                                                                      VINEYARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ALDEN                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                          4                                                                                  HOLME S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SUPERIOR DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              XIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE
                                                                                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RAVENSWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARROYO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INDEPENDENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WETMORE RD
                                         N O RT H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VA
                                                                                                                                                                               4
                   Note: All I-580 interchanges include ramp metering
                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE 5 - 2
    PROPOSED INTERSECTION
    IMPROVEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PROPOSED ROADWAY AND INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS
    PROPOSED ROADWAY
4   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION
    (ULTIMATE NUMBER OF
    LANES)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DALTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G ARAVENTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A LTA O N T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA S S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BROADMOOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N C H RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LIVERMORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA S C O                                                     LAUGHLIN
                                                                                                                               D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NT
                                                                                                                            N R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B LV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SCENIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV                                   RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RT
                                                                                                                                     YO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO
                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HERMAN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S P R IN G T O W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL
                                                                                                                                                       LAS POSITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SPRINGTOWN                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                            IER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NT
                                                                                                                                        COLL
                                                                                                                                                       COLLEGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GOLF COURSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR                    WISTERIA WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRO
                                                      RD
                               FALLON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CENTRAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NF                                                                   PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LO
                                                                                                           S   PKW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                      ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                     Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y
                                                             DUBL I N BLV D                      NY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S
                                         CROAK                                            N CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD                                     US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TRIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ITA                                           RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NT                                    IND                              OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTH                                                                            LA      SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  580                         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SO
                                                           L A S P O S I TA S                                                                                                                                                                                                               LAS PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SITAS
                                                           GOLF COURSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ACE
                                                                                                                     A I R WAY                   BL                                                                                                                                                                                                              ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STATION
                                                                                                                                                                                   ALAMEDA               DR                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                 KITTY HAWK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PATTERSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B LV                               PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RD
                                                                     L I V E R M O R E M U N I C I PA L A I R P O R T                                                                                                                                            RT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PASS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                 RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AVE                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV
                                             HAR
                                        EL C
                                                                                                                                                      JACK LONDON BL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PINE           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC                                                              ST                                                                                                                                         DAPHNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TIO                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DR
                                                                                                                                                             DR                                                                                           “P”                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                              RD                                                                                                                                                                                    MAY NISSEN                                                                                                                                                                                                              CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MURRIETA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AR                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST                                                                                                                                                                                                LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T                          LEN                                    L AW R E N C E L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                                                                                        HAGEMANN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV                                                                                                                                                                                           WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AR                                        N AT I O N A L L A B O R ATO RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RINCON
                                                                                                                                 AVE                                                                                                                                    STN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OLIVINA                               ST                                                          STATION                                                                                                                                                                       EMILY WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MA                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JENSEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LIVERMORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RAIL                                                                                                   EAST                                                    AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DOLORES ST                                        HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               YLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CIVIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COLLEGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                              WALL ST   GRANADA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MOCHO ST                                                                                                                      LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GREENVILLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H. S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RM
                                                                                                                                                                                        EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VA S C O
                                                                                                                                                                   LN                                                                                                                                    ROBERTSON                                                              OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PARK                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                               C    A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                             ENCINO DR                  M                                                                                                                                                                                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ITO                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VANCOUVER       WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                            ISABEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TES LA                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                             MAX BAER
                                                                                                                                                                             PARK                                                 CATALINA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CONCANNON                                       BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                   MURDELL
                                                                                VINEYARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ALDEN                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOL M E S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SUPERIOR DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                                                                        AV
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RAVENSWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARROYO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                INDEPENDENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WETMORE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CI
                                                                                                                                                                                           L   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                        VA
ROADWAYS DESIGNATED
AS TRUCK ROUTES (upon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FIGURE 5 - 3
transfer of SR-84 to Isabel
Avenue)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROPOSED TRUCK ROUTE SYSTEM
INTERIM TRUCK ROUTE
(Until Isabel Interchange is
Completed)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN

                                                                              C I T Y  O F L I V E R M O R E
                                                                                      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                         C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
At these locations, traffic conditions will be monitored, and feasible improvements will be
implemented as required, although the traffic model forecasts indicate that they may not
ultimately achieve the City’s desired level of service.
Local Cut-Through Traffic
Local residential street cut-through traffic, and excessive speeding on residential local and
collector streets will worsen as the congestion on the arterial street system increases. In
March 2002, to help minimize local cut-through traffic problems, the City Council adopted a
comprehensive residential traffic-calming program. This program enables the City to
address local and collector street volume and speeding problems when they arise, and it will
be used in the future to mitigate, to the greatest extent possible, any additional impacts that
arise.
Changes to Truck Routes
18B
    Upon completion of the transfer of SR 84 to Isabel Avenue, the new SR 84 will be
    designated as a truck route. As a result of this transfer, the following truck routes would be
    removed from the system: First Street, Vallecitos Road north of Isabel Avenue, Holmes
    Street, Livermore Avenue, and Stanley Boulevard east of Isabel Avenue. This
    recommendation is consistent with policies to limit cut-through traffic in the City and
    prohibit through truck traffic from Downtown. The proposed truck route system is
    illustrated in Figure 5-3.
    Changes to the Bicycle Network
    The proposed bike and trail network includes improvements to existing trails and bike
    facilities (new trail and bike lane segments) as well as new bridges and major crossings to
    complete the existing system and provide cross-town connections.
    Recommended Bike and Trail Facilities
    The intent of the proposed bike and trail facility improvements is to provide the community
    with a comprehensive bike and trail network for transportation as well as recreational
    purposes that will serve the needs and levels of a variety of users. Specific trail
    improvements to complete cross-town connections include extending the existing Altamont
    Creek Trail further west from Vasco Road to Bluebell and also extending the proposed Jack
                                                                                                        5-57

C I T Y O F L I V E R M O R E
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
London Trail from Isabel Parkway east along Jack London Boulevard and then north to
connect ultimately with the Las Positas Trail. Another important trail segment is the Iron
Horse Trail within or adjacent to the railroad right-of-way through the Downtown. This trail
segment provides pedestrian and bicycle connections between proposed residential
development and the ACE passenger rail station, LAVTA transit center, and the Downtown.
A multi-use trail is also proposed along the extension of Jack London Boulevard west to
ultimately provide a connection to Pleasanton.
To further augment the existing network, two new trail opportunities were identified as part
of the 2001 Bikeways and Trails Master Plan update. They include the Arroyo Seco Trail,
beginning approximately at the Las Colinas overpass and traveling south along an existing
Zone 7 channel road to Vasco Road, and the Patterson Pass Trail extending from Vasco
Road west to connect to the Proposed Arroyo Seco Trail. The Arroyo Seco Trail will
provide a needed more direct route from the Springtown area to the southern area of the
City as well as to residential, commercial and major employment areas such as the
Vasco/Greenville area and the Livermore and Sandia Laboratories. The proposed bikeways
and trails network is illustrated in Figure 5-4.
Recommended Bridges and Major Crossings for Bicycle Network
19B
    In addition to trails and bike lanes, several bridges and under- or over-crossings are needed
    to close gaps and provide the connectivity needed so that walking and bicycling can be a
    practical transportation mode. Also, connectivity of recreational trails is important in order
    to maximize the patronage and usability of the entire network. These crossings have been
    categorized into two types: bridges over arroyos, which tend to be short and flat, and major
    over-crossings or undercrossings of I-580, railroad tracks and major roadways, which are
    more costly and require more right-of-way.
    5-58
                                                                           Under
                                                                           Construction
                                                              Under
                                                              Construction
N O RT H
         Existing Multi-Use Trails   Staging Area
         Existing Bike Lanes         Elementary Schools                                                                 FIGURE 5 - 4
         Existing Multi-Use Trails   Middle Schools
         with Equestrian Component
                                     High Schools                                       PROPOSED BIKEWAYS AND TRAILS NETWORK
         Existing Over/Undercrossing
                                     Transportation Centers
         Proposed Over/Undercrossing Hospitals
         Proposed Bike Lanes         Parks                                                                   LIVERMORE GENERAL PLAN
         Proposed Trails             Area Outside City Limits
         Proposed Bike Routes
