           City of Cloverdale
              General Plan
Adopted by the City Council of the City of
  Cloverdale by Resolution 022-2009,
             May 13, 2009
                 Amended
               June 28, 2010
            November 10, 2010
                 CITY OF CLOVERDALE
                    GENERAL PLAN
                TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION.........................................Pg 1
2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT...................................Pg 9
3.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT.............................Pg 31
4.0 NOISE ELEMENT.........................................Pg 40
5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT............Pg 50
6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN,
    AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT........................Pg 58
7.0 URBAN LIGHTING ELEMENT.........................Pg 75
8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY......................Pg 78
             1.0 INTRODUCTION
     1.0
INTRODUCTION
                        Page 1
                                                                     1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.1       INTRODUCTION
The Cloverdale General Plan includes goals, policies, and implementation programs that
constitute the formal policy of the City for land use, development, and environmental
quality. This is an update of the General Plan adopted in 1993.
1.2       CLOVERDALE SETTING
The City of Cloverdale is located at the northern end of the picturesque Alexander Valley
where the Mayacamas Mountains meet the Coast Range. The Russian River flows
through the center of the Valley, and the developed portion of the City is located on the
valley floor west of the Russian River and east of the Coast Range. Cloverdale is at the
extreme north end of Sonoma County, located approximately 67 miles southeast of the
town of Mendocino, 34 miles northwest of Santa Rosa, and 25 miles south of Ukiah.
Map 1 shows the City's location relative to other cities, highways, geographical features,
and Sonoma County boundaries.
Cloverdale has a population of 8,517. Sonoma County has a population of 481,675. The
Coun  ty’se igh ti ncorpo rat
                            e dc iti
                                   es,Sa  nt aRos  a,Petaluma, Rohnert Park, Healdsburg,
Sonoma, Sebastopol, Cotati, and Cloverdale, contained a combined population of
329,853 (Department of Finance estimates 1/1/07).
1.3 PURPOSE AND NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The General Plan is a legal document, required by state law, and serves as a City’        s
"constitution" for development and the use of land. It is a comprehensive, long-term
do cume n t,deta i
                 lingpr o posalsfort he“  phy sicalde ve lopmento ftheCity, and of any land
outside its boundaries which in the planning agency's judgment bears relation to its
pla nning ”(Gov  ernme ntCod   eSe cti
                                     on s653  00e  tse q.). The Cloverdale General Plan has
a time horizon to the year 2025. The General Plan represents a picture of what the City
will look like in 2025 based on following th   ePlan’ sg o al
                                                            san dpolicies.
The law specifically requires that the General Plan a     ddressseve nt opicso  r“
                                                                                 eleme nts.
                                                                                          ”
These are land use, circulation (transportation), housing, conservation, open space, noise,
and safety. In addition, the General Plan includes three optional elements -- Parkland and
Recreation, Community Design, and Urban Lighting Elements.
The law requires that a General Plan shall consist of a statement of development policies
and must include diagrams and text setting forth objectives, principles, standards and plan
proposals. The Cloverdale General Plan uses the following organization to implement
the state law. The following definitions describe the nature of the statements of goals,
policies, objectives, and implementation programs as they are used in this document.
     Goal: The goal is a general expression of community values that identifies the
     desired end state either during or at the end of the General Plan process.
     Policy: A specific statement in text or diagram guiding action and implying clear
     commitment. Policies may also include quantified targets, which are considered as
     “ob jecti
             v es”i nsomeGeneral Plans.
                                                                                   Page 2

                                                                     1.0 INTRODUCTION
     Implementation Program: An action, procedure, program, or technique that carries
     out General Plan policy. Implementation programs also specify primary
     responsibility for carrying out the action and a time frame for its accomplishment.
     Responsibility: Identification of the City departments or other parties responsible for
     the implementation of a policy or program.
     Diagrams: Maps, charts and diagrams in the General Plan are General Plan policies unless
     they are clearly intended to be informative in nature.
The General Plan sets out policies and identifies ways to put these policies into action.
These various actions rest on two essential powers of local government: corporate and
police powers. Using its "corporate power," the City collects money through bonds, fees,
assessments, and taxes, and spends it to provide services and facilities such as police and
fire protection, streets, water and sewage disposal facilities, and parks. Using its "police
power," the City regulates citizens' use of their property through zoning, subdivision, and
building regulations in order "to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public."
The General Plan provides the framework for the exercise of these powers by local
officials.
State law requires that the local government review its General Plan on an annual basis.
One requirement is to annually review the Capital Improvement Plan to determine its
compliance with the General Plan (Government Code Section 65103 (b) and (c)). The
other requirement is that the local planning agency provide an annual report to the
legislative body on the status of the plan and progress of its implementation (Government
Code Section 65400).
1.4        HISTORIC PERSPECTIVE
The townsite of Cloverdale was originally part of the Mexican Rancho Rincon de
Muscalon, a long narrow strip of land comprising 8,776 acres on both sides of the
Russian River. The 1846 grantee of the Rancho, Francisco Berryessa, sold it in 1851 to
Johnson Horrel who, in 1858, deeded 759 acres to Richard B. Markle and W.J. Miller.
The two men established a trading post and tavern adjacent to the Russian River and the
town of Cloverdale began.
Early settlers were predominantly farmers or ranchers who purchased properties for
sheep, stock, vineyards or hops. J.A. Kleiser and David C. Brush purchased the 759
acres in 1859 and had the site surveyed, plotted and improved the main streets and
erected a number of buildings. Commerce soon followed with various businesses being
established. Isaac E. Shaw arrived in 1872 and operated a hardware and grocery store
and later a bank. The town developed in other ways, adding a post office, newspaper,
school, social lodges and a few churches.
In 1872, Cloverdale was incorporated as a City and an official map of the City Limits
was drawn by Daniel F. Spurr. The railroad soon arrived, adding to the town's
commercial, shipping and tourist viability. By 1878, the railroad service provided three
trains a day between Cloverdale to San Francisco. In or about 1886, the citizens of
Cloverdale organized a volunteer fire company. The first City building, a combined
firehouse and City Hall, opened its doors in August 1887. The first street lights, fueled
                                                                                    Page 3
                                                                   1.0 INTRODUCTION
by coal gas, appeared in 1884. Telephone service began in 1883, water in 1884,
electricity in 1897. The Citrus Fair was initiated in 1893.
The economy of Cloverdale in the early 1900's revolved around the agricultural, timber
and railroad industries. The population always hovered around 1,000. The area was also
known for its excellent wine production and warm climate. The 1900 census for
Cl ove  r
        dales  howse   leve n"grapeg rowers”a  nde  ight"wi nema kers".Howe    v e
                                                                                 r,the local
wine industry suffered greatly during prohibition and several vineyards were turned to
other uses.
 The advent of mechanized equipment in both the timber and automobile industries
further shaped Cloverdale. A number of logging mills were constructed in the area and
served as major employers. With the availability of employment, the town experienced a
boom in growth from 1940 to 1960 when the population rose from 800 to around 3,000.
With the advent of the automobile and the slow improvement of Highway 101,
Cloverdale become more of a highway oriented community. Businesses catering to the
traveling public become common along Cloverdale Blvd. in the early 1960's. The first
zoning map of Cloverdale was adopted in 1953, delineating the entire length of
Cloverdale Blvd. as "Highway Commercial" and the rest of the community in two
categories of residential districts.
The first General Plan for the City was adopted in 1978. At the time, the population was
3,770. The Plan set forth an ultimate urban boundary, redefined the City Sphere of
Influence and proposed a maximum population of 17,800 by the year 2000. The 1978
Plan and the resulting zoning map deleted or converted a portion of the highway
commercial area and added further definitions to the residential districts, including for the
first time, hillside areas.
In the 1980's, the City annexed approximately 300 acres to the south, extending its City
Limits to Santana Lane. Development plans for these properties were considered and
approved by the City. A series of development applications for residential projects were
submitted to the City in the late 1980's. Growth in the residential housing market was
occurring at a rapid pace along the Highway 101 corridor and Cloverdale began to
experience this pressure.
In the early 1990's, the City received word from the State of California that the long
awaited Highway 101 Bypass was funded and would be constructed by 1995. At the
same time, industries in resource products fields such as timber manufacturing field and
the Geysers began to lose force as the major employers in the Cloverdale area. In 1990,
the City adopted a Downtown Specific Plan aimed at revitalizing the downtown business
district and designating this area as the City's retail and cultural center. In light of the
recent changes in the amount of growth, the effects of the Highway 101 Bypass and the
evolving economy, the City authorized the preparation of a General Plan in late 1990.
Since adoption of the 1993 General Plan, the City took several steps to respond to the
Highway 101 bypass. Following Economic Development Commission recommendations,
the City developed infrastructure in the south industrial area, developed the Cloverdale
Boulevard beautification program, developed the River Park, and the Cloverdale Pride
Committee undertook a successful program to clean up unsightly properties. In the late
19 90’  s Ba y Ar  e ar e side
                             ntiald  e
                                     ma nd r eache d Cl ove rda
                                                              le,a  nd r  es i
                                                                             de nt
                                                                                 ialg  rowt h
                                                                                    Page 4

                                                                   1.0 INTRODUCTION
proceeded at roughly three times the historic rate. The Clover Springs community was the
largest single residential project in that time period. After completion of the 101 bypass,
the south interchange was developed with typical freeway interchange projects and the
Furber Shopping center. Also, a golf course and resort was proposed on the southern
destination commercial site (former Louisiana Pacific lumber yard), and the sphere of
influence was expanded to include that site.
1.5 PREPARATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
Preparation of the General Plan started with two Town Hall meetings in January and
February 2004. The City Council then appointed a 15-member Citizen's Advisory
Committee to recommend a concept General Plan to the Planning Commission and City
Council. The Citizen's Advisory Committee met from June 2004 to December 2005, and
recommended a draft plan to the Planning Commission and City Council on December
15, 2005. The Planning Commission and City Council held public meetings to develop
the“  project”dr  aftforEnvi   ronme  ntalI  mpactRe  portc onside
                                                                 ration.TheCi    t
                                                                                 yCouncil
ado ptedt he“ pro ject
                     ”dr a ftonJ une27   ,20 07.
The draft General Plan was formulated to minimize environmental impacts, with the goal
that adoption of the General Plan would be the primary mitigation of impacts identified in
the Environmental Impact Report.
The Planning Commission held public hearings on the General Plan on November 5,
2008, and February 4, March 4 and April 1, 2009. The Commission forwarded their
recommendations to the City Council and recommendation for approval of the Draft
General Plan on April 1, 2009.
The City Council received the recommendations of the Planning Commission and held
public hearings on February 28, March 28, and April 1 2009. The Council considered
land use changes related to issues. On May 13, 2009 the City Council adopted the
General Plan in its entirety.
Throughout the General Plan update the City made every effort to notify the public of
opportunities to be involved. Meetings were noticed in the local newspaper and at City
Hall; the City made several direct mailings to Cloverdale property owners and
organizations; and Cloverdale newspapers regularly carried topical articles on the
progress of the General Plan update.
1.6 COMPARISON OF THE 1978, 1993, AND 2008 GENERAL PLANS
The 2008 General Plan is the third General Plan for the City of Cloverdale. Each General
Plan addressed evolving economic and development issues in the community. The
following is a comparison of previous and current General Plans.
The 1978 and 1993 General Plans anticipated growth to the limits shown in this General
Plan. The 1978 General Plan had a study area larger than the proposed General Plan
study area, but anticipated that the ultimate City limits would be slightly less than the
current 2008 limits. The 1993 General Plan study area was expanded to the south in
1996. The expanded 1993 and 2008 General Plan study areas are coterminous except the
McCray Road area and the Asti and Rains Creek Water District were added to the 2008
General Plan.
                                                                                   Page 5

                                                                   1.0 INTRODUCTION
The 1978 General Plan anticipated a year 2000 population of 7,100 (2000 Census
population was 7,052). The 1993 General Plan anticipated a 2010 population of 10,781
(ABAG estimated 2010 population is 9,100). The 2008 General Plan projects a
population of 12,000 by 2025 (ABAG estimated 2025 population is 11,000).
All three General Plans have encouraged compact development within the General Plan
defined growth boundaries, balanced housing, concentrated commercial areas and
discourage commercial development along the freeway, expand the job base to respond
to loss of timber related and extractive industry jobs, provide for open spaces, protect
hillside areas from development, preserve and enhance open spaces and natural
watercourses, and balance of housing and employment opportunities. The 1978 and 1993
General Plans anticipated the changes that would occur when the Highway 101 bypass
occurred and recommended concentrated commercial in the downtown (1978) and
downtown and south interchange (1993), with removal of the strip commercial
development along Cloverdale Boulevard. The 1978 and 1993 General Plans anticipated
developing the River Park. The 1978 General Plan anticipated extension into the McCray
Road Area. The 1993 General Plan did not. The 2008 General Plan again proposes to
add McCray Road to the General Plan Study Area and Urban Service Area.
In 1978 and 1993, the focus of the General Plan was on economic vulnerability resulting
from lumber mill closures and the freeway bypass. The 1993 General Plan provided a
transition strategy to focus on a beautified downtown, removal of strip commercial along
Cloverdale Boulevard, provide for alternative industrial uses and jobs south of
downtown, and reserve three large areas for destination commercial use to attract visitors.
The 2008 General Plan retains the downtown and concentrated commercial focus and
protection of industrial lands south of town for industrial uses. The in-town Destination
Commercial site adjacent to the Citrus Fair has been changed to General Commercial and
High Density Residential, the Destination Commercial site near the SMART passenger
rail station has been mostly changed to Industrial, and the Destination Commercial area
south of the City is unchanged and has a proposed hotel and golf course development.
In 1978 and 1993, there were still large areas of vacant land for residential development.
Mo  stoft   hosea reaswe  repl ann edf or“  i
                                            n nov
                                                ative”mi  xe sofd  ensities;h owe ve r,t hey
were primarily developed as conventional single family subdivisions. Most of those
vacant lands have been developed, and the 2008 General Plan anticipates that major
development will occur in infill areas, with the most substantial areas available for large-
scale residential development in the proposed McCray Annexation north of the City and
the Alexander Valley Resort Destination Commercial area southeast of the City.
1.7        PLANNING AREAS FOR THE 2008 GENERAL PLAN
The planning area for the General Plan encompasses 7.2 square miles (4,608 acres) and
extends generally east to the Russian River and west to the crest of the ridgeline, north to
McCray Road, and south to Asti and the Rains Creek Water District. Highways 101 and
128 are a part of the planning area as well as the City Municipal Airport. The northern
boundary extends to the north Highway 101 interchange and includes the McCray Road
area. The Study Area includes two major creeks, Cloverdale Creek to the north and
Porterfield Creek to the south. The General Plan planning area includes four separate
geographical areas See map 2. These are:
                                                                                   Page 6

                                                                      1.0 INTRODUCTION
     CITY LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the community, where land use is controlled
     by the City. They encompass 2.5 square miles (1,601 acres).
     SPHERE OF INFLUENCE: The City Sphere of Influence is the area of the City
     that has been approved for future annexation by the Sonoma County Local Agency
     Formation Commission. It encompasses 2.3 square miles (1,474 acres) beyond the
     City Limits. The Sphere of influence has remained generally consistent since the
     adoption of the first General Plan in 1978, with only one extension approved since
     the original General Plan was adopted in 1978. The Sonoma County General Plan
     uses the Sphere of Influence to define the ultimate area to be annexed to the City.
     URBAN SERVICE AREA: The City Urban Service Area is the area where the City
     anticipates extending urban services (e.g. water, sewer, police, etc.) It encompasses
     1.3 square miles (760 acres) beyond the Sphere of Influence and represents area that
     the City intends to add to the Sphere of Influence after Local Agency Formation
     Commission approval.
     STUDY AREA: The City Study Area encompasses 1.22 square miles (773 acres)
     outside of the Urban Service Area and can be considered the areas under County
     jurisdiction where the City expresses land use directions to help the County
     determine transition policies between the urban City areas to the agriculture and very
     low intensity uses under County jurisdiction.
                 Figure 1.1 Planning Area Individual and Cumulative Land Area
                                                  2008          2008   Cumulative  Cumulative
                                                acreage Square Miles      Acreage    Sq miles.
        Land within the City limits         1,615 acres    2.5 sq.mi.  1,615 acres  2.5 sq.mi.
        Land in the existing (2008) Sphere
                                            1,460 acres    2.3 sq.mi.  3,075 acres  4.8 sq.mi.
        of Influence but not in City Limits
        Proposed Sphere of Influence
                                            1,391 acres    2.2 sq.mi.  4,466 acres  7.0 sq.mi.
        Expansion
        Remaining Land in the Study Area
                                              511 acres    0.8 sq.mi.  4,977 acres  7.8 sq.mi.
        (Outside City & Sphere)
In addition to the above, the General Plan identifies an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)
and two exception areas within which the City may approve urban uses. The UGB
includes the existing City Limits and portions, but not all, of the Existing Sphere and
Proposed Sphere expansion.
1.8       ASSUMPTIONS GUIDING THE PREPARATION OF THE 2005 GENERAL
          PLAN
In any 20-year General Plan time frame, a City can expect to accomplish a finite number
of major objectives. The General Plan Citizen's Advisory Committee has identified the
following 14 major objectives that will be applied to all of the General Plan elements.
Community setting.
                                                                                   Page 7
                                                                      1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.   Maintain and encourage undeveloped hillsides, river and creek frontages, and forest
     setting that complement the natural visual setting of Cloverdale.
2.   Maintain the urban forest by expanding the tree canopy within the City. Recommend
     preparation of a Tree Preservation Ordinance.
3.   Maintain and improve the design of the built environment, including entrances and
     approaches to the community and downtown, site planning and development,
     highway frontages, and street and sidewalk design.
4.   Minimize impacts of urban lighting.
5.   Conserve or preserve historic buildings and the character of the older parts of town
     using conservation and form based zoning ordinances.
 Maintain a balance of land uses
6.   The General Plan should provide for a balance of land uses for housing, jobs,
     economic development, destination commercial sites, and a jobs/housing balance.
7.   Residential land use should have a target population of 12,000 people.
8.   Downtown economic development continues to be important in the updated General
     Plan.
9.   Industrial lands should be reserved for industrial purposes, and not for retail sale of
     typical household retail items.
 Geographical Growth.
10. The City should grow to the north or south if needed. There should be no expansion
     east of the Russian River, and expansion, if any, into hillside areas should be very low
     intensity, with controlled visibility and impacts.
11. The City may consider use of areas outside the urban service boundary and General
     Plan study area for recreation sites, even though they would not be considered for
     residential, commercial, or industrial use.
12. The City will adopt an Urban Growth Boundary.
 Community Recreation
13. Recreation assets should match population growth, including an evaluation of various
     groups who would like recreation assets such as youth, sports, walkers, elderly
     citizens, and land area and facilities targeted to those groups, including residential,
     commercial, and industrial areas.
14. Consider water-based recreation.
                                                                                     Page 8
                 2.0 LAND USE
      2.0
LAND USE ELEMENT
                        Page 9
            2.0 LAND USE
Exhibit 2.1
                   Page 10
                                                                                                           2.0 LAND USE
                                                        Exhibit 2.2
                      Land Use Densities and Intensities Allowed
                                                  Maximum                  Population/            Floor Area
        Land Use Category                       Dwelling Units           Dwelling Unit               Ratio
                                                 per Net Acre
Residential
   Rural Residential                           1 unit/5 net acres               2.6                                      Note (1)
   Low Density Residential                      4 units/net acre                2.6                 0.35+             Notes (1)(6)
   Medium Density Residential                   8 units/net acre                2.6                 0.35+             Notes (1)(6)
   High Density Residential                    16 units/net acre                2.6                 0.35+             Notes (1)(6)
Commercial
   Mixed Commercial                            20 units per /acre               2.6                   0.8             Notes (1)(2)
   Downtown Commercial                         20 units/net acre                2.6                   3.0           Notes (1) (2)(8)
   General Commercial                          20 units/net acre                2.6                   1.0           Notes (1)(2)(8)
   Service Commercial                                    -                        -                   1.0                Note (7)
   Highway Frontage Commercial                 20 units/net acre                  -                   0.8             Notes (1)(2)
   Destination Commercial                       2 units/net acre                2.6                   1.0             Notes (1)(3)
   Transit Oriented Development                20 units/net acre                2.6                   1.0               Notes(1)
Industry
   General Industry                                                                                    .6             Notes (1)(2)
   Business Park                                                                                       .6             Notes (1)(2)
Other
   Public/                                               -                        -                   1.0
   Quasi-Public
   Conservation                              1 unit/160 net acres               2.6                     -                Note (1)
(1)   Net acres are “ net”a fterde leti
                                      ng“ e nvi
                                              r o
                                                nme  ntall ysensiti
                                                                  vel  a
                                                                       nds ,”de  f
                                                                                 ineda  slan dso  ve
                                                                                                   r20% s  lo
                                                                                                            pe,landsi nr equ ire
                                                                                                                               d
      stream or creek setbacks, woodlands, or lands with federal or state listed endangered species.
(2)   Residential use must be secondary to the commercial use and located either above or behind the commercial use. The
      floor area for residential use cannot exceed the floor area of commercial use on the site, except in the Mixed
      Commercial designation, which may have any percentage residential. Mixed Commercial that is 100% residential shall
      follow the R-2 zoning standards.
(3)    Residential use must be secondary to the commercial use and located above the commercial use. The floor area for
      residential use cannot exceed the floor area of commercial use on the site, except that developments with two stories of
      residential above a commercial use, the area of each residential story cannot exceed the floor area of first floor
      commercial use
(4)   Residential use must be secondary to destination commercial uses on the site. Residential use may not occupy more
      than 20% of the net area of the site.
(5)   Residential use must be secondary to the industrial use of the site, located either above or behind the industrial use. The
      floor area for residential use cannot exceed the floor area of industrial use on the site.
(6)   For detached single family units, including detached units in planned developments and specific plans, floor area ratio
      (FAR) shall be 0.35 for lots less than 4,000 square feet and 0.40 for lots over 4,000-8,000 square feet. FAR may be
      establish edi ntheZon  in gOr  di
                                      n a
                                        nc efo rlot
                                                  so ve r8, 000s qu arefee t.“ En v i
                                                                                    ronme  nta l
                                                                                               l ysensitivela
                                                                                                            nds”a sde fin e
                                                                                                                          di n( 1)
      above, private roads and shared driveways shall not beu    seda s“ l
                                                                         o ta rea”i nc alculatingFAR.Nomo     retha  n25% o  flo t
                                                                                                                                 s
      in any development may be less than 4,000 square feet. No lots may be less than 3,000 square feet.
             In a planned development, a composite FAR may substitute for individual lot FAR. The composite FAR will
      co nsisto fthet otalFARo    falldetac heddwe  l
                                                    li
                                                     ngu   nit
                                                             si nthepr  oj
                                                                         e ctdi videdbyt  hes  umo  f(a )tot
                                                                                                           al“l
                                                                                                              o tare a”o fall
      those units as defined in the previous paragraph plus (b) public parks, usable open space, and/or trails open to the
      g eneralpu bl i
                    cwi  t
                         h outc o s
                                  t,e xcl
                                        udi ng“ environme   n
                                                            tall
                                                               ys en sit
                                                                       ivel an ds”a sde finedi  n1a bov  e.
(7)   General Commercial and Service Commercial areas fronting Cloverdale Boulevard to the south of Healdsburg Avenue
      and to the north of School Street may be rezoned to any zone conforming to Medium Density Residential General Plan
      designation at property owner request.
(8)   Downtown densities may be increased with Planning Commission approval for developments that provide pedestrian
      oriented commercial uses.
                                                                                                                       Page 11

                                                                        2.0 LAND USE
                                        Exhibit 2-3
                      Historic and Projected Growth Rates
                          Year   1960     1970      1980     1990 2000   2005    2025
                    Population  2,848    3,251     3,989    4,924 6,831  8,241 12,000
                Housing Units     988     1220     1,656    2,109 2,619  3,192  4,700
     Population per household     2.88     2.66     2.41     2.33  2.61   2.58   2.55
            Population growth              403       738      935 1,907  1,410  3,749
          Dwelling unit growth             232       436      453   510    573  1,508
  Average Annual dwelling unit
                                             23       44       45    51    115     75
                        growth
1960-2000 are Census data. 2005 is Department of Finance Estimate
                                                                                Page 12
                      2.0 LAND USE
      Exhibit 2.4
Urban Growth Boundary
                             Page 13
                                                                           2.0 LAND USE
2.1      INTRODUCTION
The Land Use Element describes the general distribution and intensity of uses of the land
for housing, business, industry, open space, education, public buildings and grounds,
waste disposal facilities, and other public and private uses. The Land Use Map and
Diagrams includes standards of population density and building intensity for the City.
The Land Use Element plays the central role of correlating all land use issues into a set of
coherent development policies. Its goals, policies, and programs relate directly to the
other elements.
2.2       GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal LU 1
Provide a balance of land uses within the General Plan Study Area for housing, jobs,
economic development, recreation, conservation, and destination commercial uses.
    Policy LU 1-1
    Allowable land uses are shown on the General Plan Land Use Map, Exhibit 2.1.
    Allowable population density and building intensity are shown in the Land Use
    Table, Exhibit 2.2.
          Implementation LU 1-1.a. Initiate Zoning Ordinance and any other Ordinance
          amendments necessary to bring the City Ordinances into conformity with
          Exhibits 2.1 and 2.2.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within one year of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 1-1.b. Initiate Housing Element amendments necessary to
          bring the Housing Element and General Plan into conformity.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within one year of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        LMI Housing Funds
          Implementation LU 1-1.c. Review residential development policies to allow
          limited numbers of small lots or cluster housing within conventional single
          family areas in order to provide variety and affordable housing.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within one year of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        General Fund
          Implementation LU 1-1.d. Revise parking requirements for small lot and cluster
          housing projects to provide for automobile and recreational vehicle parking so
          that parking does not impact city streets.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within one year of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        General Fund
                                                                                   Page 14

                                                                         2.0 LAND USE
Policy LU 1-2
Infrastructure and land use policies are based on a maximum anticipated population
for the City of 12,000 residents and 4,700 housing units in 2025.
      Implementation LU 1-2.a. Develop a growth management program to allocate
      an average of 75 units per year, but allowing flexibility in application of growth
      so that growth does not exceed 375 units in any five year period. The Growth
      Management Program shall include a strategy to meet the City’            sHou   sing
      Element fair share goals and jobs housing balance policies in Policy LU 1-3
      below.
           Responsibility:    Community Development Department
           Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                              1-1.a.
           Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Policy LU 1-3
Provide a jobs/housing balance, (defined as a 1:1 jobs to housing ratio) by
encouraging new business in the City, by encouraging housing production for local
employees, and by targeting a portion of City housing funds to provide housing for
essential employees who live and work in the City.
      Implementation LU 1-3.a. Develop a business attraction/initiation plan to
      increase number of jobs available for residents and to encourage local residents
      to open businesses in Cloverdale to achieve a 1:1 jobs to housing ratio.
          Responsibility:     Economic Development Commission -- staff
          Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:          Community Development Agency funds
      Implementation LU 1-3.b. Revise the Housing Element to provide housing for
      local employees.
          Responsibility:     Community Development Department
          Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:          LMI Housing Funds
      Implementation LU 1-3.c. Revise the Zoning Ordinance Inclusionary Housing
      Program and other Housing Programs to emphasize housing for local employees
      and essential local employees, including preferences in growth management
      allocations.
          Responsibility:     Community Development Department
          Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                              1-1.a.
          Resources:          LMI Housing Funds
Policy LU 1-4
It is the intent of the City to have a substantial reserve of industrial land to the south
of the existing City limits, to provide for a balance of commercial and industrial
lands on areas reserved for non-residential uses, and to insure that there is a buffer
                                                                                  Page 15

                                                                        2.0 LAND USE
between industrial and residential uses so that industrial uses do not affect residential
areas.
     Implementation LU 1-4.a. Provide buffer areas between industrial and
     residential uses. Where existing industrial uses exist, residential development
     applications shall provide a buffer. Where residential uses exist, industrial uses
     shall provide mitigation and buffering.           Where the General Plan has
     undeveloped land with residential and industrial uses, both industrial and
     residential uses shall provide buffering.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Ongoing with project review
         Resources:          General Fund
     Implementation LU 1-4.b. Encourage major destination commercial uses, such
     as resort/conference facilities, on an opportunity-presented basis, including
     potential to consider General Plan boundary amendments and provision of
     services.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Not specified
         Resources:          To be identified if opportunities are presented.
     Implementation LU 1-4.c. Pursue funding options for industrial infrastructure
     to the south of the City, including redevelopment, bonding, grants, assessments,
     owner participation, etc.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Start upon General Plan adoption.
         Resources:          General Fund, Redevelopment Funds, staff time.
    Implementation LU 1-4.d. A coordinated Master Development Vision Plan and
    General Plan revision may be submitted for the area south of the existing city
    limits and west of the freeway (Kelly Road Gateway) consisting of the following
    (a) economic impact analysis, (b) a minimum of 37.5 acres (60% commercial
    a nd40  %i n dustrial
                        )de  signe  dtoh e
                                         lps u ppo r
                                                   tan da chie vet heCi ty’sg oalofa1: 1
    jobs/housing ratio and the balance in flexible mixed use development, (c) master
    circulation plan, (d) gateway design concept and architectural and landscape
    design guidelines, (e) a demonstrated public benefit area, (f) hillside protection,
    and (g) open space for passive, active recreation, and pedestrian and bicycle
    linkage.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Timing is dependent on property owner submission
          Resources:         Applicant funding, General Fund, Redevelopment Funds,
                             staff time.
Policy LU 1-5
                                                                                 Page 16

                                                                      2.0 LAND USE
Utilize land use guidelines within the General Plan Study Area as basis for
comments on projects proposed in the County adjacent to the City, including the
hillsides to the west of the City.
      Implementation LU 1-5.a. Develop a statement of preferred land use practices
      in County areas adjoining the City, including and emphasizing the City policies
      for hillside development, and send that statement to the County annually.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Include in the General Plan year end report.
          Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Policy LU 1-6
Provide recreation assets to match the population growth that are appropriate to the
various groups who might use recreation facilities.
      Implementation LU 1-6.a. Programs are in the Parks and Recreation Element.
      Implementation LU 1-6.b. Provide pedestrian accessibility from residences to
      parks. Establish short pedestrian routes from residences to parks where streets
      do not provide a direct access.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                             1-1.a.
          Resources:         General Fund –staff time
      Implementation LU 1-6.c. Require design review and develop standards for
      open space and design in all small lot, cluster, townhouse, and apartment
      projects, so that there is adequate room for children play areas and resident
      needs.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                             1-1.a.
          Resources:         General Fund –staff time
      Implementation LU 1-6.d. Small lot detached and duet units shall provide a
      usable rear yard generally consistent with the private rear yard that could be
      expected in a standard single family house.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                             1-1.a.
          Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Policy LU 1-7
The City may consider using land outside the General Plan Study Area for recreation
purposes as a City project or in cooperation with the County.
      Implementation LU 1-7.a. Programs are in the Parks and Recreation Element.
                                                                              Page 17

                                                                          2.0 LAND USE
Goal LU 2
The downtown will be the commercial, cultural, and governmental core of the City.
    Policy LU 2-1
    Provide economic development resources to the downtown in order to maintain a
    focal point for the community, a strong community image, and an anchor for
    economic growth.
         Implementation LU 2-1.a. Maintain an up-to-date downtown plan, implement
         downtown plan policies, support pedestrian oriented business, infill vacant sites,
         upgrade existing buildings, and encourage mixed use, shared multi-use parking,
         attractive buildings, attractive signs and usable public spaces.
             Responsibility:     Community Development Department
             Timeframe:          Initiate within one year of General Plan adoption.
                                 Implement over 20 years.
             Resources:          Community Development Agency Funds
         Implementation LU 2-1.b.         Encourage cultural facilities and events in the
         downtown.
             Responsibility:     Community Development Department
             Timeframe:          Implement over 20 years.
             Resources:          Community Development Agency funds
    Policy LU 2-2
    Retain existing residential uses and encourage new residential uses in and near the
    downtown in order to preserve a close-in customer and pedestrian base.
         Implementation LU 2-2.a. Use zoning, Community Development Agency
         funding, housing funds, and parking incentives to encourage mixed use
         development downtown.
             Responsibility:     Community Development Department
             Timeframe:          Initiate within one year of General Plan adoption.
                                 Implement over 20 years.
             Resources:          CDA economic development and LMI housing funds
         Implementation LU 2-2.b. Return properties developed with residential uses
         but zoned for commercial use to residential zoning, consistent with Exhibit 2.1.
         (Will be implemented by LU 1-1.a.)
    Policy LU 2-3
    Retain essential services, such as the Post Office and City administrative offices
    downtown.
         Implementation LU 2-3.a. Coordinate with the Postmaster General on site
         locations.
             Responsibility:     Community Development Department
             Timeframe:          Initiate within one year
                                                                                  Page 18
                                                                           2.0 LAND USE
              Resources:         Community Development Agency funds –staff time
          Implementation LU 2-3.b. Encourage retention of essential services in the
          downtown plan. (will be implemented by LU 2-1.a.)
     Policy LU 2-4
     Discourage the creation of retail commercial areas outside the downtown that would
     adversely affect the viability of the downtown, including freeway frontages south of
     the City, freeway frontages east of Highway 101, and areas around the central
     Highway 101 interchange.
          Implementation LU 2-4.a. Review any proposals for commercial zoning or
          retail use.
              Responsibility:    Planning Commission
              Timeframe:         As projects are proposed
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Goal LU 3
Preserve and enhance Cl   ove r
                              d ale’ss ma ll-town character and the experience of its natural
boundaries and setting. Cloverdale –a small town on the valley floor with undeveloped
hills to the west, north, and south and the Russian River as an urban development
boundary to the east, and protect important farmlands from urban development.
     Policy LU 3-1
     Develop an Urban Growth Boundary that allows urban development within the
     boundaries and does not allow urban development outside the boundaries except in
     two existing developed areas (Industrial and Asti Exception Areas).
          Implementation LU 3-1.a. Prepare an Urban Growth Boundary to be passed by
          the voters substantially as shown in Exhibit 2.5. The UGB language adopted by
          the City Council and presented to the voters shall also include a General Plan
          amendment to include the UGB language in the General Plan.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Adopt UGB Ordinance within six months of General Plan
                                 adoption. Place the UGB Ordinance on the ballot at the
                                 first election following General Plan adoption.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 3-1.b. Land outside the Urban Growth Boundary shall be
          retained as Conservation Features, except for the Industrial and Asti Exception
          Areas.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Adopt UGB Ordinance within six months of General Plan
                                 adoption. Place the UGB Ordinance on the ballot at the
                                 first election following General Plan adoption.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
                                                                                     Page 19

                                                                        2.0 LAND USE
     Implementation LU 3-1.c. The City shall develop a list of exception uses
     allowed outside the Urban Growth Boundary, limited specifically and
     exclusively to industrial uses in the Industrial Exception Area, Destination
     Commercial Uses in the Asti Exception area, and Conservation Uses in all other
     areas outside the Urban Growth Boundary. The conservation uses shall allow
     relocation of the Citrus Fair as an exception.
         Responsibility:    Community Development Department
         Timeframe:         Adopt UGB Ordinance within six months of General Plan
                            adoption. Place the UGB Ordinance on the ballot at the
                            first election following General Plan adoption.
         Resources:         General Fund –staff time
     Implementation LU 3-1.d. Revise the Sphere of Influence to be coterminous
     with the Urban Growth Boundary to the north, west, and east of the city and to
     extend south to include the Rains Creek Water District and the General Plan
     Study Area to the southeast of the freeway.
         Responsibility:         Community Development Department and LAFCO
         Timeframe:              One year after General Plan adoption
         Resources:              General Fund –staff time
Policy LU 3-2
Hillside areas are generally outside of the proposed Urban Growth Boundary, and
any development shall conform to Urban Growth Boundary requirements.
Development shall not be allowed on hillsides outside the UGB, except where the
development restrictions would raise constitutional issues regarding private property
rights. Development on hillside areas within the UGB shall be consistent with the
Conservation, Design, and Open Space Element, to eliminate or minimize visual,
access or lighting impacts in hillside areas, particularly in the western hillsides.
     Implementation LU 3-2.a. Develop a hillside ordinance for any areas above 400
     foot elevation and for properties over 20% slope that are within the Urban
     Growth Boundary. All development applications submitted prior to the
     adoption of a Hillside Ordinance shall be required to submit a Grading and
     Erosion Control Plan which addresses prompt revegetation of disturbed areas,
     avoidance of grading activities during wet weather, avoidance of drainage
     corridors and riverbanks, and other erosion control measures to the satisfaction
     of the City of Cloverdale. Also see Implementation CDO2-1.a
         Responsibility:    Community Development Department
         Timeframe:         Within two years of General Plan adoption.
         Resources:         General Fund –staff time
     Implementation LU 3-2.b. Coordinate with Sonoma County to assure that City
     hillside view policies are communicated and implemented in any County
     approvals.
         Responsibility:    Community Development Department
         Timeframe:         Ongoing.
         Resources:         General Fund –staff time
                                                                                  Page 20

                                                                         2.0 LAND USE
Policy LU 3-3
Maintain the compact form and natural setting of Cloverdale by protecting hillsides,
protecting land outside the Urban Growth Boundary from urban development, and
protecting Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Statewide
Importance from urban development, with conditions that allow for economic and
rational infill growth.
     Implementation LU 3-3.a. Land outside the Urban Growth Boundary shall be
     retained as Conservation Features, except for the Industrial and Asti Exception
     Areas, which have no farmland of statewide significance. Land shown as Prime
     Farmland, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Statewide Importance shall be
     retained as Conservation Features, except that specific parcels identified in
     Exhibit 2.6 may be changed to urban uses if equivalent lands are place in a land
     trust within Sonoma county for permanent and equivalent agricultural use.
         Responsibility:    Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Adopt UGB Ordinance within six months of General Plan
                             adoption. Place the UGB Ordinance on the ballot at the
                             first election following General Plan adoption. Monitor
                             conversion of farmlands in Exhibit 2.6 for compliance
                             with this Policy and Implementation Measure.
         Resources:          General Fund –staff time
     Implementation LU 3-3b. The City, in coordination with Sonoma County, shall
     consider implementing a requirement that future development projects adjacent
     to designated agricultural lands under the Conservation Features designation
     will maintain a buffer between the proposed development and agricultural
     operations. The width of the buffer, the allowable land use activities, and a
     mechanism for maintenance of the buffer shall be part of any implementing
     action of the requirement.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department and Sonoma
                             County Permit and Resource Management Department.
         Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption and prior to
                             approval of any development project adjacent to land
                             designated Conservation Features specifically to protect
                             agricultural resources.
         Resources:          General Fund –staff time.
Policy LU 3-4
Maintain and expand the tree canopy within and outside the developed areas of the
City, including old growth and newly planted trees. Prepare tree protection
standards that can be implemented with a tree preservation ordinance.
     Implementation LU 3-4.a. Develop a tree-protection ordinance that will
     identify heritage trees (trees over 23 inches diameter and/or historically
     significant) and significant trees and tree species (trees over 8 inches diameter).
                                                                                 Page 21

                                                                          2.0 LAND USE
             Responsibility:    Community Development Department
             Timeframe:         Within two years of General Plan adoption.
             Resources:         General Fund –staff time
         Implementation LU 3-4.b. Tree canopy implementation is in the Conservation,
         Design, and Open Space Element.
    Policy LU 3-5
    Conserve or preserve historic buildings and the character of the older parts of town
    using conservation and form based zoning ordinances, while also allowing change of
    use of the properties where allowed by General Plan land use and density standards.
         Implementation LU 3-5.a. Develop zoning standards for the R-2 District around
         the downtown so that new construction or additions respect the height, design,
         and configurations of older structures in the area, including encouragement of
         secondary units and flexibility in parking standards to support development
         which is consistent with existing neighborhood character.
             Responsibility:    Community Development Department
             Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                                1-1.a.
             Resources:         General Fund –staff time
         Implementation LU 3-5.b. Map areas with properties developed before 1939
         and develop conservation-based zoning requirements for alteration of structures
         built before 1939, as shown on the 1939 Sanborn Maps.
             Responsibility:    Community Development Department
             Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                                1-1.a.
             Resources:         General Fund –staff time
    Policy LU 3-6
    Minimize the impacts of urban lighting by providing adequate light for safety but not
    creating the glare of an urban area.
         Implementation LU 3-6.a. See Urban Lighting Element
Goal LU 4
Maintain the built environment to support the quality of life and the friendly, rural, small
town atmosphere.
    Policy LU 4-1.
    Maintain and improve the design of the built environment. Improve the appearance
    of entries and approaches to the downtown and the community. Maintain attractive
    highway frontages, well designed streetscapes and sidewalks.
         Implementation LU 4.1.a.         Implementation is included in the Design,
         Conservation, and Open Space Element.
    Policy LU 4-2
                                                                                    Page 22

                                                                          2.0 LAND USE
     Protect and enhance views from the Highway 101 corridor.
          Implementation LU 4.2.a.          Implementation is included in the Design,
          Conservation, and Open Space Element.
     Policy LU 4-3.
     Improve the appearance of fast food chains and other formula businesses within the
     General Plan Study Area.
          Implementation LU 4-3.a. Revise the Zoning Ordinance and design standards
          to minimize the formula appearance of fast food and other chain businesses,
          including a requirement that such businesses in the downtown will not have
          exterior formula appearance elements or interior formula design elements
          readily visible from the street.
              Responsibility:     Community Development Department
              Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                                  1-1.a.
              Resources:          General Fund –staff time
     Policy LU 4-4
     Encourage elimination of blighted and visually undesirable conditions Citywide to
     enhance affordable housing, job opportunities, and historical preservation.
          Implementation LU 4-4.a.          Reconstitute a replacement for the former
          Cloverdale Pride Committee to contact property owners and encourage
          improving site appearance.
              Responsibility:     Community Development Department
              Timeframe:          Ongoing
              Resources:          General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 4-4.b. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to allow abatement of
          deteriorated buildings or properties.
              Responsibility:     Community Development Department
              Timeframe:          Within one year of General Plan adoption. Include in LU
                                  1-1.a.
              Resources:          General Fund –staff time
Goal LU 5
Encourage the Cloverdale Unified School District and other educational institutions to
identify and provide sites and facilities for a full spectrum of educational opportunities
within the City.
     Policy LU 5-1
     Coordinate site needs analysis with the Cloverdale Unified School District so that
     sites can be identified for public school needs.
                                                                                  Page 23

                                                                           2.0 LAND USE
          Implementation LU 5-1.a. Identify a future high school site with a minimum of
          20 acres, potential for shared facilities, and potential for a larger site when
          combined with City recreation facilities.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department, Cloverdale
                                 Unified School District
              Timeframe:         Based on Cloverdale Unified School District needs.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 5-1.b. Use school facilities within the existing City limits
          to provide preschool, elementary, and middle school functions.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department, Cloverdale
                                 Unified School District
              Timeframe:          Based on Cloverdale Unified School District needs.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 5-1.c. Monitor school needs in south Cloverdale to
          determine if an elementary school site will be needed, preferably within walking
          distance of housing.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department, Cloverdale
                                 Unified School District
              Timeframe:         Based on Cloverdale Unified School District needs.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
          Implementation LU 5-1.d. Encourage the Cloverdale Unified School District to
          prepare a demographics study to determine future school needs within the
          General Plan time frame. If necessary for implementation, identify ways to
          provide future school sites.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department,               Cloverdale
                                 Unified School District
              Timeframe:         Within one year of General Plan adoption.
              Resources:         Cloverdale Unified School District.
          Implementation LU 5-1.e. Encourage educational institutions to open or
          establish Cloverdale campuses, including college and junior college campuses
          or satellite programs, private educational and trade schools at all levels, and in-
          city offices for campuses or programs in County areas near Cloverdale,
          including co-located resources meeting a variety of educational needs at shared
          locations.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Based on opportunities presented.
              Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Goal LU 6
New development will be coordinated with the provision of infrastructure and public
services.
     Policy LU 6-1
                                                                                     Page 24

                                                                      2.0 LAND USE
Ensure adequate water and wastewater capacities or improvements are in place prior
to granting approval for new development.
     Implementation LU 6-1.a. Continue the annual growth management review
     which requires infrastructure audits if development exceeds a potential
     threshold of 200 units per year, and phase development as required in the
     growth management ordinance if infrastructure is not available.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Annual Review required
          Resources:        General Fund –staff time
     Implementation LU 6-1.b. Upgrade the City Wastewater Treatment Plan to
     provide tertiary treatment. Provide plumbing in new development so that
     tertiary treated water can be distributed for new development, open space,
     parks, and other uses.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Sewer feasibility studies within five years. Plumbing
                            feasibility study within two years.
          Resources:        Capital Improvement Program, Sewer reimbursement
                            funds, development requirements, staff time
     Implementation LU 6-1.c. Promote water conservation and encourage water
     conserving landscaping. Adopt water conservation ordinances and mandatory
     landscaping ordinances if needed to respond to water supply issues.
          Responsibility:   City Engineer
          Timeframe:        Ongoing.
          Resources:        Staff time
     Implementation LU 6-1.d. Maintain a Water Master Plan for evaluate adequacy
     of water supplies and to provide a framework for timed capital improvements,
     financing of improvements, and facility expansion.
          Responsibility:   City Engineer
          Timeframe:        Ongoing.
          Resources:        Staff time
Policy LU 6-2
Provide adequate public facilities and services to meet the needs of the community.
     Implementation LU 6-2.a. (See implementation LU 6-1.a.)
Policy LU 6-3
Discourage development beyond areas with planned expansions of sewer, water, and
road systems. Develop a growth phasing plan that addresses location and timing of
development and infrastructure.
     Implementation LU 6-3.a. (See implementation LU 6-1.a.)
Policy LU 6-4
                                                                             Page 25

                                                                             2.0 LAND USE
     Require new development to fund processing costs and necessary infrastructure and
     services required by such new development.
           Implementation LU 6-4.a. Establish and update as necessary cost recovery,
           development and service fees, and other funding mechanisms (including, but
           not limited to, creation and operation of assessment and tax districts) so that
           new development, impacts on, or users of City infrastructure or services
           (including, but not limited to outside area service users) shall pay for the cost of
           all necessary City application review and processing, and necessary
           infrastructure and basic municipal services for such new development, and other
           new impacts on or users of City infrastructure or services.
               Responsibility:    Community Development & Engineering Departments
               Timeframe:         Annual Review required
               Resources:         General Fund –staff time
Goal LU 7
Encourage jobs and housing nexus, providing housing for workers employed in
Cloverdale, in order to reduce commuting, to support local businesses, schools, and
activities by providing a base of residents who both live and work in Cloverdale.
     Policy LU 7-1
     Amend the Housing Element to provide programs encouraging housing for local
     employees in the development process, including farmworkers, using incentives,
     inclusionary housing requirements, and housing funds.
           Implementation LU 7-1.a. Revise Housing Element.
               Responsibility:    Community Development Department
               Timeframe:         Within one year
               Resources:         General Fund
           Implementation LU 7-1.b. Develop programs to support local employee
           housing, including use of housing funds and agreements with developers.
               Responsibility:    Community Development Department
               Timeframe:         Within one year
               Resources:         General Fund
Goal LU 8
Maintain the Cloverdale Airport and allow only airport-compatible land uses near the
airport.
     Policy 8-1
     Future development and use of the City Airport shall be consistent with the policies
     and programs as established in the Cloverdale Municipal Airport Master Plan.
                                                                                       Page 26

                                                                         2.0 LAND USE
         Implementation LU 8-1.a. Update the Airport Master Plan to provide for airport
         expansion and for appropriate rules, safety zones, and potential easements and
         conditions on future development.
             Responsibility:    Community Development Department
             Timeframe          Airport Master Plan is in preparation
             Resources:         FAA grants
Goal LU 9
Maintain waste collection and waste management contracts to accommodate needs for
household waste and for vigorous and proactive recycling facilities and collection.
    Policy 9-1
    Maintain waste management contracts and participation in countywide waste
    disposal facilities to accommodate household waste and to meet or exceed state and
    countywide recycling goals.
         Implementation LU 9-1.a. En    cou r
                                            aget heCi  ty ’
                                                          swa  stema  nageme ntf ra nc
                                                                                     his
                                                                                       ee
         to provide recycling education and outreach programs, recycling containers on
         public and private locations, and to continually expand the types of materials
         and composting opportunities in the waste collection process.
             Responsibility:    City Manager
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         City waste management franchise agreements
         Implementation LU 9-1.b. Encourage green building, green purchasing
         practices, waste minimization practices in City purchasing and operation, and
         green business practices.
             Responsibility:    Community Development Department & Chamber of
                                Commerce
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
                                                                                  Page 27

                                                                             2.0 LAND USE
2.3       General Plan Land Use Categories
RR Rural Residential
This designation is applied to hillside, hilltop, and ridgeline areas, generally defined as
areas that are above 400 foot in elevation. De    n sit
                                                      iesa rea  l
                                                                lowe  dba sedon“   ne t”acres
afterde leting“  envi r
                      onme  nt
                             allysens it
                                       ivel a nds,”d  efineda sl andsove  r2 0% s  l
                                                                                   op e,lands
in required stream or creek setbacks, lands with federal or state listed endangered species,
or woodlands.
LDR Low Density Residential
This designation is intended for traditional single family subdivision development,
generally with 6,000 square foot lot sizes. It is applied primarily to areas that have been
subdivided since 1960.
Medium Density Residential
This designation allows for a variety of development types such as single family attached
or detached units, renter/owner opportunities such as duplexes and triplexes, or low
density rental units.
High Density Residential
This designation allows high density condominiums or apartments and is intended for
areas that have services such as shopping, employment, or transportation, available
within a reasonable walking distance.
Office/Residential
This designation promotes a combination of professional office and moderate-density
housing along some selected areas of Cloverdale Boulevard. Most of the areas with
Office/Residential designation are existing residential areas that are expected to remain as
residential or transition to mixed office/residential or office use. Most are also in areas
identified for a historic conservation approach. The intent of development in
Of fice/Reside ntiala reaswi l
                             lb etor etaint he“  residential”a ppea rance,d esign,a ndl ayout
consistent with adjoining properties, and the allow flexibility in parking setback, and
other standards to maintain the residential feel of the area.
Downtown Commercial
This designation creates a center for the City, a focal point that is accessible and provides
neighborhood and pedestrian-oriented commercial uses. The intent of the designation is
to provide a wide variety of uses, consistent with historic downtown uses, and to
encourage residential use above first floor business.
General Commercial
This designation provides for community-serving commercial uses that provide normal
household retail items, with easy accessibility and convenience. It is intended for areas
around the downtown and in the Furber Plaza shopping center.
                                                                                      Page 28

                                                                           2.0 LAND USE
Service Commercial
This designation is intended for heavier commercial uses, including those that are
automobile or low impact.
Destination Commercial
This designation is intended to encourage recreation and tourist-commercial uses to serve as
a distinctive entry into the City. Primary uses include golf courses, hotels, motels, recreation
vehicle campgrounds, bed and breakfasts, parklands, destination resorts, and retail uses, if
similar and compatible. Secondary uses include residential developments (if associated with
a recreational amenity or visitor serving facility), convenience stores, community centers,
service stations and art, craft or music schools.
Transit Oriented Development.
This designation provides high-density residential and destination uses that directly
contribute riders for the SMART passenger rail station. The intent of this designation is a
community where transit serves wholly or partially as a substitute for automobile use.
The designation may also include parklands or limited commercial and retail space
directly related to the SMART station, so that convenience needs can be satisfied within
walking distance of the station and residents.
General Industry
This designation provides additional employment opportunities in Cloverdale. It is the
intent of this designation that industrial uses (light and quasi-heavy) have little
environmental effects as possible. The placement of this designation is located away from
residential uses and sensitive habitats where possible. Primary uses include light-
manufacturing, limited manufacturing, industrial parks, wineries, lumber mills, assembly,
warehousing and distribution. Secondary uses include professional office and research
and development.
Business Park
This designation provides additional service-oriented employment opportunities in
Cloverdale. Primary uses include professional office and research and development.
Secondary uses include limited light industry, industrial parks, wineries, warehouses, and
nurseries.
Public/Quasi-Public
This designation provides for government-owned facilities, public and private schools,
parks and cultural facilities, and quasi-public uses. Residential, commercial and
industrial uses are discouraged. This designation is applied City-wide to encompass such
facilities as the City sewage and water treatment and distribution facilities, churches,
libraries, schools, special care facilities, and the City airport.
Conservation Features
                                                                                    Page 29
                                                                          2.0 LAND USE
The purpose of this designation is to manage and preserve valuable biological, visual, and
agricultural resources in the Cloverdale Planning Area.             Primary uses include
river/stream-related recreation, open space buffers, and agricultural production. Setbacks
of 50 feet from tributaries are encouraged, and between 300 feet to 1,000 feet around the
Russian River.
                                                                                   Page 30
                  3.0 CIRCULATION
        3.0
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                            Page 31
                                       3.0 CIRCULATION
                       Exhibit 3.1
                STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
Red = Freeway
Green = Arterial
Orange = Collector
                                                 Page 32
                                                                         3.0 CIRCULATION
3.1 INTRODUCTION
The Circulation Element identifies the guiding principles for moving people and goods
within the City and identifies the infrastructure necessary to assure that the transportation
network will serve the City at General Plan buildout.
A majority of trips are made by automobile. The Circulation Element identifies the
roadway system necessary for automobile traffic by setting levels of service, hierarchy of
roads, and areas where road improvements are necessary.
The Circulation Element also identifies alternative travel modes, such as walking,
bicycles, bus transit, and rail transit. The alternative transportation is important to reduce
pressure on roads, conserve energy, and improve the public health through exercise.
The road system provides many functions in addition to carrying vehicle traffic. It
provides open space separating dwelling units and commercial uses. If properly
landscaped, streetside landscaping provides location for trees to support the urban forest.
If developed with safe pedestrian and bike ways, it serves as a non-motorized
transportation corridor, a linear park, and an attractive network for healthy exercise. If
properly designed, it provides the background for the community urban design and
appearance. Finally, it provides the right of way for most of the City’      sp ubl icut il
                                                                                          iti
                                                                                            es
infrastructure.
The Circulation Element proposes several policies to support these additional important
roadway functions, rather than serving the single purpose of automobile traffic.
The freeway separates the developed areas of Cloverdale from the light rail station. The
freeway also blocks pedestrian and bicycle access to the station. A substantial
commitment to encourage development near the station and other ways to expand light
rail use will be necessary to bring frequent headway (number of trips) to Cloverdale.
3.2       GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal CE 1
Develop and maintain a balanced vehicular and non-vehicular transportation system to
meet the mobility needs consistent with General Plan land use goals and policies.
Provide a balance of land uses within the General Plan Study Area for housing, jobs,
economic development, recreation, and destination commercial uses.
     Policy CE 1-1
     Develop and maintain the Circulation Plan network of freeway/highways, arterials,
     collectors, and local streets. The proposed streets should be designed to serve the
     functions they are intended to serve, with adequate capacity and safety.
          Implementation CE 1-1.a. Design, construct, upgrade, and maintain the
          automobile and pedestrian circulation system according to the functions they are
          intended to serve, as shown in Exhibit 3-1 and the trails systems in Exhibit 5.1
          (Parks and Recreation Element).
               Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
               Timeframe:         Ongoing
                                                                                      Page 33

                                                                 3.0 CIRCULATION
         Resources:        Capital Improvement Program,           project  approvals,
                           development impact fees.
    Implementation CE 1-1.b. Upgrade and maintain the existing circulation
    network through the Capital Improvement Program and Development Impact
    Fees.
         Responsibility:   Community Development and Engineering Department
         Timeframe:        Ongoing
         Resources:        Capital Improvement Program, project approvals, street
                           improvement fund
    Implementation CE 1-1.c. Coordinate with the County of Sonoma in addressing
    regional transportation issues.
         Responsibility:   Community Development and Engineering Department
         Timeframe:        Ongoing
         Resources:        Countywide Transportation Development Act Funding.
                           Congestion Management Plan, SMART Passenger Rail
                           Authority
    Implementation CE 1-1.d. Provide funding to repair streets that are seriously
    deteriorated and sidewalks that are in poor repair.
         Responsibility:   Community Development and Engineering Department
         Timeframe:        Ongoing
         Resources:        Capital Improvement Program, project approvals, street
                           improvement fund
    Implementation CE 1-1.e. Truck routes shall be established to minimize noise
    impacts on residential areas. Construction truck routes shall be specified to
    minimize noise impacts.
         Responsibility:   Community Development and Engineering Department
         Timeframe:        Ongoing
         Resources:        Capital Improvement Program, project approvals, street
                           improvement fund
Policy CE 1-2
Plan and reserve in advance of development, the street alignments and building
setbacks necessary to handle anticipated future growth and traffic requirements.
    Implementation CE 1-2.a. Develop and adopt plan lines, if needed, for arterial
    and collector streets shown in Exhibit 3.1. Place plan lines in the Zoning
    Ordinance, and require setbacks to be measured from adopted plan lines.
         Responsibility:   Community Development and Engineering Department
         Timeframe:        Ongoing
         Resources:        General Fund
    Implementation CE 1-2.b. Require new development and expansions of existing
    development to provide necessary street improvements for the demand they
    generate.
                                                                             Page 34
                                                                       3.0 CIRCULATION
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
        Implementation CE 1-2.c. Develop and maintain an up to date comprehensive
        street improvement fee for new development to finance General Plan roadway
        improvements necessary to serve the City at General Plan buildout.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
   Policy CE 1-3
   Design street systems in residential areas to minimize through traffic, to encourage
   internal movement by bicycling and walking, to provide safer and quieter
   neighborhoods, to minimize vehicular conflicts at intersections and to ensure that the
   impact of recreational traffic on local residents is minimized.
        Implementation CE 1-3.a. Do not use back-on treatment at the expense of good
        site planning.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
        Implementation CE 1-3.b. Identify and provide directional signs to recreational
        uses that maximize use of arterial and collector streets and minimize or
        eliminate traffic through residential areas.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
Goal CE 2
Maintain a satisfactory Level of Service (LOS) for automobile traffic.
    Policy CE 2-1
    The City shall strive to maintain mid-Level of Service (LOS) D operation during the
    weekday morning and evening peak periods at intersections of an arterial street with
    either another arterial or a collector street and intersections of two collector streets.
    For public safety, signalization warrants shall be evaluated using CALTRANS
    standards, which are typically based on LOS C. For projected future conditions the
    LOS is to be calculated using the average traffic demand over the highest 60-minute
    period. For all types of control the Level of Service standard is to be applied to the
    average intersection delay, and not that for any single movement or approach.
    Exceptions to meeting this standard include:
         Stop-controlled minor street approaches to either collector or arterial streets;
                                                                                    Page 35

                                                                 3.0 CIRCULATION
         Locations where the City Engineer deems improvement to be technically,
            financially, or environmentally infeasible;
         Locations where improvements are needed to meet LOS standards but are
            not warranted based on volumes;
     Conditions where the improvement would result in significant adverse
        impacts to other travel modes, including walking, bicycling, or transit; or
     Locations where attainment would cause loss of the unique character of the
        downtown, identified historic resources or neighborhood character,
        distinctive tree canopy, or distinctive watercourses.
    Implementation CE 2.1.a. Evaluate traffic impacts from major developments for
    consistency with LOS standards.
          Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Departments
          Timeframe:         Ongoing. Require traffic reports with major development
                             proposals
          Resources:         General Fund
    Implementation CE 2.1.b. Configure Cloverdale Boulevard between Citrus Fair
    Drive and Healdsburg Ave. and between Brookside Drive and Del Webb Drive
    with five traffic lanes. Signalize the Healdsburg Ave. Cloverdale Boulevard and
    Treadway Drive Cloverdale Boulevard Intersections.
          Responsibility:    City Engineer
          Timeframe:         With adjoining development and when signal warrants are
                             met
          Resources:         Developer fees and street funds.
    Implementation CE 2.1.c. Configure the south interchange with roundabouts to
    accommodate traffic levels related to the overcrossing, offramps, and Asti Road
    and South Cloverdale Boulevard to achieve LOS D. Alternative designs may be
    considered if LOS D can be achieved by those designs.
          Responsibility:    City Engineer
          Timeframe:         With adjoining development and when signal warrants are
                             met
          Resources:         Developer fees and street funds.
Policy CE 2-2
Cr eat
     ea“   coun tryr oad”a p pearancef or Cloverdale Boulevard, First Street east of the
freeway, and Asti Road where possible, including narrow pavement shade trees
adjoining travel lanes, parking only where necessary, and protected bicycle and
pedestrian ways, including trails instead of sidewalks and on-street bike lanes where
possible.
                                                                               Page 36

                                                                    3.0 CIRCULATION
        Implementation CE 2-2.a. Prepare design plans for Cloverdale Boulevard, First
        Street east of the freeway, and Asti Road prior to major improvements to those
        roads.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Prior to major improvements
             Resources:         General Fund, street funds, developer contributions.
Goal CE 3
Promote bicycle use and walking as an alternative to automobile traffic and for
community health and enjoyment.
    Policy CE 3-1
    Provide an extensive network of pedestrian and bicycle pathways to support
    community health and provide safe alternatives to automobile use.
        Implementation CE 3-1.a. Implement programs for bicycle and pedestrian trails
        in the Parks and Recreation Element.
        Implementation CE 3-1.b. Maintain an up-to-date bikeways plan in conjunction
        with the Sonoma County Transit Agency Countywide bikeways plan.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund
        Implementation CE 3-1.c. Integrate bicycle and pedestrian routes with transit
        stops.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         Include integration with public works projects and
                                planning permit approvals.
    Policy CE 3-2
    Provide continuous sidewalks or pedestrian ways along all streets. Maintain
    sidewalks in good repair. Integrate sidewalks and the pedestrian trails network in
    the Recreation and Open Space Element.
        Implementation CE 3-2.a. Explore a program to fund sidewalk improvement or
        installation where no sidewalks exist, including sharing of costs with property
        owners, loans payable at time of sale, etc.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Ongoing
             Resources:         General Fund. Sidewalk improvement funds.
        Implementation CE 3-2.b. Identify major pedestrian routes and, where they
        adjoin streets, prepare roadway sections that encourage pedestrian use.
             Responsibility:    Community Development and Engineering Department
             Timeframe:         Prior to major street improvements
                                                                                  Page 37
                                                                       3.0 CIRCULATION
              Resources:          General Fund. Repair and install with public works
                                  projects and planning permit approvals.
         Implementation CE 3-2.c. Repair or install sidewalks or pedestrian ways on all
         streets in conjunction with public works and private development projects.
              Responsibility:     Community Development and Engineering Department
              Timeframe:          Ongoing, with public works projects and planning permit
                                  approvals
              Resources:          General Fund. Repair and install with public works
                                  projects and planning permit approvals.
         Implementation CE 3-2.d. Where possible, use traditional sidewalk design with
         a planter strip between the curb and sidewalk.
              Responsibility:     Community Development and Engineering Department
              Timeframe:          Ongoing, with public works projects and planning permit
                                  approvals
              Resources:          Development approvals.
    Policy CE 3-3
    Provide trees or other shade sources along pedestrian routes. Where street widening
    would remove substantial shade trees, investigate alternative roadway configurations
    that would preserve the shade trees.
         Implementation CE 3-3.a. Explore a program to fund sidewalk improvement or
         installation where no sidewalks exist, including sharing of costs with property
         owners, loans payable at time of sale, etc.
              Responsibility:     Community Development and Engineering Department
              Timeframe:          Ongoing
              Resources:          General Fund. Sidewalk improvement funds.
Goal CE 4
Promote transit service and use to serve Cloverdale land use goals.
    Policy CE 4-1
    Participate in efforts to establish passenger rail service on the SMART right of way.
         Implementation CE 4-1.a. Encourage passage of rail bonds and develop
         appropriate land uses that will support rail ridership.
              Responsibility:     Community Development and Engineering Department
              Timeframe:          At City initiation or by potential developers prior to
                                  development in the Transit Oriented Development area.
              Resources:          General Fund, transit planning funds, or developer
                                  preparation.
         Implementation CE 4-1.b. Develop designs for Citrus Fair Drive and Asti Road
         (south interchange to First Street) to serve as attractive access routes to the light
         rail station. Elements include traffic calming, shaded pedestrian walkways,
         protected bicycle lanes, and small convenience commercial near the station.
                                                                                      Page 38
                                                                3.0 CIRCULATION
          Responsibility:  Community Development and Engineering Department
          Timeframe:       At City initiation or by potential developers prior to
                           development in the Transit Oriented Development area.
          Resources:       General Fund, transit planning funds, or developer
                           preparation.
Policy CE 4-2
Develop a Plan around the Cloverdale passenger rail station in order to coordinate
pedestrian access with the downtown, provide a source of transit riders within a half-
mile radius of the station, and establish destination uses to attract transit riders to
Cloverdale.
    Implementation CE 4-2.a. Initiate a Station Area Precise Plan prior to
    development of major properties within a half mile of the Cloverdale passenger
    rail station.
          Responsibility:  Community Development and Engineering Department
          Timeframe:       The Station Area Precise Plan Grant has been approved
                           by MTC. Completion is expected in 2009.
          Resources:       General Fund, transit planning funds, or developer
                           preparation.
Policy CE 4-3
Support bus service locally, countywide, and beyond county borders.
    Implementation CE 4-3.a. Maintain and encourage use of the Cloverdale City
    bus by maintaining schedules that serve the community and by use of distinctive
    vehicles to bring visibility to the service.
          Responsibility:  Community Development and Engineering Department
          Timeframe:       Maintain schedules on an ongoing basis. Consider
                           distinctive vehicle design when acquiring new buses.
          Resources:       County transit funding.
Policy CE 4-4
Encourage ridesharing to reduce commute trips.
    Implementation CE 4-4.a. Coordinate with regional ridesharing plans.
          Responsibility:  Community Development and Engineering Department
          Timeframe:       Ongoing.
          Resources:       General Fund.
                                                                               Page 39
                                                                                3.0 CIRCULATION
3.3 HIGHWAY PLAN CONCEPTS
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS
Category    Function                                         Types of Standards
Freeway     Carry interurban, regional and interstate        Number of travel lanes, controlled access,
            traffic                                          divided by median or barriers, grade-
                                                             separated interchanges.
Arterial    Carry large traffic volumes over long            Number of travel lanes, spacing
            distances                                        signalization, parking restrictions, right-of-
                                                             way width, roadway width
Collector   Carry local area traffic to the arterial system Number of travel lanes, signalization, right-
                                                             of-way width, roadway width
Local Road  Provide access to property; carry local          Number of travel lanes, right-of-way width
            traffic
                                  HIGHWAY PLAN CONCEPTS
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS
Level                Traffic Condition
LOS "A"              •Freef lowc   ond it
                                        io ns
                     •Low volumes
                     •Hig hope  ratings  pe ed
                     •Uni nterrup tedf low
                     •Nor  estrictiononma     neuver abili
                                                         ty
                     •Dr i
                         v ersma  in tainde  sir
                                               eds pe eds
                     •Littl
                          eornode     lays
LOS "B"              •Stab l
                           ef lowc   ond ition
                     •Ope ratin gs pe edsbe  g i
                                               nningt  ob erestri
                                                                cted
LOS "C"              •Stable flow but speed and maneuverability restricted by higher traffic volumes
                     •Satisfac t
                               o ryope  ra t
                                           ings pe edf orurb anc onditions
                     •De laysa ts ig nals
LOS "D"              •App roa ch ingu  nsta bleflow
                     •Lows  pe e ds
                     •Ma jorde  lay sa tsig na l
                                               s
                     •Littl
                          ef re edomto maneuver
LOS "E"              •Lowe  rope  ratings  pe eds
                     •Vol umea   torne  a rcapacity
                     •Uns tab l
                              ef  l
                                  ow
                     •Ma jorde  lay sa nds  toppage s
LOS "F"              •For cedf lowc   ond itions
                     •Lows  pe e ds
                     •Vol ume  sbe  l
                                    owcapacity, may be zero
                     •Stoppa  gesf orl ongpe   ri
                                                od sb ecause of downstream congestion
                                                                                                 Page 40

              4.0 NOISE
     4.0
NOISE ELEMENT
                 Page 41
                                                 4.0 NOISE
Exhibit 4.1 LAND USE AND NOISE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS –
EXTERIOR
                                                    Page 42

                                                                                       4.0 NOISE
Exhibit 4.2 LAND USE AND NOISE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS –
INTERIOR
                      Land Use Category                                   Ldn/CNEL, dB
          Category                            Use                            Interior1
                                 Single-Family, Duplex,
                                                                                452
Residential                      Multi-Family
                                 Mobile Home                                    452
                                 Hotel, Motel, Transient
                                                                                45
                                 Lodging
                                 Commercial Retail, Bank,
                                                                                50
                                 Restaurant
                                 Office, Research and
                                                                                45
                                 Development
Commercial
Industrial                       Amphitheater, Concert Hall,
                                                                                45
                                 Meeting Hall
Institutional
                                 Gymnasium (MP Room)                            50
                                 Sports Club                                    55
                                 Manufacturing, Warehouse,
                                                                                50
                                 Wholesale, Utility
                                 Movie Theater or Theater                       35
                                 Hospital, School (Classroom)                   45
Institutional
                                 Church, Library                                40
Open Space                       Park                                           NA
1
  All indoor environments excluding bathrooms, toilets, closets, and corridors.
2
  Noise level required with exterior windows and doors closed.
                                                                                          Page 43

                                                        4.0 NOISE
Exhibit 4.3 TRAFFIC NOISE PREDICTION AT GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
                                                           Page 44
                                                     4.0 NOISE
Exhibit 4.4 CLOVERDALE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT NOISE CONTOURS 2025
                                                         Page 45
                                                                                  4.0 NOISE
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Noise Element is to identify and reduce noise impacts on the
community, to protect residents, employees, and visitors from harmful effects of
exposure to excess noise, to protect the economic base of the City by preventing
encroachment of noise sensitive land uses into areas with existing noise producing
businesses and uses, to provide flexibility for development of infill properties where
elevated noise levels exist, and to provide the information necessary to address noise
issues in existing and future land use planning and project review process.
The main tools in implementing noise goals are:
      The acceptable noise levels chart (Exhibits 4-1 and 4.2) which show acceptable
           and maximum acceptable noise levels for various existing and potential land
           uses shown on the General Plan land use map.
      Predicted noise level charts (Exhibits 4.3 and 4.4) which show predicted noise
           levels from various land uses, transportation corridors, and the airport.
      Evaluating the potential impact of existing and future noise generation from
           anticipated land uses and transportation corridors with the maximum noise
           levels acceptable to sensitive receptors, such as housing, schools, hospitals, etc.
      Requiring that either the generator control noise or that the receptor have
           additional sound insulation to achieve the acceptable noise levels.
Traffic is one of the main sources of noise in a community, and the typical mitigation for
traffic is construction of sound walls. Sound walls in Cloverdale have been constructed
with berms and attractive materials; however, the walls have often blocked views of
Cl ove rda le’sdi s t
                    incti
                        veh  ill
                               s i
                                 des  etti
                                         ng .Fut urec  ons i
                                                           de r
                                                              ati
                                                                onofn    oisei mpa   c
                                                                                     tss ho ul d
evaluate both visual goals and exterior noise reduction. Where visual goals would be
compromised, higher exterior noise levels may be acceptable, but buildings should use
noise reduction assemblies to meet the interior noise standards of Exhibit 4-1.
The Noise Element recognizes that the California Building Code requires new
construction to assure maximum noise levels within a residential building and provides
information that would assist in meeting the California Building Code noise standards.
4.2        GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal NE 1
Maintain a quiet community by reducing existing noise problems and assuring that noise
is not intrusive to people inside and outside of buildings with noise policies that identify
and reduce noise impacts on the community, protect residents, employees, and visitors
from harmful effects of exposure to excess noise, protect the economic base of the City
by preventing encroachment of noise sensitive land uses into areas with existing noise
producing businesses and uses, provide flexibility for development of infill properties
where elevated noise levels exist, and provide the information necessary to address noise
issues in existing and future land use planning and project review process.
                                                                                       Page 46

                                                                            4.0 NOISE
Policy NE 1-1 Acceptable interior noise levels within Cloverdale shall be as shown
in Exhibit 4.2. All new developments shall be constructed to meet the interior noise
levels shown in Exhibit 4.2 after a review of existing and potential future noise
generation by allowable land uses and transportation corridors.
     Implementation NE 1-1.a. Require all new developments to meet interior noise
     levels shown in Exhibit 4.2.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing for all development applications
          Resources:        Application processing and building permits
     Implementation NE 1-1.b. All new developments near undeveloped properties
     which are expected to generate high noise levels in the future (parks, schools
     play yards, streets, freeways, rail lines, airports, etc.) shall be constructed to
     meet interior noise levels shown in Exhibit 4.2, based on anticipated noise levels
     from adjoining uses.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing for all development applications
          Resources:        Application Fees
     Implementation NE 1-1.c. Require noise studies and noise mitigation for
     projects in areas where noise levels identified in Exhibits 4.3 and 4.4exceed
     allowable limits in Exhibits 4.1 or 4.2.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        General Fund
     Implementation NE 1-1.d.           Multi-family, townhouse, mixed use, and
     condominium projects shall use unit separation partitions and assemblies that
     guarantee interior noise levels within the residential units shall be less than the
     minimum in Exhibit 4.2.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        General Fund
Policy NE 1-2 Acceptable exterior noise levels are shown in Exhibit 4-1 and shall be
met by new development, except school playgrounds during daytime use. Where
noise mitigation measures are required to satisfy the noise level standards of this
element, emphasis shall be placed on use of setbacks and site design to the extent
feasible prior to consideration of noise barriers. Where structures such as sound walls
are proposed for noise attenuation, they will be evaluated in the context of
community appearance goals. Interior noise levels will still be required to meet
Policy NE1-1 even if a lower standard is allowed for exterior noise levels based on
this policy for appearance of sound walls.
     Implementation NE 1-2.a. All new development or construction projects that
     create exterior noise impacts in excess of levels shown in Table 4.1 (based on
                                                                                Page 47
                                                                            4.0 NOISE
     current or anticipated land uses) shall provide mitigation at the affected property
     line to meet the exterior noise standards.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing for all development applications
          Resources:         Application Fees
     Implementation NE 1-2.b. Where physical noise barriers are constructed to
     minimize noise, landscaped berms or a combination of landscaped berms and
     walls should be used, and visible landscape elements and trees should be
     installed on both sides of the berm and/or wall to provide foreground and
     background screening.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing for all development applications
          Resources:         Application Fees
Policy NE 1-3 Noise from stationary sources such as music, machinery and pumps,
air conditioners, shall be contained on the generating site and shall not exceed the
standards of Exhibit 4.1 for the generating and receiving site at the property line.
     Implementation NE 1-3.a. Place noise standards in the Zoning Ordinance or
     Municipal Code.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund
Policy NE 1-4 Mitigate construction noise in project review, environmental review
process, and construction inspection process.
     Implementation NE 1-4.a. Review projects using standards in Exhibit 4.1, place
     appropriate conditions of approval, and follow conditions in the construction
     inspection process.
          Responsibility:    Community Development and Building Inspection
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         Application and development fees
Policy NE 1-5 Mitigate potential transportation noise, including high traffic streets
and truck routes, through proper design of street circulation, coordination of routing,
and other traffic control measures.
     Implementation NE 1-5.a. Review street proposals with a goal of providing
     noise mitigation, in addition to traffic considerations.
          Responsibility:    Engineering Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund and application fees
     Implementation NE 1-5.b. Establish truck and construction haul routes to
     minimize impacts on noise impacts.
          Responsibility:    Engineering Department
                                                                                 Page 48
                                                                    4.0 NOISE
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        General Fund and application fees
Implementation NE 1-5.c. In addition to the above policies and implementation
measures, a noise analysis shall be prepared and mitigation measures developed
for construction of new roadways or railways or for capacity enhancing roadway
or railway improvements e     xc eedt he“  signifi
                                                 can ti ncrease”l evelsi  nt he
following table.
              Pre-Project Noise                Significant Increase
             Environment (Ldn)
             Less than 60 dB                          5+ dB
               60 - 65 dB                             3+ dB
           Greater than 65 dB                        1.5+ dB
     Responsibility:   Engineering Department
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        General Fund and application fees
                                                                        Page 49

                  5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
             5.0
PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                     Page 50
                                                         5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
Exhibit 5.1 Parks and Recreation Opportunities
Dark Green = existing parks
Light Green = added park sites proposed in the 1993 General Plan
Red = existing trails and trails under active discussion
Yellow = schools, quasi-public, and private meeting halls
Aqua = hillside open space existing & potential
Olive = Proposed Alexander Valley Resort golf course
                                                                            Page 51
5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
                   Page 52
                                                         5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Park and Recreation Element is to identify existing park and
recreational facilities, determine park and recreational needs, and provide the framework
for future park and recreational decisions within the City of Cloverdale.
The Parks and Recreation Element uses a broad interpretation of recreation activities,
including children’   splay, organized sports, water activities, walking, camping, arts,
theater, museums, etc. The Element also uses a broad interpretation of park and
recreation facilities as being the places where these broad range of recreation activities
take place. Given the resource limits of the City and other agencies that provide
recreation activities and/or space, the Element emphasizes full use of existing facilities,
whether owned by the City, School District, other government agencies, nonprofit
groups, or private ownership, and the potential for shared use agreements, in order to
maximize the services that each facility provides for Cloverdale residents.
The Element also identifies park and recreation opportunities in close proximity to the
City, which can be used by residents. Regional open space and recreation facilities like
Yorty Creek and Warm Springs Dam provide opportunities that could not be duplicated
within or by the City.
5.2       GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal PR 1
Maintain, expand, or support potential Parks and Recreation Facilities to serve
Cloverdale residents and visitors as shown in Table 5.1.
     Policy PR 1-1 Establish an ad hoc parks and recreation committee to review existing
     and proposed park facilities and uses, including programs to cooperatively use
     nonprofit and private parks and recreation facilities for general use, with the charge
     to: inventory facilities available to the community, pursue shared use agreements to
     increase community accessibility and decrease overall costs to the community of
     providing facilities, and use existing facilities where possible prior to building new
     facilities.
          Implementation PR 1-1.a. Establish and staff the committee as described.
                Responsibility:  City Council to appoint and Community Development
                                 Department to staff.
                Timeframe:       Within two years of General Plan adoption.
                Resources:       General Fund
                Policy PR 1-2 Provide five acres of City-owned park and recreation land
          per 1,000 residents
          Implementation PR 1-2.a.       Provide parklands as determined by the ad hoc
          committee.
                Responsibility:  Community Development Department
                Timeframe:       Ongoing
                                                                                    Page 53

                                                      5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
           Resources:          Parkland dedication fees and land dedications
Policy PR 1-3 Investigate potential acquisition of parklands through purchase,
dedication, or transfer from other agencies as follows: investigate purchase or
parkland dedication for part or all of the Angeli Vineyard site as an addition to City
Park; investigate purchase of a new community park site in the south industrial area;
pursue acquisition of the CALTRANS land to the east of Tarman Park; investigate
acquisition of the land south of the SMART station for a Landmark Visitor Park.
     Implementation PR 1-3.a. Investigate acquisition as determined by the ad hoc
     committee.
           Responsibility:     Community Development Department
           Timeframe:          Ongoing
           Resources:          Parkland dedication funds and land dedications
Policy PR 1-4. Provide hillside open areas and trails on sites and trails shown in
Exhibit 5.1 in planning permit approvals (see also Land Use Element and Open
Space Element)
     Implementation PR 1-4.a. Where planning permits are issued for properties
     with hillside areas and land below the 400 foot elevation, provide development
     opportunities below the 400 foot elevation and provide for open space and trails
     on hillside areas above the 400 foot elevation.
           Responsibility:     Community Development Department
           Timeframe:          Ongoing
           Resources:          Application processing.
Policy PR 1-5. Pursue pedestrian trails, bicycle trails, and combined
pe des t
       r ian/bi
              c yc l
                   et railswi  thag oalofp  rovidingl inkeda nd“ looped”t ra i
                                                                             lsy
                                                                               stemsi n
planning permit approvals (see also Land Use Element and Open Space Element) on
sites and trails shown in Exhibit 5-1.
     Implementation PR 1-5.a. Where planning permits are issued for properties
     with hillside areas and land below the 400 foot elevation, provide development
     opportunities below the 400 foot elevation and provide for open space and trails
     on hillside areas above 400 foot elevation. Where appropriate, require or accept
     dedication of parklands, open space, and trails, including private maintenance
     and funding.
           Responsibility:     Community Development Department
           Timeframe:          Ongoing
           Resources:          Application processing.
     Implementation PR 1-5.b. Investigate City purchase of property or easements to
     fill gaps in the trails system.
           Responsibility:     Community Development Department
           Timeframe:          Ongoing
           Resources:          Parkland dedication fees.
                                                                                Page 54

                                                   5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
Policy PR 1-6. Provide assistance to the Cloverdale Citrus Fair to improve the
existing facility for community use if they desire to stay and for relocation if they
desire to move to another location.
     Implementation PR 1-6.a. Coordinate with the Citrus Fair and provide
     assistance to the Citrus Fair using resources available to the City, such as
     Redevelopment Funding and land use flexibility.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        Redevelopment funding and planning policies.
Policy PR 1-7. Participate with Sonoma County, Cloverdale Unified School District,
other government nonprofit agencies, and private property owners, or other project
sponsors if opportunities become available to establish recreational facilities or uses
that promote the shared goals of the City.
     Implementation PR 1-7.a. Encourage coordination with the Sonoma County
     Parks Department and Open Space District for provision of Regional Parks and
     Regional Open Space that benefits Cloverdale residents.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        General Fund.
     Implementation PR 1-7.b. Encourage use of City resources to coordinate with
     other agencies, if the coordination achieves a City parks or recreation goal and
     uses City resources more effectively than stand alone parks or recreation
     programs.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        General Fund, City staff resources.
                                                                               Page 55
                                                            5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
     5.3 Existing Parkland Acreage
 Park type                          Existing City Parks Total      Needed for      Additional
                                                        acres          12,000  acreage needed
                                                                   population         by 2025
 Neighborhood Park.s               Tarman Park 0.5 ac      4.2
                              Vintage Meadows 3.5 ac.
                            Brookside Mini Park0.2 ac.
 Community Parks                      City Park 7.4 ac.   13.4
                                    Furber Park 6.0 ac.
 Active Open Space                  River Park 10.3 ac.   25.9
                               Porterfield Ck 10.0 ac.
                                Clover Springs 5.6 ac.
 Community                     Downtown Plaza 0.4 ac       0.8
 Center/Administrative            Senior Center 0.4 ac.
 0.3 acres/1,000
    Total 5 acres per 1,000                               44.3        60 acres      15.7 acres
                population
 Open Space Recreation      River Park 58.2 passive ac.   58.2    No standard
 1.5 acres/1,000                (includes County land)             established
 population
5.3 Definitions
Parkland types
Neighborhood Park: High priority is placed on servicing the preschool age children and
families. Facilities should include children's play equipment, seating and shade for adults
and children, and open space. Low priority is placed on field sports or large-scale court
games.
Community Park: High priority is placed on Children/Adult Field Sports and field play
areas, children's play equipment and court games. Lower priority is placed on open space
recreation and large scale court games. Community Centers are acceptable as a
compatible use.
Community Center: An indoor recreation facility to include volleyball, basketball, game
rooms, etc. If the area is available, can be included as part of a Community Park. Such a
center would be devoted to community activities and/or functions. A high priority for
this facility is adequate circulation and on-site parking.
Open Space –Active: An area for low intensity uses such as picnicking, bicycling and
bicycle routes, camping, hiking, water sports. This designation is oriented toward
maintaining and utilizing the natural terrain or resources as part of the amenities. Low
priority is placed on active recreation uses.
Specialty Park: Special purpose park that meets a particular goal, such as the downtown
plaza which serves as a focal point for downtown economic development and a proposed
landmark visitor park that will provide an appropriate structure to identify either an
entrance or focal point for traffic on Highway 101.
                                                                                     Page 56

                                                          5.0 PARKS AND RECREATION
Regional Park: Provides an expanded range of recreational facilities that the City itself
cannot provide for such as boating, swimming, golf, tennis, hiking, fishing, camping and
equestrian trails. The impetus for such a facility is on regional attraction. Facilities may
be publicly or privately developed on public lands, private lands, or a combination of
public and private lands.
Types of parkland uses
Children's Play Equipment Play equipment such as climbers, swings, paddle pools,
slides, playhouses, and play sculpture oriented toward the tot to preschool age children.
One play facility is recommended for each 1,000 square feet of primary space included in
a sand or other resilient surface. For safety, play equipment should not be located within
40 feet of any wide street frontage.
Children/Adult Field Sports and Field Play Areas Improved land for sports requiring a
defined field configuration, such as softball, baseball, soccer, field hockey, etc.
Court Games Paved or hard surface area for active recreation (mostly adult) use. Court
Games may include tennis, basketball, soccer, volleyball, bocce ball, shuffleboard,
handball, paddle tennis, etc.
Indoor Recreation (Gyms). Large structures such as gymnasiums, designed for
basketball, volleyball, handball, badminton, swimming etc.
Community Center. Indoor recreation facilities used for passive activities such as
meetings, games, cooking/eating, art galleries, performing and visual arts, community
classes, etc.
Open Space Recreation. Areas with natural amenities that encourage low intensity uses
oriented to those amenities, such as picnicking, water sports, bicycling and bicycle routes,
hiking trails, camping, nature trails, etc., but not organized court games or field sports
commonly found in Community Parks.
Open Space, Passive or Visual. Areas with natural amenities, including hillsides, forests,
creeks, agricultural areas, that provide an open space setting for the community that is
typically guaranteed by conditions of approval in planning permits or by the Sonoma
County Regional Parks or Open Space District. (See also policies in the Land Use
Element and Open Space Element).
Pedestrian Trails: Trails systems that provide for pedestrians in scenic, creekside, or
other natural areas, and connections as needed to create an interconnected system of
trails. Pedestrian trails may also serve for bicycle or equestrian use, but those are not
required components of the pedestrian trail system.
Swimming Pool. Swimming pool for community use.
Theater. A building with a stage, lighting, seating, or other improvement that can be used
for plays, performances, or lectures.
                                                                                     Page 57
          6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
                6.0
CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN
        SPACE ELEMENT
                                            Page 58
                                      6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
6.1 INTRODUCTION
The Conservation, Design, and Open Space Element is concerned with the conservation of
natural resources, provision of open space and the urban design of the community. The three
subjects, conservation, open space, and design are combined because the natural resources and
open space provide the framework for the built areas of the City, and the overall appearance of
the City integrates natural and man made elements.
The primary vision of the element is to maintain and encourage development that complements
the natural visual setting of Cloverdale –a small town on the valley floor with hills to the west,
north, and south and the Russian River to the east, separated from the other urbanized areas of the
County by natural features and agricultural areas.
Conservation goals include development, and utilization of natural resources such as water and its
hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and cultural
resources. Open space goals include hillsides, creek and river setback areas, biologically
sensitive habitat, and natural forests. Design goals address design of the downtown, community
scenic highway entries, interchanges, non-residential buffering, hillside development
compatibility, signage, landscape/hardscape standards and public spaces as a means to creating a
healthy, beautiful, functional, and prosperous City. One major finding made in the Downtown
Specific Plan was that Cloverdale's Beautification Plan of the downtown is necessary in order to
draw the desired economic activity into the area.
This Element strengthens certain portions of the 1993 General Plan, particularly provisions
related to hillside development. It also includes a new direction for urban forest management,
returning to a policy of requiring street trees along sidewalks and when streets are widened,
installed, or improved.
6.2        GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal CDO 1
Rely on natural features (agricultural lands, hillsides, and the Russian River to provide
shape and form to the City of Cloverdale.
     Policy CDO 1-1 Urban development in the City will be on the valley floor, defined
     generally as the land below the 400 foot elevation. Development will be framed by
     and contained within agricultural lands to the north and south, the Russian River to
     the east, and below the 400 foot elevation
           Implementation CDO 1-1.a. See Implementation LU 3-6.
                Responsibility:     Community Development Department
                Timeframe:          Ongoing
                Resources:          General Fund –staff time
           Implementation CDO 1-1.b. Adopt an Urban Growth Boundary (see Land Use
           Element).
     Policy CDO 1-2 “     Con  se rvationFe a t
                                              ur es”are asoutside the Urban Growth Boundary,
     as shown on the General Plan Land Use Map, shall be reserved for agricultural uses..
     “ Cons  e r
               va t
                  ionFe  a tures”a  rea sinhi llsidestot  h ewe  stoft  h eCity shall be reserved
     for protection of forested hillsides.
                                                                                            Page 59

                                  6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
         Implementation CDO 1-2.a. Reserve conservation areas as described in Policy
         CDO 1-2.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy CDO 1-3 Land use designations for areas outside the Sphere of Influence are
    intended as guidelines for County review of projects. Also see Policy LU 1-5.
         Implementation CDO 1-3.a. Communicate adopted policies to the County and
         review County development projects based on City General Plan policies.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy CDO 1-4 Hillside Conservation Areas may be annexed if the annexation
    provides permanent hillside open space or recreation opportunities for the City.
         Implementation CDO 1-4.a. Use Policy CDO 1-4 as guideline for annexation
         review.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy CDO 1-5 Encourage the County to retain surrounding lands in very low
    density residential, agricultural, open space, and natural resource uses that provide
    contrast to urbanized Cloverdale. Promote the creation of a community separator or
    open space buffer between Cloverdale and any urban development around the City.
         Implementation CDO 1-5.a. Use Policy CDO-4 as guidelines for annexation
         review.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
Goal CDO 2
Maintain hillside areas above the 400 foot elevation as an open space frame around the
City and for hillside areas within the City.
    Policy CDO 2-1 Adopt a hillside ordinance or a hillside provisions within the
    Zoning Ordinance to implement hillside development provisions.
         Implementation CDO 2-1.a. Prior to adoption of a hillside ordinance and
         hillside road standards, any development above the 400 foot elevation shall
         require a City Council review and instruction to staff to proceed with application
         review prior to processing the development application. Also see LU 3-2b.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
                                                                                   Page 60
                              6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
          Resources:         General Fund
Policy CDO 2-2 Where a parcel has land both below and above the 400 foot
elevation, development rights to the hillside areas shall be transferred to the area
below 400 foot elevation, and hillside areas will remain as visual open space with
easements or other legal guarantees that include the City as a participant. Any
hillside areas shall provide for trails as outlined in the Parks and Recreation Element.
     Implementation CDO 2-2.a. Use Policies CDO 2-2, 3, and 4 as basis for hillside
     review.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund
Policy CDO 2-3 Where a property within the City as of the date this General Plan is
adopted does not have lands below the 400 foot elevation, residential development
above the 400 foot elevation may be allowed if:
      The development conforms to General Plan densities
      The residential use, including grading for roadways and lighting, will not be
          visible from the valley floor within the City because it is positively screened
          by topographic features.
      The residential use provides guarantees that the hillside areas will remain as
          visual open space with easements or other legal guarantees that include the
          City as a participant.
      The open space areas provide for trails as outlined in the Parks and
          Recreation Element.
     Implementation CDO 2-3.a. Use Policies CDO 2-2, 3, and 4 as basis for hillside
     review. Also see LU 3.2b.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund
Policy CDO 2-4 Annexation of lands above the 400 foot elevation is prohibited;
except for lands described in Policy CDO 2-2 and Implementation LU 3-1.d. or lands
that will provide open space use. Recreation uses above the 400 foot elevation may
be allowed if lighting is not visible from the valley floor within the City and the
access roads, trail systems, and supporting structures or facilities are generally not
visible from the valley floor within the City.
     Implementation CDO 2-4.a. Use Policies CDO 2-2, 3, and 4 as basis for hillside
     review.
          Responsibility:    Community Development Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund
                                                                                  Page 61

                                   6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
     Policy CDO 2-5 Any roads serving hillside development shall follow natural
     contours, with minimum disruption to hills or forests, minimum or no curbside
     parking, and lighting that is not visible from the valley floor.
          Implementation CDO 2-5.a. Adopt road standards conforming to Policy CDO-
          2-5 and use Policy CDO-2-5 as basis for hillside review.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Ongoing
               Resources:        General Fund
Goal CDO 3
Maintain and improve the design of the built environment. Improve the appearance of
entries and approaches to the downtown and the community. Provide design guidelines
for new development and growth.
     Policy CDO 3-1 Enhance major entrances to Cloverdale in order to provide
     definitive gateways to the City, including views seen from the freeway at the north
     and south of the City and the central interchange. Enhance entrance points along
     Cloverdale Boulevard to the north and south and at the central interchange/entrance
     to downtown.
          Implementation CDO 3-1.a.         Develop downtown and City entrance design
          standards.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        Economic Development funds
     Policy CDO 3-2 Use traditional downtown design elements in the downtown.
     Design within the pedestrian-serving portion of the downtown should have
     pedestrian oriented retail space on the first floor (buildings built to the sidewalk,
     display windows, recessed doors, and pedestrian oriented signs), with development
     above the first floor designed for retail, office, or residential use. Any residential use
     shall have the appearance of a commercial building facing the street, not that of a
     residential use.
          Implementation CDO 3-2.a. Update the Downtown Plan to reflect the urban
          design goals.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        Economic Development funds
     Policy CDO 3-3 Parking in the downtown core should emphasize shared parking,
     should not be located between a building and the street, and should not have
     individual driveways across sidewalks in areas designed for high levels of pedestrian
     use.
          Implementation CDO 3-3.a. Utilize downtown shared parking standards
          contained in the Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                                      Page 62
                             6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Ongoing
          Resources:        Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-4 Preserve the traditional appearance of existing houses along
Cloverdale Boulevard north of the downtown by allowing flexibility of use as an
economic incentive to preserve and flexibility in parking standards so that the
parking requirements do not require demolition or improper alteration. Existing
houses should be used as a design model for new construction.
     Implementation CDO 3-4.a. Develop Zoning Ordinance conservation and
     design standards for Cloverdale Boulevard north of downtown and older
     residential areas around the downtown, in order to preserve older houses and
     their settings.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:        Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-5 Preserve the traditional appearance of the residential areas around
the downtown by identifying structures built prior to 1939, allowing flexibility in
planning standards as an incentive to retaining these buildings in their traditional
appearance, and requiring design review for new construction in the area to assure
that the traditional appearance of older Cloverdale is retained.
     Implementation CDO 3-5.a. Develop Zoning Ordinance conservation and
     design standards for Cloverdale Boulevard north of downtown and older
     residential areas around the downtown, in order to preserve older houses and
     their settings.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:        Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-6 Design of detached single family housing, including small lot single
family developments should have the look and feel based on representative
development in the past, including mix of single and multi-story units, typical single
family private yard spaces. Medium and higher density housing should be attached
and provide common parking and open spaces if they cannot meet the traditional
single family models of development.
     Implementation CDO 3-6.a. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to include standards
     of CDO3-7.
          Responsibility:   Community Development Department
          Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:        Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-7 Remove or upgrade the appearance of structures that were built
when Cloverdale Boulevard was a state highway, and are no longer appropriate for
the City’ sma   i
                na r t
                     eri
                       alstreet
                              ,i ncludings ma llgass  tations,au t
                                                                 ore
                                                                   pairf acil
                                                                            ities,an d
motor court type uses.
                                                                              Page 63

                            6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
     Implementation CDO 3-7.a. Land Use Element Exhibit 2.2 footnote (7) allows
     rezoning to residential use as conforming to the General Plan. Encourage
     rezoning where appropriate. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to include property
     maintenance ordinance.
          Responsibility:  Community Development Department
          Timeframe:       Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:       Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-8 Develop a design plan for the area around the passenger rail station
so that the station is incorporated into a mixed use community, rather than an
isolated facility that is reached only by car. Consider downtown-type design
configurations for the properties immediately opposite the station, with features like
narrower roads to slow traffic, parking and buildings modeled after the downtown,
and high density residential above commercial uses that could serve a transit
community and commuter rail passengers.
     Implementation CDO 3-8.a. Develop Transit Oriented Development design
     plan before or concurrent with the Transit Oriented Development Specific Plan.
          Responsibility:  Community Development Department
          Timeframe:       Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:       Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-9 Develop a design plan for the industrial and commercial areas
visible from the freeway. Freeway visible uses should de-emphasize freeway-
oriented signage and designs with parking as a main visual element from the
freeway. Standards should encourage significant landscape areas, including tree
screening, between the freeway and the uses.
     Implementation CDO 3-9.a.       Develop and adopt design standards for areas
     visible from the freeway.
          Responsibility:  Community Development Department
          Timeframe:       Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:       Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-10 Emphasize street trees and landscaping along Asti Road,
Cloverdale Boulevard, and Foothill Boulevard.
     Implementation CDO 3-10.a. See Circulation Element Policies.
Policy CDO 3-11 Eliminate sign blight.
     Implementation CDO 3-11.a. Update the Zoning Ordinance to provide for sign
     amortization.
          Responsibility:  Community Development Department
          Timeframe:       Within two years of General Plan adoption.
          Resources:       Economic Development funds
Policy CDO 3-12 Fast Food uses with drive in windows are allowed within the
South Interchange area and shall not have drive in windows outside the South
Interchange area. Fast food uses within the Downtown Business District shall not
                                                                              Page 64
                                  6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
    have franchise or typical fast food design elements visible from the street, including
    façade designs, signage, and interior design elements.
         Implementation CDO 3-12.a. Update the Zoning Ordinance fast food design
         standards, including location, design, and definitions.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
              Resources:        Economic Development funds
    Policy CDO 3-13 Eliminate overhead utility lines.
         Implementation CDO 3-13.a. Require undergrounding with development
         proposals. Develop City priorities for undergrounding funds.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Ongoing
              Resources:        Development review and undergrounding funds.
Goal CDO 4
Investigate historic, archaeological, and paleontological resources and preserve or
conserve resources that help residents and visitors understand the history of Cloverdale.
    Policy CDO 4-1 Conserve or preserve historic buildings and the character of the
    older parts of town using conservation zoning and form based zoning ordinances,
    while also allowing change of use of the properties where allowed by General Plan
    land use and density standards.
         Implementation CDO 4-1.a. Develop conservation based zoning requirements
         for alterations of structures built before 1939, as shown on the 1939 Sanborn
         Maps.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
              Resources:        General Fund
         Implementation CDO 4-1.b. Develop zoning design standards for the R-2
         District around the downtown so that new construction or additions respect the
         height, design, and configuration of older structures in the area.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
              Resources:        General Fund
         Implementation CDO 4-1.c. Use the State Historic Building Code at the
         Building's Official's discretion on any structure identified in the National
         Register of Historic Places, California Register of Historic Resources, or local
         designation.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Ongoing
              Resources:        General Fund
                                                                                   Page 65

                              6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
Policy CDO 4-2 Preserve remaining prehistoric camps, villages, and use sites.
Identify areas that may be used by the Pomo Indians for resource procurement or
religious purposes.
     Implementation CDO 4-2.a. Maintain standard conditions of approval for
     CEQA and project review of development projects including agricultural
     conversion. Require cultural resources studies where applicable and require that
     work be halted and studies conducted if cultural or archaeological resources are
     discovered; require that such studies be conducted by qualified historians or
     archaeologists; and require notification pursuant to law if human remains are
     discovered.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Ongoing
         Resources:          Development Review requirements.
     Implementation CDO 4-2.b. Coordinate with the Native American Heritage
     Commission and local tribal members to determine if the study area or
     developments contain any artifacts or areas used for religious purposes.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Ongoing
         Resources:          Development Review requirements.
Policy CDO 4-3 Identify historically significant structures or groups of structures
that help residents and visitors understand what Cloverdale was like historically.
Identify historic materials such as structural remains.
     Implementation CDO 4-3.a. Assist property owners in their restoration efforts.
     This includes providing information on preservation resources and assisting in
     the placement of structures on the National Register of Historic Places, and
     seeking public and private funding for preservation.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Within two years of General Plan adoption.
         Resources:          General Fund
     Implementation CDO 4-3.b. Survey to identify locally important historic
     resources and historic patterns of settlement. Develop an implementation
     program to preserve identified resources.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Within two years of General Plan adoption.
         Resources:          General Fund
     Implementation CDO 4-3.c. Maintain standard conditions of approval for
     CEQA and project review of development projects to preserve historic and
     archaeological resources.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Ongoing.
         Resources:          General Fund
                                                                              Page 66
                                 6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
    Policy CDO 4-4 Preserve paleontological resources if identified by discovery or if
    the area is found to have resources by other investigations or databases.
         Implementation CDO 4-4.a. Develop standard conditions of approval for CEQA
         and project review for preservation of paleontological resources.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Ongoing.
              Resources:        General Fund
Goal CDO 5
Provide public, open space, and habitat uses along the Russian River.
    Policy CDO 5-1 For areas that are not constrained by levees within the City, riparian
    areas shall be provided adjacent to the Russian River when development projects are
    proposed to restore native grassland habitat for raptors.
         Implementation CDO 5-1.a. Developments along the Russian River shall
         include an analysis of habitat, preservation or restoration of habitat.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department/County of Sonoma
              Timeframe:        Ongoing
              Resources:        Development Review Requirements
         Implementation CDO 5-1.b. Provide continuous trails along the river on top of
         levees (see Parks and Recreation Element).
         Implementation CDO 5-1.c. Where designated in the Land Use Element,
         provide destination commercial or public recreation uses along the River.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Ongoing
              Resources:        Development Review Requirements
Goal CDO 6
Develop an urban forest plan to preserve existing trees on hillsides and the valley floor.
Enhance the tree canopy with new planting.
    Policy CDO 6-1 Maintain and expand the tree canopy within and outside the
    developed areas of the City, including old growth and newly planted trees. Prepare
    tree protection standards that can be implemented with or without a tree preservation
    ordinance.
         Implementation CDO 6-1.a. Develop an urban forest plan/street tree plan with a
         management strategy for maintaining existing and newly planted trees, including
         best practice provisions for installation, maintenance, and succession planning.
              Responsibility:   Community Development Department
              Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
              Resources:        General Fund
    Policy CDO 6-2 Protect distinctive natural vegetation such as oak woodlands,
    riparian corridors and mixed evergreen forests by maintaining the natural features as
                                                                                   Page 67
                               6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
a whole. Preservation of individual trees or features rather than the larger habitat
does not satisfy this policy.
      See Implementation CDO 6-1.a.
Policy CDO 6-3 Large or otherwise significant trees shall be maintained both in
residential, non-residential, and open space areas by:
 Revising development plans that would remove significant trees so that those
     trees are saved.
 Developing standard conditions of approval to minimize damage during
     construction and provisions to assure that building foundations, utilities,
     walkways, irrigation, or use patterns will not damage root structures, trunks or
     crowns.
      See Implementation CDO 6-1.a.
Policy CDO 6-4 New private and public development, including public street,
sidewalk, utility, and park construction, shall provide a mix of trees with a crown
that can provide shade and summer cooling and trees with height to create a
silhouette against the skyline.
      See Implementation CDO 6-1.a.
      Implementation CDO 6-4.b. Development proposals shall show the percent of
      tree crown coverage at fifteen years after installation.
           Responsibility:    Community Development Department
           Timeframe:         Ongoing
           Resources:         General Fund
Policy CDO 6-5 New public and private development shall provide street trees
parallel to streets -- in planter strips, in sidewalks, or at back of sidewalks, spaced at
regular intervals along the street. Tree intervals shall provide a canopy with leaves
touching at maturity. Tree locations shall be identified prior to design of utilities,
drainage, hydrants, electrical equipment boxes, vaults, etc., and those features should
be subservient to tree locations.
     Implementation CDO 6-5.a. Prepare and adopt a tree and landscape material list
     for public and private projects, including height and spread at maturity and
     suitable locations for various trees and landscape materials.
           Responsibility:    Community Development Department
           Timeframe:         Within two years of General Plan adoption.
           Resources:         General Fund
Policy CDO 6-6 Prepare an urban forest plan/street tree plan, including a program
for new trees to be installed with development and a plan for retrofit in areas where
development or streets were installed without trees.
      See Implementation CDO 6-5.a.
                                                                                  Page 68

                                6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
   Policy CDO 6-7 Require the use of drought-tolerant or native to Mediterranean
   climate trees, shrubs, and ground covers for use in public and private landscaping
   development approvals.
         See Implementation CDO 6-1.a.
Goal CDO 7
Conserve natural vegetation and wildlife resources.
   Policy CDO 7-1 Conserve and protect the area's natural vegetation by:
              Ensuring that drainage and runoff from City sources is not impairing
                 the water quality of the Russian River.
              Retaining existing riparian vegetation within the conservation buffers
                 along all natural watercourses to preserve riparian vegetation and
                 habitat.
              Restoring degraded riparian habitats where feasible.
              Prohibiting agricultural activities within the conservation buffers along
                 all natural watercourses.
              Avoiding the contamination of groundwater supplies.
        Implementation CDO 7-1.a. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide 100 foot
        buffers (50 feet on each side) from creeks and rivers shown on the Conservation
        Element Map. Where the Russian River buffer is wider than 50 feet on the map,
        provide the wider buffers.
             Responsibility:   Community Development Department
             Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
             Resources:        General Fund
        Implementation CDO 7-1.b. Cooperate with nonprofit, County, State, and/or
        Federal agencies in preparing a Russian River riparian corridor restoration and
        management plan.
             Responsibility:   Community Development Department
             Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
             Resources:        General Fund
        Implementation CDO 7-1.c. Require programs such as plaques or painted
        notices that storm drains flow to the river and programs to identify ways to
        protect wildlife and vegetation resources.
             Responsibility:   Community Development Department
             Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
             Resources:        General Fund
        Implementation CDO 7-1.d. Adopt an Integrated Management Plan for the
        long-term conservation and restoration of riparian corridors and wetlands within
        the City. The Plan should include provisions to:
                     Protect identified wetlands;
                                                                                  Page 69

                              6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
                 Require development proponents to submit an assessment of
                    wetlands;
                 Avoid impacts on sensitive areas by preserving and restoring
                    wetlands as a preferred alternative and replacement as a
                    secondary alternative;
                 Provide buffers where possible;
                 Design public access with buffers to protect wetlands while also
                    facilitating public use and enjoyment.
         Responsibility: Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Within two years of General Plan adoption.
         Resources:          General Fund
         Also see Implementations PS 1-5
Policy CDO 7-2 Conserve and protect the area's natural wildlife and endangered
species by:
          Requiring the restoration of fisheries through habitat improvement and
              resource management.
          Establishing long-term conservation zones, including possible use of
              incentives and credits to create easements and open space.
          Requiring the use of native and drought-tolerant plant species in
              landscaping and in the replanting of cut slopes.
          Developing classroom and on-site education programs to promote
              preservation of wildlife and vegetation resources.
    Implementation CDO 7-2.a. Coordinate wildlife conservation activities with
    Sonoma County conservation agencies and nonprofit conservation groups.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department
         Timeframe:          Within two years of General Plan adoption.
         Resources:          General Fund
    Implementation CDO 7-2.b. Preserve wetlands, habitat corridors, sensitive
    natural communities, and other essential habitat areas that may be adversely
    affected by public or private development projects where special-status plant
    and animal species are known to be present or potentially occurring based on
    City biological resource mapping or other technical material. Require a
    Biological Resources Assessment for development projects in areas with
    identified or with potential for special status plant and animal species.
         Responsibility:     Community Development Department and CEQA Process
         Timeframe:          Ongoing with project submittals.
         Resources:          General Fund and development fees
    Implementation CDO 7-2.c. Protect sensitive biological resources and habitat
    corridors in CEQA review and participate                in comprehensive habitat
                                                                              Page 70

                                  6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
          management programs, including continued acquisition and permanent
          protection of important natural habitats.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department, regional agencies,
                                 and Open Space District.
               Timeframe:        Ongoing.
               Resources:        General Fund and Regional Agency Funding.
          Implementation CDO 7-2.d. Prepare lists of appropriate native landscape
          species and inappropriate invasive exotic species for use by property owners in
          landscaping plans. Prohibit use of highly invasive species in the project review
          process. Consult educational and regional agencies for lists of appropriate
          native species.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department.
               Timeframe:        Within two years of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:        General Fund.
Goal CDO 8
Conserve energy and minimize resource depletion by encouraging alternative energy,
solar power, and green building techniques.
     Policy CDO 8-1 Use energy and resource efficient methods in daily City operation.
          Implementation CDO 8-1.a. Where feasible, use energy efficient transportation,
          locally-generated solar and alternative power sources, and green building
          methods for City buildings.
               Responsibility:   Community Development Department
               Timeframe:        Solar power source studies within one year. Other
                                 implementation measures as opportunities present.
               Resources:        General Fund and Community Development Agency.
     Policy CDO 8-2 Use, support, and encourage energy and resource efficient methods
     in private construction.
          Implementation CDO 8-2.a. Study and develop ordinances and incentives to
          encourage energy efficient transportation, locally-generated solar and alternative
          power sources, and green building methods for private buildings and projects.
          Building Department should provide reviews and inspect using green building
          standards if requested by any applicant.
               Responsibility:   Community       Development      Department,      Building
                                 Department
               Timeframe:        Ongoing. Support green building and energy efficient
                                 processes in the City review and inspection functions.
               Resources:        General Fund and Community Development Agency.
          Implementation CDO 8-2.b. Study and develop ordinances and incentives to
          encourage water conservation.
                                                                                    Page 71
                             6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
         Responsibility:    Community      Development      Department,      Building
                            Department
         Timeframe:         Ongoing. Support water conservation by ordinance, in
                            development review, and in City inspection functions.
         Resources:         General Fund and Community Development Agency.
Policy CDO 8-3 Inventory and work to reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GHG)
     Implementation CDO 8-3.a. The City shall work with the Sonoma County Air
     Pollution Control District, California Air Resources Board and/or other
     responsible agencies to prepare a Climate Action Plan. The Climate Action Plan
     shall include at a minimum:
          An inventory of current (2008) GHG emissions within the Sonoma
             County Air Pollution Control District consistent with methodologies
             developed by the International Environmental Agency for Local
             Governments (ICLEI) and California Air Resources Board (ARB).
          An inventory of 1990 GHG emission levels within the Sonoma County
             Air Pollution Control District consistent with methodologies developed
             by ICLEI and ARB.
          Estimated inventory of 2020 GHG emission levels within the Sonoma
             County Air Pollution Control District consistent with methodologies
             developed by ICLEI and ARB.
          Specific targets for reductions of the current and projected 2020 GHG
             emissions inventory from those sources reasonably attributable to the
             Ci t
                y’s di  sc
                         retiona r
                                 yl  and us  ed  ecisions a nd t h e Ci ty’si  nter
                                                                                  nal
             government operations.
          Specific and general tools and strategies to reduce the current and
             projecte d202 0GHGi   nve nt
                                        or iesandt  ome etthePl an ’stargetsfo rGHG
             reduction by 2020.
     Implementation CDO 8-3.b. The City shall seek funding from the state and/or
     other sources, including development impact fees, in order to fund the Plan.
Goal CDO 9
Review potential impacts of mining aggregate resources from the Russian River in
light of need for the resource and City goals related to scenic, recreational, and
wildlife use of the River. The areas evaluated shall be those shown (California
Geological Survey, 2005) to have resource potential (MRZ-2b), and from which
resource could be mined in the future (that is, have compatible land uses as defined
by the California Geological Survey). If the results of the evaluation confirm the
presence of extractable resource, the possible loss of this resource to future land
development shall be weighed against the benefit of such development.
     Implementation CDO 9-1.a. Evaluate applications for aggregate mining if
     applications are submitted.
                                                                              Page 72

                  6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
Responsibility: Community Development Department, Building
                Department
Timeframe:      If applications are submitted
Resources:      General Fund.
                                                           Page 73
                  6.0 CONSERVATION, DESIGN, AND OPEN SPACE
Exhibit 6-1 Conservation Element Map
                                                    Page 74
                  7.0 URBAN LIGHTING
          7.0
URBAN LIGHTING ELEMENT
                               Page 75
                                                                    7.0 URBAN LIGHTING
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Cloverdale is a small town in a rural setting, where night time lighting levels are currently
low enough to allow residents, visitors, and surrounding residents to enjoy night time
views of the natural setting and the sky. Many businesses and residents have installed
high intensity light sources as a way to protect properties at night and, for businesses, as a
form of advertising that the business is there. The combination of occasional bright
lighting and other areas without corresponding bright lights creates a security issue
because bright lights obscure any threats in the less well lit area. A consistent but lower
level of lighting allows safety personnel to see all areas, rather than just the very bright
areas. Sonoma County has adopted night time lighting standards for areas around
Cloverdale to minimize unnecessary light and all night lighting. The Urban Lighting
Element encourages a level of lighting appropriate for a small town in a rural setting.
7.2       GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal UL 1
Maintain night time lighting levels that provide security and safety but also preserve and
maintain views of night time skies.
     Policy UL 1-1 Require that all new development projects and public improvements
     maintain night time lighting levels at the minimum necessary to provide security and
     safety, using fixtures which shield the light source so that light is directed downward,
     with height and power limited to the minimum necessary to provide adequate
     lighting.
          Implementation UL 1-1.a. Prepare a community lighting ordinance to provide
          standards for lighting on streets, business and residential properties, public
          properties, and signage.
               Responsibility:    Community Development Department
               Timeframe:         Within two years of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:         General Fund
          Implementation UL 1-1.b. Revise the Zoning Ordinance and Engineering
          Standards to include standards for lighting based on Dark Skies principles.
               Responsibility:    Community Development Department
               Timeframe:         Within two years of General Plan adoption.
               Resources:         General Fund
      Policy UL 1-2 Minimize light spillage that carries off the property where lights are
     located.
          Implementation UL 1-1.a and b
     Policy UL 1-3 Reduce the light glare from businesses at the south interchange. Do
     not allow similar high intensity lighting sources at the other two interchanges.
          Implementation UL 1-3.a. Develop an ordinance to amortize high-intensity
          lighting, high intensity sign illumination, and unshielded lighting. See also
          Implementation UL 1-1a. and b.
                                                                                      Page 76
                                                             7.0 URBAN LIGHTING
        Responsibility:     Community Development Department
        Timeframe:          Within two years of General Plan adoption.
        Resources:          General Fund
Policy UL 1-4 Eliminate excess lighting from illuminated signs.
    Implementation UL 1-1.a and b, and UL 1-3.a.
Policy UL 1-5 Revise street lighting with shielding or fixtures designed to produce
down light, rather than light spread
    Implementation UL 1-1.b and UL 1-3.a.
Policy UL 1-6 Phase out existing high intensity lighting and signs with an
amortization program.
    Implementation UL 1-1.a and b, and UL 1-3.a.
Policy UL 1-7 Avoid the use of reflective building materials which can cause
daytime and nighttime glare.
    Implementation UL 1-1.a and b and UL 1-3.a.
                                                                              Page 77
                8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
            8.0
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
         ELEMENT
                                       Page 78
                                                     8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
8.1 INTRODUCTION
The Public Health and Safety Element addresses the protection of the community from
any unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture,
ground shaking, ground failure, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides
and landslides; subsidence and other geologic hazards in an area; flooding; and wildland
and urban fires.
INCORPORATION OF COUNTY SEISMIC SAFETY ELEMENT
The City of Cloverdale's General Plan is based on the Public Safety Element of the
County of Sonoma. The County Public Safety Element was adopted by the Board of
Supervisors on March 23, 1989. The City will adopt appropriate policies and programs
that pertain to the General Plan Study Area. Provided below are applicable County of
Sonoma goals and policies as well as goals and policies that are City-proposed for the
General Plan. The applicable provisions of the County Safety Element will remain in
effect as adopted even if the County Safety Element is revised.
8.2       GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
Goal PS 1
Prevent unnecessary exposure of people and property to risks of damage or injury from
earthquakes, landslides and other geologic hazards.
     Policy PS 1-1
     Continue to utilize all available data on geologic hazards and related risks from the
     appropriate agencies.
     Policy PS 1-2
     Continue to utilize studies of geologic hazards prepared during the development
     review process.
     Policy PS 1-3
     Encourage research on geologic hazards, their probabilities and their effects within
     Sonoma County.
     Policy PS 1-4
     Require and review geologic reports prior to decisions on any project which would
     subject property or persons to significant risks from the geologic hazards shown on
     County of Sonoma General Plan Public Safety Element Figures PS-1a through PS-1i
     and related file maps and source documents. Geologic reports shall describe the
     hazards and include mitigation measures to reduce risks to acceptable levels. Where
     appropriate, require an engineer's or geologist's certification that risks have been
     mitigated to an acceptable level and, if indicated, obtain indemnification or insurance
     from the engineer, geologist, or developer to minimize City exposure to liability.
     Policy PS 1-5
                                                                                     Page 79
                                                   8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
    Adopt, upon approval by the International Congress of Building Officials and the
    State of California, revisions to the California Building Code which increase
    resistance of structures to groundshaking and other geologic hazards.
    Policy PS 1-6
    Require dynamic analysis of structural response to earthquake forces prior to City
    approval of building permits for structures whose irregularity or other factors prevent
    reasonable load determination and distribution by static analysis.
    Policy PS 1-7
    Encourage strong enforcement of state seismic safety requirements for design and
    construction of dams, power plants, hospitals and schools.
    Policy PS 1-8
    Roads, public facilities and other Public Agency projects should incorporate
    measures to mitigate identified geologic hazards to acceptable levels.
Goal PS 2
Prevent unnecessary exposure of people and property to risks of damage or injury from
flooding.
    Policy PS 2-1
    Coordinate flood hazard analysis and management activities with the Army Corps of
    Engineers, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other responsible
    agencies. Request changes in FEMA maps where appropriate to reflect new data or
    analyses.
    Policy PS 2-2
    Base land use planning and development review on FEMA maps and data or parcel
    specific scaled interpretations of these maps and site specific elevation data.
    Policy PS 2-3
    Prepare a comprehensive analysis of the potential flood hazards and drainage
    impacts associated with adopted land use plans for each major watershed in the City.
    Encourage the County to work with Cloverdale to develop basin wide drainage
    studies and development fees for the purpose of identifying and mitigating the direct
    and cumulative impact of flooding which results from the loss of permeable surfaces.
    The City shall use proposed annexations, redevelopment agreements, revenue
    sharing agreements and the CEQA process as tools to ensure that incorporated
    development pays its fair share toward the studies and mitigation of downstream
    flooding impacts caused by upstream development.
    Policy PS 2-4
    Pending completion of the above applicable drainage analyses, individual project
    applications shall be required to analyze and mitigate drainage impacts, based upon
    the land use plan. If such analysis identified unmitigated and cumulative significant
                                                                                    Page 80
                                                  8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
effects, including impact on downstream flooding, further environmental
documentation may be required.
Policy PS 2-5
In the event that the City determines that the project, when considered cumulatively
with other projects to be undertaken in the drainage basin, will result in a significant
effect with respect to downstream flooding, the project applicant will either a)
prepare a focused environmental impact report on such effect, or b) agree to modify
the project to construct improvements or participate in a funding mechanism
necessary to mitigate any downstream flooding impacts (such as posting a bond or
funds prior to recordation of the final map in an amount to be determined by the
Water Agency). Failure to modify the project or to propose further environmental
documentation shall be grounds for finding the project inconsistent with the plan.
Policy PS 2-6
Use the 100-year flood event and corresponding elevations as the City measure of
acceptable level of risk and protection in the consideration of any amendments of the
land use plan map.
Policy PS 2-7
Onsite and offsite flood related hazards shall be reviewed for all projects located
within areas subject to known flood hazards.
Policy PS 2-8
Regulate development, water diversion, vegetation removal, grading and fills to
minimize any increase in flooding and related damage to people and property.
Policy PS 2-9
Payment of costs for drainage facilities to handle the surface runoff from new
development shall be the responsibility of developers and others who benefit.
Policy PS 2-10
Require that design and construction of drainage facilities be subject to the review
and approval of the Sonoma County Water Agency (SCWA) where appropriate
based on project size.
Policy PS 2-11
Require that tentative and final subdivision maps and approved site plans show areas
subject to flooding as shown on the FEMA maps.
Policy PS 2-12
Give priority to floodplain management over flood control structures for preventing
damage from flooding except where the intensity of development requires a high
level of protection and justifies the costs of structural measures.
Policy PS 2-13
Consider the potential risk of damage from flooding in the design and review of
projects, including those which could facilitate floodplain development.
                                                                                Page 81
                                                      8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
     Policy PS 2-14
     Continue to enforce City code requirements on construction in flood hazard areas
     and other adopted regulations which implement the National Flood Insurance
     Program.
     Policy PS 2-15
     Avoid variances to building setbacks along streams and in 100-year flood plains..
     Policy PS 2-16
     Limit filling in areas which could retain a significant amount of floodwater.
     Policy PS 2-17
     Encourage the timely completion and filing of inundation maps for all dams whose
     failure could cause loss of life or personal injury within Sonoma County
Goal PS 3
Prevent unnecessary exposure of people and property to risks of damage or injury from
wildland and structural fires.
     Policy PS 3-1
     Continue to utilize available information on wildland and structural fire hazards.
     Policy PS 3-2
     Consider the severity of natural fire hazards, potential damage from wildland and
     structural fires, adequacy of fire protection and mitigation measures consistent with
     this element in the review of projects.
     Policy PS 3-3
     Require on-site detection and suppression, including automatic sprinkler systems,
     where available services do not provide acceptable levels of protection.
Goal PS 4
While maintaining the autonomy granted to it pursuant to state zoning laws, implement
state and county requirements for the storage, transport, disposal and use of hazardous
materials, including requirements for management plans, security precautions, and
contingency plans.
     Policy PS 4-1
     Where allowed by law, regulate the transportation of hazardous materials to
     minimize the potential for damage. Seek regulation by other agencies consistent
     with adopted City policies.
Goal PS 5
Reduce damage to life and property from natural hazards to the greatest extent possible.
     Policy PS 5-1
                                                                                    Page 82
                                                 8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
Support the adoption of the County Safety Element into City policy as incorporated
by reference above.
Policy PS 5-2
Adopt revisions to the Uniform Fire Code and California Building Code to address
fire and life safety after they are approved by inspection organizations and the State
of California.
Policy PS 5-3
Ensure that roadways are adequate in terms of width, radius, and grade to facilitate
access by emergency vehicles.
Policy PS 5-4
Develop and implement City programs for fuel breaks, brush management,
controlled burning, revegetation and construction and maintenance of fire roads.
Policy PS 5-5
Incorporate and expand upon the fire safety standards recommended in CDF's "Fire
Safety Guidelines" into City development standards and the Uniform Fire Code.
Policy PS 5-6
Ensure that fire/police facilities and equipment are adequate for proposed
development before granting approval.
Policy PS 5-7
Require all new development in areas of potential fire hazards to provide for
clearance around structures, the use of fire resistant ground cover materials, and
require installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems.
Policy PS 5-8
Prepare and implement a Police/Fire Department Master Needs Assessment.
Policy PS 5-9
Ensure that increased septic and well activity do not increase ground water
contamination.
Policy PS 5-10
Ensure that seismically unsafe buildings and structures including unreinforced
masonry buildings (URMs) do not cause a serious threat to human safety and/or the
ability of the Policy and Fire Department to deliver service.
Policy PS 5-11
In conjunction with the County, study the risk of seismically-induced liquefaction.
Policy PS 5-12
Require development adjacent to hillside areas to minimize geologic and fire
hazards. Require all new development, including single-family residential, to
provide built-in fire protection (i.e. automatic fire sprinklers).
                                                                              Page 83
                                           8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
Implementations PS 1-5
The City will review and revise the Uniform Fire and Building Codes as
appropriate. The City will incorporate and expand upon CDF and County of
Sonoma fire safety standards in City development codes and the Uniform Fire
Code.
     Responsibility:   Building Division
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        General Fund
The City will require improvements to ensure emergency vehicle access as a
condition of approval of proposed development.
     Responsibility:   Community Development Department
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        Development Conditions of Approval
The Fire District will ensure fire protection is adequate before approving
proposed development. This shall be done through the environmental
review/application review process.
     Responsibility:   Cloverdale Fire Protection District
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        Development Conditions of Approval
To improve fire protection to the Study Area the City will require that project
sponsors participate in any assigned proportional costs for the expansion of the
City Public Safety facilities, equipment, or services, including police, fire, and
any other public safety services provided within the City.
     Responsibility:   Community Development Department
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        Development Conditions of Approval
Coordinate with the County and Department of Forestry to provide joint fire
protection services.
     Responsibility:   Cloverdale Fire Protection District
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        Fire Protection District
Require studies from project developers to ensure that major new development
does not adversely affect groundwater quality.
     Responsibility:   Community Development Department
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
     Resources:        Development Conditions of Approval
For projects proposed in hazardous geologic areas, require a geologic report that
includes analysis of soils foundation, grading, erosion, and sediment control.
     Responsibility:   Community Development Department
     Timeframe:        Ongoing
                                                                          Page 84
                                            8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
     Resources:         Development Conditions of Approval
Require a geotechnical investigation prior to project approval for new
development and redevelopment projects in areas with identified significant
geologic hazards or where the City Engineer determines such hazards may exist,
including liquefaction-related failures, slope stability and erosion hazard
analysis in hillside areas, existing or potential soil instability, or expansive soils.
The report shall include an assessment of geologic and seismic hazards, and all
recommendations contained in the report shall be implemented.
     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         City Development Standards. Development Conditions
                        of Approval
Require new development projects to incorporate sound soil conservation
practices and keep land alteration (grading) to a practical minimum by the
following (a) minimize cuts and fills, (b) limit grading to the smallest practical
area of land, (c) Limit time land is exposed to accelerated erosion from grading,
(d) apply best management practices for winterization, (e) replant graded areas
to ensure permanent plant cover, and (f) design project specific erosion control
measures.
     Responsibility:    City Engineer
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         City Development Standards. Development Conditions of
                        Approval
Require geologic and seismic hazard peer review for critical facilities (except
for schools and hospitals which have state review).
     Responsibility:    City Engineer
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         City Development Standards. Development Conditions of
                        Approval
Evaluate the presence/absence of aggregate resource. The areas evaluated shall
be those shown (California Geological Survey, 2005) to have resource potential
and from which resource could be mined in the future (that is, have compatible
land uses as defined by the California Geological Survey). If the results of the
evaluation confirm the presence of extractable resource, the possible loss of this
resource to future land development shall be weighed against the benefit of such
development.
     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         Development Conditions of Approval
                                                                              Page 85
                                                    8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
Goal PS 6
Ensure that City emergency procedures are adequate in the event of potential natural or
man-made disaster.
    Policy PS 6-1
    Regularly update the City's Multi-Hazard Emergency Plan. As part of the periodic
    update, the City will review County and State emergency response procedures that
    must be coordinated with City procedures.
         Implementation PS 6-1.a. The City will regularly update the City's Multi-
         Hazard Emergency Plan. The City's Multi-Hazard Emergency Plan designates
         emergency evacuation routes as Highway 101 and Highway 128.
              Responsibility:    All City Departments
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy PS 6-2
    Support the County's Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
         Implementation PS 6-2.a. The City will incorporate the County's Hazardous
         Waste Management Plan into City Plans and Policies
              Responsibility:    City Manager
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy PS 6-3
    Utilizing State and County sources, maintain an inventory of sites with storage or use
    of significant quantities of hazardous materials
         Implementation PS 6-3.a. The City will maintain an inventory of sites with
         storage or use of significant quantities of hazardous materials utilizing State and
         County information.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
    Policy PS 6-4
    Require a use permit for any commercial or industrial use involving significant
    quantities of hazardous materials. Hazardous materials management plans shall be
    required as a condition of approval for such permits. [Significant quantities are
    determined under the County's Hazardous Waste Management Plan.]
         Implementation PS 6-4.a. The City will review its zoning code to ensure that
         the zoning code requires a use permit for any use involving significant amounts
         of hazardous materials
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
                                                                                    Page 86
                                                    8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
               Resources:         General Fund
     Policy PS 6-5
     Conduct periodic emergency response exercises to test the effectiveness of City
     emergency response procedures.
         Implementation PS 6-5.a. The City will conduct periodic emergency response
         services to test the effectiveness of City emergency response procedures and
         more widely disseminate copies of the City's Multi-Hazard Emergency Services
         Plan to the general public and affected agencies.
               Responsibility:    City Manager
               Timeframe:         Ongoing
               Resources:         General Fund
     Policy PS 6-6
     Conduct periodic emergency response exercises to test the effectiveness of City
     emergency response procedures.
         Implementation PS 6-6.a. Include contingencies for emergency services if
         major damage occurs in populated areas, and Cloverdale is a relief site for a
         large influx of affected people.
               Responsibility:    All City Departments
               Timeframe:         Ongoing
               Resources:         General Fund
Goal PS 7
Provide appropriate regulations for land use and airport operations to ensure that the
safety of airport operations and personnel and the general public and adjacent structures
are protected.
     Policy PS 7-1
     Future development and use of the City Airport shall be consistent with the policies
     and programs as established in the Cloverdale Municipal Airport Master Plan as
     adopted in October 1988. Any proposals for expansion and/or development of the
     airport shall be referred to the Sonoma County Airport Land Use Commission.
     Policy PS 7-2
     Make every effort to ensure that runway length and safety areas meet Federal
     Aviation criteria.
     Policy PS 7-3
     Ensure that approach zones, clear zones, and landing thresholds are maintained to
     Federal Aviation Regulations and State Division of Aeronautics.
     Policy PS 7-4
     Protect the airport property from erosion and flooding hazards.
     Policy PS 7-5
                                                                                 Page 87
                                                  8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
Building sites on the airport property should be clustered in areas outside the
approach zone and overflight zone, and set back as deemed appropriate from the
extended runway centerline and typical flight tracks.
Policy PS 7-6
Discourage residential, noise-sensitive developments or significant expansions
thereto located near the airstrip or under an overfly route. The area of concern with
futur ede v elopme ntl ieswi thin“ referrala rea”d eli
                                                     neatedbyt  heCou  nt
                                                                        yAi rpor tLa nd
Use Commission. (See Exhibit 10) Until future annexation, the City will work with
the County in unincorporated areas to ensure that developments are required to
dedicate airport easements, deed restrictions or file "buyer beware" notifications to
ensure that prospective buyers are aware of the airport's influence. The
notifications/restrictions shall include the following as appropriate:
Policy PS 7-7
A right-of-way for free and unobstructed passage of aircraft through the airspace
over the property at any altitude above a surface specified in the easement (set in
accordance with Federal Aviation Regulations Part 77).
Policy PS 7-8
A right to subject the property to noise, vibration, fumes, dust, and fuel particle
emissions associated with normal airport activity.
Policy PS 7-9
A right to prohibit the erection or growth of any structure, tree or other object that
would enter the acquired airspace.
Policy PS 7-10
A right-of-entry onto the property, with appropriate advance notice, for the purpose
of removing, marking or lighting any structure or other object that enters the
acquired airspace.
Policy PS 7-11
A right to prohibit electrical interference, glare, misleading light sources, visual
impairments, and other hazards to aircraft from being created on the property.
Policy PS 7-12
Prohibit objects or structures to be erected in critical areas which, because of height
or other factors, would result in an increase in the minimum ceiling or visibility
criteria for an existing or proposed instrument approach procedure.
     Implementation PS 7-1 through 7-11
     The City will implement the Cloverdale Municipal Airport Master Plan. The
     plan shall be regularly reviewed and updated as appropriate.
          Responsibility:    Public Works Department
          Timeframe:         Ongoing
          Resources:         General Fund
                                                                               Page 88

                                          8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
The City will work with adjacent property owners to ensure that height
limitation standards are met for the Runway Clear Zone.
     Responsibility:    Public Works Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
The City will monitor erosion control work and consider levees or rip-rap
protection for the Airport property.
     Responsibility:    Public Works Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
Through Master Plan, environmental, and project review, the City will ensure
that building areas take into account the flood potential at the south end of the
airport.
     Responsibility:    Public Works Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
The City will issue timely FAA Notices to Airmen to advise airport users of any
flooding as it occurs.
     Responsibility:    Public Works Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
Through the Zoning Ordinance, environmental, and project review, the City will
ensure building sites on the airport property are located appropriately to avoid
safety hazards.
     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
Through environmental and project review, the City will regulate property
located near the airport such that no structures are constructed which would
interfere with aircraft operations.
     Responsibility:    Community Development Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
The City shall ensure that through Master Plan, project, and environmental
review, any change in the length or location of runway use shall require safety
studies to determine the measures needed to ensure safe airport operations and
that adjacent/nearby land uses will not be adversely affected.
     Responsibility:    Public Works Department
     Timeframe:         Ongoing
     Resources:         General Fund
                                                                         Page 89
                                                      8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
         Through the General Plan, Zoning Code, and environmental review, the City
         will strongly discourage new residential development within the 55 CNEL
         contour, and discourage inappropriate land use developments beneath the
         aircraft traffic pattern. The City wi     llut  ilizet he“  Ai r
                                                                        p ort
                                                                            /Land Use Noise
         Co  mpa tibil
                     ityCr  it
                             eri
                               a ”i ne v aluati
                                              ngt hea   cce pt
                                                             a bil
                                                                 ityofde  velopme  ntpr opos ed
         wi thint he“ referralare a”bo  und ary
                                              .
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
         The City will work with the County and the Sonoma County Airport Land Use
         Commission to ensure consistency in the application of land use regulations on
         all projects proposed wi  t
                                   hi nt he“ ref
                                               e rr
                                                  a la rea”
              Responsibility:    Public Works Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
         The City will work with the County and private property owners to ensure the
         airport access road is widened and well-maintained.
              Responsibility:    Public Works Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
Goal PS 8
Provide for public health facilities in the community.
    Policy PS 8-1
    Encourage health care providers and health care emergency services within the City.
         Implementation PS 8-1.a. Inventory health care services and develop a health
         care services plan in coordination with the Health Care District.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
         Implementation PS 8-1.b. Encourage and support hospital services, health care
         services, clinics, and assisted living facilities that will provide health care for all
         Cloverdale residents.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
              Timeframe:         Ongoing
              Resources:         General Fund
         Implementation PS 8-1.c. Support provision of emergency services responses
         by encouraging paramedic and ambulance services.
              Responsibility:    Community Development Department
                                                                                       Page 90

                                      8.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFTEY
     Timeframe:       Ongoing
     Resources:       General Fund
Implementation PS 8-1.d.En     cour
                                  agee
                                     stabl
                                         ishmentofdoc  t
                                                       or’
                                                         sof fi
                                                              ceswi  t
                                                                     hin
the community.
     Responsibility:  Community Development Department
     Timeframe:       Ongoing
     Resources:       General Fund
Implementation PS 8-1.e. Cooperate with Vector control for prevention of
insect and rodent-borne diseases
     Responsibility:  Public Works
     Timeframe:       Ongoing
     Resources:       General Fund
                                                                Page 91

                              Cit y of
                      C l o ve rd a l e
                         2015-2023
H o u s ing El e m e nt
       Adopted by Cit y Council Resolution 081-2014
                        D e cem b er 10, 2014
        Prepared for:                           Prepared by:
                                                          ®
     City of Cloverdale
124 N. Cloverdale Boulevard           2729 Prospect Park Drive, Suite 220
   Cloverdale, CA 95425                  Rancho Cordova, CA 95670


                                                                                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM ...................................................................................................... 1-1
  1.1 Housing Program.............................................................................................................................. 1-1
  1.2 Quantified Objectives ..................................................................................................................... 1-13
CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT ................................................................................................ 2-1
  2.1. Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 2-1
    2.1.1 Community Context ................................................................................................................... 2-1
    2.1.2 General Plan Consistency ........................................................................................................... 2-3
    2.1.3 Community Participation............................................................................................................ 2-3
  2.2. Review of the 2009 Housing Element ............................................................................................. 2-8
  2.3. Housing Needs Assessment............................................................................................................. 2-9
    2.3.1 Population and Demographic Trends ....................................................................................... 2-25
    2.3.2 Employment and Income Trends.............................................................................................. 2-27
    2.3.3 Housing Stock Characteristics .................................................................................................. 2-32
    2.3.4 Housing Costs and Affordability .............................................................................................. 2-35
    2.3.5 Special Housing Needs ............................................................................................................. 2-38
    2.3.6 Assisted Housing Inventory ..................................................................................................... 2-45
  2.4 Land Inventory and Housing Resources......................................................................................... 2-47
    2.4.1 Land Inventory ......................................................................................................................... 2-50
    2.4.2 Financial and Administrative Resources .................................................................................. 2-55
  2.5 Potential Constraints ...................................................................................................................... 2-57
    2.5.1 Governmental Constraints ........................................................................................................ 2-57
    2.5.2 Non-Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................ 2-70
    2.5.3 Infrastructure and Environmental Considerations .................................................................... 2-72
    2.5.4 Public Facilities ........................................................................................................................ 2-72
2.6 Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation .......................................................................... 2-75
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                  2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                                          i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Charts, Figures, and Tables
Table 1.1 Quantified Objectives, 2015-2023 ........................................................................................... 1-13
Figure 2.1. Location Map of Cloverdale .................................................................................................... 2-2
Table 2.1 Review of 2009 Housing Element Implementation Programs ................................................... 2-9
Table 2.2 Population Trends and Projections, 1960 to 2040 ................................................................... 2-25
Table 2.3 Population Growth Comparison, 2000 to 2010 ....................................................................... 2-25
Table 2.4 Average Household Size, 2000 and 2011 ................................................................................ 2-26
Table 2.5 Population Age, 2000 and 2010 ............................................................................................... 2-26
Table 2.6 Race/Ethnicity, 2000 and 2010 ................................................................................................ 2-27
Table 2.7 Employment by Industry, 2000 and 2011 ................................................................................ 2-28
Table 2.8 Unemployment in Selected Jurisdictions, 2013 ....................................................................... 2-28
Figure 2.2 Live/Work Balance, 2011 ....................................................................................................... 2-29
Table 2.9 Estimated Travel Distance to Work, 2011 ............................................................................... 2-30
Table 2.10 Travel Time to Work, 2012 ................................................................................................... 2-30
Table 2.11 Household Income by Quartile, 2000 and 2011 .................................................................... 2-31
Table 2.12 State Income Limits for Sonoma County, 2014 ..................................................................... 2-31
Table 2.13 Household Income Category by Tenure, 2010 ...................................................................... 2-32
Table 2.14 Housing Units by Type in Cloverdale, 2000 and 2010 .......................................................... 2-32
Table 2.15 Age of Housing Stock ............................................................................................................ 2-33
Table 2.16 Housing Conditions Survey Results, 2008 ............................................................................ 2-33
Table 2.17 Household Tenure and Vacancy, 2010 .................................................................................. 2-34
Table 2.18 Overcrowded Housing Units, 2010........................................................................................ 2-35
Table 2.19 Listed Rental Prices, 2014 ..................................................................................................... 2-35
Figure 2.3 Median Home Sales Price, 2010 to 2013................................................................................ 2-36
Table 2.20 Maximum Affordable Housing Payments, 2014 ................................................................... 2-37
Table 2.21 Overpayment by Tenure, 2010 .............................................................................................. 2-38
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                              City of Cloverdale
                                                              ii

                                                                                                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table 2.22 Senior Population, 2000 and 2010 ......................................................................................... 2-39
Table 2.23 Elderly Households by Tenure............................................................................................... 2-39
Table 2.24 Senior Household Income, 2011 ............................................................................................ 2-40
Table 2.25 Care Facilities for Seniors and/or Disabled Persons .............................................................. 2-40
Table 2.26 Persons with a Disability, 2000 ............................................................................................. 2-41
Table 2.27 Disabilities by Type and Age, 2000 ....................................................................................... 2-41
Table 2.28 Developmentally Disabled Residents by Age, 2014 .............................................................. 2-42
Table 2.29 Household Size by Tenure, 2010 ........................................................................................... 2-43
Table 2.30 Assisted Housing Developments in Cloverdale ..................................................................... 2-46
Table 2.31 2014–2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................................................................... 2-47
Table 2.32 Capacity to Meet the 2014–2022 RHNA ............................................................................... 2-48
Figure 2.4 Residential Land Inventory .................................................................................................... 2-49
Table 2.33 Planned or Approved Residential Projects............................................................................. 2-50
Table 2.34 Vacant Land Inventory .......................................................................................................... 2-52
Table 2.35 Underutilized Land Inventory ................................................................................................ 2-54
Table 2.36 General Plan Land Use Designations Allowing Residential Development ........................... 2-58
Table 2.37 Residential Development Standards by Zoning District ........................................................ 2-59
Table 2.38 Residential Parking Requirements ......................................................................................... 2-60
Table 2.39 Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District ........................................................................ 2-62
Table 2.40 Typical City Permit Process and Timelines ........................................................................... 2-66
Table 2.41 Planning Fees ......................................................................................................................... 2-67
Table 2.42 Development Impact Fees, 2014............................................................................................ 2-68
Table 2.43 Estimated Construction Costs ................................................................................................ 2-71
Table 2.44 Interest Rates, 2013................................................................................................................ 2-72
City of Cloverdale                                                                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                                    iii


                                                                             CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
Chapter 1. Housing Program
1.1 Housing Program
This 2015-2023 Cloverdale Housing Element establishes a program              to address the housing needs of
Cloverdale residents at all socioeconomic levels. The Housing Element        is intended to coordinate with the
City’s economic development programs by encouraging housing for               people who work in Cloverdale
businesses and to coordinate with the City’s greenhouse gas reduction        goals by reducing in-commute by
people who are employed in Cloverdale.
A primary intent of the Housing Element is to provide a range of opportunities so that young adults leaving
home do not have to leave Cloverdale because of housing costs; parents and grandparents can move to
Cloverdale to join their families; households find affordable housing that is appropriate for their needs and
lifestyle preferences; and special needs households are incorporated into the community.
Housing Goals
Goal H-1         Conserve and improve the existing housing stock to provide adequate, safe, and
                 decent housing for all Cloverdale residents.
Goal H-2         Provide housing for all economic segments of the community.
Goal H-3         Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special housing needs such
                 as the elderly, disabled, large families, farmworkers, homeless persons, households
                 with extremely-low to moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
Goal H-4         Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender, age, sexual
                 orientation, marital status or national origin.
Goal H-5         Ensure public participation in the development of the City’s housing policies.
Goal H-6         Promote effective and efficient land use in meeting housing needs, including
                 consideration of energy and natural resource conservation, and green building
                 technologies.
Housing Goals, Policies, and Implementation Programs
Goal H-1         Conserve and improve the existing housing stock to provide adequate, safe, and
                 decent housing for all Cloverdale residents.
Policy H-1.1         Housing Rehabilitation. Facilitate the rehabilitation, improvement, and preservation of
                     existing housing in Cloverdale.
     IP-1.1.1             Rehabilitation/Preservation Program. Continue to partner with the Sonoma
                          County Housing Rehabilitation Program to provide low-interest rehabilitation loans
                          for homes and mobile homes owned or occupied by lower and moderate-income
                          households. Facilitate citizen awareness of the rehabilitation loan program by:
                              a. making pamphlets on this program available at City Hall and at the public
                                  library;
City of Cloverdale                                                                     2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                        1-1

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                           b. providing program information to neighborhood groups in older residential
                                areas and mobile home parks;
                           c. posting program information on the City’s website; and
                           d. providing program information in the process of building code enforcement.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development and Building
                                                     Departments
                       Funding:                      CDBG
                       Time frame:                   Ongoing; contact neighborhood groups and mobile home
                                                     parks periodically, provide information on the City’s
                                                     website by 2015 and update as needed.
    IP-1.1.2           Capital Improvement Program. Review and recommend projects in the City's
                       Capital Improvement Program (CIP) that will maintain and improve the City’s older
                       residential neighborhoods as well as projects that will facilitate opportunities for infill
                       and transit-oriented housing.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development and Public Works
                                                     Departments
                       Financing:                    General Fund
                       Time frame:                   Annually
Policy H-1.2       Mobile Home Parks. Encourage the preservation and maintenance of the community’s
                   three existing mobile home parks.
    IP-1.2.1           Mobile Home Park Maintenance. Specifically advertise the availability of home
                       rehabilitation loans to mobile home owners through the program described in IP-
                       1.1.1. Encourage residents utilizing program funds to include an Earthquake
                       Reinforced Bracing System (ERBS) to help stabilize the dwelling during an
                       earthquake in the rehabilitation work.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community       Development       and    Building
                                                     Departments
                       Funding:                      CDBG
                       Time frame:                   Ongoing; advertise the program to mobile home owners
                                                     directly periodically
Policy H-1.3       Preserve existing affordable housing. To the maximum extent possible, retain
                   permanent or long-term affordability for existing income-restricted affordable owner and
                   rental housing units at risk of conversion to market rate housing.
    IP-1.3.1           Preservation of affordable housing. Monitor the existing stock of affordable units
                       and work proactively to retain these units. As appropriate, partner with nonprofit
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                      1-2

                                                                            CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                       housing organizations, including developers and community land trusts, to preserve
                       and rehabilitate affordable units. Require permanent or a minimum 55-year
                       affordability for units that receive City funding.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       Inclusionary housing funds, state and federal housing
                                                      programs
                       Time frame:                    Ongoing; monitor units annually
    IP-1.3.2           Funding. To the maximum extent possible, leverage City funds 10:1 in preservation
                       projects ($1 in City spending provides $10 in total housing benefit).
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       General Fund, Inclusionary housing fund
                       Time frame:                    Ongoing, as funding requests are considered
Goal H-2        Provide housing for all economic segments of the community.
Policy H-2.1       Regional Housing Needs. Ensure that adequate residentially designated land is available
                   to accommodate the City’s share of the regional housing need.
    IP-2.1.1           Monitoring. The City will monitor the supply of residential land to ensure sufficient
                       developable land is available for single-family and multifamily residential
                       development. If, at any time, the supply of sites zoned for multifamily housing falls
                       below the quantity of land required to accommodate the City’s remaining need for
                       higher density multifamily housing, the City will initiate General Plan Amendments
                       and/or rezonings to provide additional land.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       General Fund
                       Time frame:                    Ongoing as sites are developed
    IP-2.1.2           Infill Development. Wherever appropriate, the City will grant flexibility to
                       encourage development on infill parcels using the tools currently provided within the
                       Zoning Ordinance (PUD permits, density bonus, and second residential unit
                       ordinance). This can be applied on a case-by-case basis in tandem with required
                       discretionary review permits.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department,
                                                      Planning Commission, City Council
                       Funding:                       General Fund
                       Time frame:                    Ongoing; as development projects are proposed
City of Cloverdale                                                                 2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                       1-3

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
    IP-2.1.3           Opportunity Sites. Pending resolution of the dissolution of the Redevelopment
                       Agency, the City will initiate development on its Thyme Square and Cherry Creek
                       sites. The process would include initiating requests for proposals and seeking
                       developer partners to realize the vision for these properties as established in planning
                       efforts and past development initiatives. In addition, the City will continue to pursue
                       grants and other funding to improve connectivity to the planned SMART station site
                       and emphasize residential development opportunity on nearby sites.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                      General Fund
                       Time frame:                   Development on City owned sites pending resolution of
                                                     state review of former Redevelopment Agency assets;
                                                     pursue grants and other funding on an ongoing basis as
                                                     funds are made available
Policy H-2.2       Inclusionary Housing. Update the inclusionary housing program to reflect legal
                   requirements and best practices.
    IP-2.2.1           Inclusionary Housing Ordinance. Revise the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance to
                       improve clarity regarding requirements and program administration and address
                       recent court decisions regarding inclusionary zoning. Examine the appropriateness
                       and potential impacts of making fee payment the primary method of compliance and
                       establish a regular time frame for updates to the in-lieu fee schedule.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                      General Fund
                       Time frame:                   2015
Policy H-2.3       Large-Scale Non-Residential Projects. Consider the impacts on housing demand of
                   large-scale commercial, industrial, and office projects.
    IP-2.3.1           Housing Impacts of Employment-Generating Uses. Consider preparing a study to
                       examine the nexus between the development of large-scale office, commercial, and
                       industrial projects on the need for affordable housing. Identify the housing impacts of
                       these projects and the potential demand for new housing. If a nexus is found,
                       consider adopting an impact fee to generate funds to be used to mitigate the impacts
                       and assist in the development of affordable housing.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                      General Fund
                       Time frame:                   Complete nexus study by 2017
Policy H-2.4       Second Dwelling Units. Continue to facilitate the construction of second dwelling units.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                      1-4

                                                                            CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
    IP-2.4.1           Second Dwelling Units. Promote the development of second units as a source of
                       lower-cost rental housing and a potential income source for home owners. Provide
                       informational brochures regarding second unit opportunities and requirements at City
                       Hall and on the City’s website.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       General Fund
                       Time frame:                    Complete and post a brochure by 2015
Policy H-2.5       Manufactured Housing. Allow the placement of manufactured housing units on
                   permanent foundations in residential zoning districts.
    IP-2.5.1           Manufactured Housing. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate manufactured
                       homes as a separate use and clarify that manufactured homes on permanent
                       foundations are subject to the same level of review and development standards as
                       conventional single-family homes, in compliance with state law.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       General Fund
                       Time frame:                    2015
Policy H-2.6       Mitigate Development Constraints. Address and mitigate, as appropriate, regulatory
                   constraints to facilitate the development of housing affordable to lower- and moderate-
                   income households.
    IP-2.6.1           Flexible Parking Options. The City will continue to allow and encourage shared
                       parking and allow both on-site and/or off-site provision of required spaces. In
                       addition, the City will review and consider revising its shared parking program within
                       the downtown commercial core to maximize the potential for mixed use
                       development.
                       Responsibility:                Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                       General Fund
                       Time frame:                    Ongoing, as projects are proposed; review by 2015
    IP-2.6.2           Development Impact Fees. The City shall review its current development impact fee
                       program to confirm the appropriate level of impact fees to charge for multifamily
                       residential units and second units based on the demand they create for public
                       facilities and infrastructure. Where justified, the City shall consider reducing fees for
                       multifamily units, second units, co-housing, and self-help housing units to encourage
                       their construction. The City shall consider deferring the payment of development
                       impact fees for projects that include affordable housing or reducing fees for lower-
                       income housing on a sliding scale related to the level of affordability. The City shall
                       also consider adopting a sliding-scale fee depending on the size of the unit or
                       “locking” fees to the time of approval.
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                      1-5

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                       Responsibility:             Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                    General Fund
                       Time frame:                 Complete review by 2016 (during the next impact fee
                                                   review)
Goal H-3       Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special housing needs
               including the elderly, disabled, large families, farmworkers, homeless persons,
               households with extremely-low to moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
Policy H-3.1       Available Funding Sources. Utilize County, State and federal programs and other
                   funding sources that provide housing opportunities for extremely low-, very low-, low-,
                   and moderate-income households and special needs households.
    IP-3.1.1           Funding Sources. Assist housing developers in identifying opportunities to finance
                       affordable housing intended for occupancy by household with special needs,
                       particularly extremely low-income households, seniors, disabled and
                       developmentally disabled persons, farmworkers, and homeless persons. Funding
                       sources may include:
                          Rural Development Loan Program financed by the State Department of Housing
                           and Community Development (HCD).
                          Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds.
                          Mortgage Revenue Bond Program through the CHFA. The City can issue
                           revenue bonds on behalf of affordable housing developers or work with
                           developers to secure these bonds.
                          Housing Enables by Local Partnerships Program (HELP) operated by the CHFA.
                          HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME).
                       The City will promote use of these funds by listing potential funding sources on its
                       website and planning staff will inform housing developers of these funding
                       possibilities.
                       Responsibility:             Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                    General Fund
                       Time frame:                 Annually review and disseminate information on
                                                   funding opportunities; assist developers on an ongoing
                                                   basis as notices of funding availability are issued and/or
                                                   as development projects are proposed.
    IP-3.1.2           Housing Fund. Maintain the City’s housing fund, with contributions collected from
                       private and public sources, including the in-lieu inclusionary housing fees to
                       implement and/or supplement the City's housing programs. Use the Housing Fund to
                       make housing available to extremely low to moderate-income Cloverdale residents.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                    1-6

                                                                           CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development and Finance
                                                     Departments
                       Funding:                      Housing Fund
                       Time frame:                   Fund maintenance ongoing; allocate funds as projects
                                                     are proposed
Policy H-3.2       Senior Housing. Continue to allow senior housing projects to be developed with
                   requirements less stringent than those specified in the Zoning Ordinance, where found to
                   be consistent with maintaining the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Maintain a
                   requirement for sidewalks for senior housing projects.
    IP-3.2.1           Senior Housing. Continue to permit senior housing developments for persons aged
                       55 and over, with reduced parking and flexibility in the application of other
                       requirements.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department,
                                                     Planning Commission, City Council
                       Funding:                      General Fund
                       Time frame:                   Ongoing, implement as projects are proposed
Policy H-3.3       Large Families. Encourage the development of housing appropriate for large families.
    IP-3.3.1           Grant Funding. Continue to work with developers to apply for HOME grants or
                       Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds specifically to accommodate
                       large families.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                      General Fund, HOME, CDBG
                       Time frame:                   Ongoing, implement as projects are proposed
Policy H-3.4       Housing for the Disabled. Continue to facilitate barrier-free housing in new
                   development.
IP-3.4.1           Sonoma Developmental Center. Monitor the potential closing of the Sonoma
                   Developmental Center, a large group care facility for persons with developmental
                   disabilities, and coordinate with the North Bay Regional Center, other local jurisdictions,
                   and housing and service providers to provide support and assistance with the relocation
                   of former residents, as needed.
                       Responsibility:               Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                      Housing fund
                       Time frame:                   Monitor annually or as information becomes available;
                                                     provide support and assistance as needed.
City of Cloverdale                                                                 2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                      1-7

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
Policy H-3.5       Homeless Housing and Services. Monitor and work to address the housing needs of
                   homeless persons in the community.
    IP-3.5.1           Emergency Housing Demand. Continue to consult with the Cloverdale Police
                       Department and homeless providers in the community to maintain ongoing estimates
                       of the demand for emergency housing in the City.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing, consult quarterly or as appropriate
    IP-3.5.2           Inter-Agency Cooperation. Continue to work with private, county, and State
                       agencies to provide emergency housing for the homeless.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing, attend meetings and events as scheduled
Policy H-3.6       Farmworker Housing. Promote improved housing conditions for farmworker
                   households and the construction of additional farmworker housing.
    IP-3.6.1           Regional Coordination. Work closely with Sonoma County representatives to
                       address farmworker housing needs and coordinate the construction of farm worker
                       housing in the community. Actively participate in Countywide committees and task
                       forces to identify funding solutions such as a housing assessment.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Coordinate with Sonoma County at least twice yearly;
                                                    attend committee and/or task force meetings as
                                                    scheduled.
    IP-3.6.2           Application Assistance. Provide technical assistance to developers seeking to
                       provide affordable units for farm workers in the City. Assist developers in the
                       preparation of funding applications to the Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant
                       program and other appropriate funding sources.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing; as development projects are proposed
Goal H-4       Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender, age, sexual
               orientation, marital status or national origin.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                     1-8

                                                                           CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
Policy H-4.1       Equal Housing Opportunity. Continue to promote equal access to housing for all
                   persons in Cloverdale.
    IP-4.1.1           Fair Housing Information. Promote equal housing opportunity by providing and
                       distributing information regarding fair housing laws and resources to the public at
                       City Hall, the public library, social service centers, public transit providers, and on
                       the City’s website.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing; distribute information annually
    IP-4.1.2           Discrimination Complaint Processing. Establish and document a City procedure
                       for investigating and appropriately handling housing discrimination complaints.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  2016
    IP-4.1.3           Nondiscrimination Clause. Continue to provide nondiscrimination clauses in rental
                       agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City assistance.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund, housing fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing, as developments are proposed and receive City
                                                    assistance
Goal H-5        Ensure public participation in the development of the City’s housing policies.
Policy H-5.1       Public Participation. Continue to encourage and facilitate public participation in the
                   formulation and review of the City's housing and development policies.
    IP-5.1.1           Housing Element Update. Continue to hold public hearings to discuss proposed
                       revisions to the City’s Housing Element.
                       Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                       Funding:                     General Fund
                       Time frame:                  Ongoing until adoption of the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                    Element
Policy H-5.2       Annual Review of Housing Element Implementation. Annually review the City’s
                   progress in implementing Housing Element programs and achieving housing goals.
City of Cloverdale                                                                 2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                     1-9

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
    IP-5.2.1            Annual Report. Prepare an annual report that describes the amount and type of
                        housing constructed and housing-related activities for review by the Planning
                        Commission and the City Council and submittal to the California Department of
                        Housing and Community Development.
                        Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                     General Fund
                        Time frame:                  Annually
Goal H-6       Promote effective and efficient land use when meeting housing needs, including
               consideration of energy and natural resources conservation, and green building
               technologies.
Policy H-6.1       Energy Use and Conservation. Encourage the reduction of energy use and the
                   conservation of natural resources in the development of housing through implementation
                   of the State Energy Conservation Standards.
    IP-6.1.1            Education and Information. Develop informational materials for dissemination to
                        developers and project designers during the initial stages of project design and
                        review. These materials may include, but not be limited to, passive solar planning
                        through subdivision, lot and structure orientation, protection of solar access, and
                        application of passive and active energy saving features. The City shall also review
                        its land use regulations and subdivision ordinance and where appropriate add
                        provisions which promote and/or require energy conservation planning as a factor in
                        project approval.
                        Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                     General Fund
                        Time frame:                  Develop informational materials by 2016; review
                                                     regulations annually
Policy H-6.2       Energy Efficiency Standards. Ensure that all new residential development meets or
                   exceeds the standards contained in Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations
                   (Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings), and
                   encourage the retrofitting of existing development to improve energy and conservation.
    IP-6.2.1            Green Building. The City should support Green Building standards which aim to
                        support a sustainable community by incorporating green building measures into the
                        design, constructions, and maintenance of new buildings. The City will also work
                        with stakeholders to develop a list of incentives that will help developers meet
                        mandatory green building standards.
                        Responsibility:              Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                     General Fund
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                     1-10

                                                                              CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                        Time frame:                     List of potential development incentives by 2016;
                                                        ongoing
Policy H-6.3       Reduction of Vehicle Use. Encourage a development pattern that helps reduce vehicle
                   miles traveled and promotes transit ridership as well as pedestrian and bicycle access.
    IP-6.3.1            Public Transit. Work with local and regional public transit providers and developers
                        to encourage housing development located in close proximity to public transit
                        facilities, particularly on sites located within close proximity to the planned SMART
                        station. Incorporate development features that facilitate bicycle and pedestrian access
                        and networking in project design.
                        Responsibility:                 Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                        General Fund
                        Time frame:                     Ongoing and as projects are proposed
    IP-6.3.2            Housing Preferences. Require that developers utilize City workforce housing
                        preferences in the sale of below market rate homes to improve local affordable
                        housing opportunities for those that work and/or live in Cloverdale.
                        Responsibility:                 Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                        General Fund
                        Time frame:                     Ongoing and as projects are proposed
Policy H-6.4       Infrastructure and Public Services. Ensure adequate infrastructure and public services
                   are in place to serve existing and planned residential development.
    IP-6.4.1            Capital Improvement Program. The City shall continue to update and implement
                        its five-year Capital Improvement Program to guide development of public facilities
                        required by new residential demand and to improve existing facilities in need of
                        upgrading. The City will continue to implement facilities master plans to increase
                        water and sewer processing capacity.
                        Responsibility:                 Planning/Community Development Department
                        Funding:                        General Fund
                        Time frame:                     Annually; implementation of facilities improvements
                                                        ongoing
Policy H-6.5       Water and Sewer Services. Consistent with State Law, first priority for water and sewer
                   hook-ups shall be given to developments that help meet the community’s share of the
                   regional need for lower-income housing.
    IP-6.5.1            Water Provisions for Lower-Income Households. The City’s urban water
                        management plans shall include projected water use for single-family and
                        multifamily housing needed for lower-income households.
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                        1-11

CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
                      Responsibility: Planning/Community Development Department
                      Funding:        General Fund
                      Time frame:     As management plans are updated
2015–2023 Housing Element                                              City of Cloverdale
                                      1-12

                                                                                        CHAPTER 1. HOUSING PROGRAM
1.2 Quantified Objectives
Based on the policies and actions outlined above, the following objectives represent a reasonable expectation
of the maximum number of new housing units that will be developed, rehabilitated or conserved and the
number of households that will be assisted over the next five years. Table 1.1 illustrates the City’s realistic
expectations for development during the planning period.
                                        Table 1.1 Quantified Objectives, 2015-2023
                                          Extremely      Very                                    Above
                                                                     Low      Moderate                         TOTAL
                                             Low          Low                                   Moderate
        New Construction1                     19           20         29           31              112          211
        Rehabilitation2                       16           16         16           40               40          128
        Preservation3                                  275                                   --                 275
        Total                                 35           36         45           71              152          614
        1. New construction objectives are based on the 2014-2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
        2. Rehabilitation objectives are based upon programs for rehabilitation; mobile home park maintenance
        and earthquake reinforced bracing; and home owner initiative (for moderate and above moderate).
        3. Preservation objectives are based on the goal of retaining the City’s entire existing affordable housing
        stock.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                            1-13


                                                                           CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Chapter 2. Housing Assessment
2.1. Introduction
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance and the
early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California family is a priority
of the highest order.” Government and the private sector must make a coordinated effort to provide a diversity
of housing opportunity and accommodate Cloverdale’s share of the region’s housing needs. The City’s
housing goals must be pursued within the constraints of today’s housing market while balancing concerns
about design, conservation, and public services.
This chapter analyzes population and housing growth, employment and income trends, existing housing
characteristics and affordability, and special housing needs. In addition, the chapter provides analysis of land
and programmatic resources for housing development as well as potential governmental and non-
governmental constraints to housing development. The analysis in this chapter was used, in part, as a basis to
establish the goals, policies, and implementation programs stated in Chapter 1.
2.1.1 Community Context
Cloverdale is the northernmost city in Sonoma County in the Alexander Valley. Figure 2.1 provides a
location map of Cloverdale. The city encompasses approximately 2.5 square miles. Incorporated in 1872,
Cloverdale maintains a historic character, and in recent planning efforts, the community has expressed a
desire to retain the small-town feel and natural beauty.
The city’s main street, Cloverdale Boulevard, served as Highway 101 until a bypass was constructed in 1995.
Most residential development is located to the west of Highway 101.
City of Cloverdale                                                                    2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                       2-1

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                            Figure 2.1. Location Map of Cloverdale
2015–2023 Housing Element                                          City of Cloverdale
                                               2-2

                                                                        CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.1.2 General Plan Consistency
The City of Cloverdale General Plan was adopted in 2009 and amended in 2010. In addition to the Housing
Element, the General Plan includes seven elements: Land Use, Circulation, Noise, Parks and Recreation,
Conservation, Design, and Open Space, Urban Lighting, and Public Health and Safety. The General Plan was
reviewed and the goals, policies, and programs outlined in this Housing Element were found to be consistent
with the other elements of the General Plan. The City will review this Housing Element to ensure continued
consistency throughout the planning period as amendments are proposed to other elements of the General
Plan.
The City is aware of Senate Bill (SB) 244 (2011) and Assembly Bill (AB) 162 (2007). SB 244 requires that
cities examine the existence and potential housing needs of unincorporated disadvantaged communities
located within or adjacent to the city’s sphere of influence and incorporate an analysis of any such
communities into the general plan land use element. The City of Cloverdale received information from the
Local Agency Formation Commission of Sonoma County confirming that there are no disadvantaged
unincorporated communities within or near Cloverdale’s sphere of influence. AB 162 requires all cities and
counties to amend the safety and conservation elements of their general plan to include analysis and policies
regarding flood hazards and management.
2.1.3 Community Participation
The City engaged the public in the development of this Housing Element through a workshop, consultations,
and public hearings. Information and a draft Housing Element were made available on the City’s website.
Meeting notifications and materials were posted in both English and Spanish.
City staff developed and maintained an extensive list of stakeholders and interested parties that were notified
of opportunities for participation and key milestones in the update process. The list included organizations
representing a wide range of socioeconomic segments of the community and included (but was not limited to)
the Building Industry Association, Burbank Housing, Cloverdale Community Outreach Committee, Chamber
of Commerce, Clearwater Homes, Community Housing Sonoma County, Eden Housing, Faith Based Housing
Coalition, Greenbelt Alliance, Habitat for Humanity Sonoma County, Sonoma County Housing Advocacy
Group, Housing Land Trust of Sonoma County, MLB Homes, North Bay Association of Realtors, North Bay
Regional Center, Sonoma County Farm Bureau, and Sonoma County Homeless Task Force.
Community Workshop
The City held a joint Planning Commission and City Council community workshop on April 19, 2014, to
provide information on the Housing Element and the update process, present initial findings regarding
housing needs in the community, discuss current housing resources, and review implementation of the 2007–
2014 Housing Element. The workshop was attended by Planning Commission and City Council members as
well as approximately 10 residents and representatives of local organizations. Organizations represented
included the Cloverdale Community Outreach Committee and the Greenbelt Alliance.
Following is a summary of comments:
Housing Needs and Challenges
 There is a need for housing for veterans. Assistance may be available through Veterans Affairs
     Supportive Housing program (VASH) vouchers.
    Landlords can be an issue when using rental assistance programs. Discrimination has also been an issue
     for persons with disabilities.
City of Cloverdale                                                                 2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                     2-3

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
   There is a need for housing appropriate for disabled persons. Units should be on the ground floor and one
    level.
   Numbers used and provided by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) for the Regional
    Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), projections, and development of Plan Bay Area are problematic. The
    methodology is unclear.
   Include all available detail regarding the race and ethnicity of Cloverdale residents.
   The rental market in Cloverdale is very tight (low vacancy rate) and the monthly rent price numbers
    initially presented seem too low. The for-sale housing market is difficult due to a lack of inventory.
   Rental housing can be particularly difficult for single women, especially single women with kids.
   Many young families are renting, rather than buying. This is putting pressure on the rental market. Often
    these families are waiting to buy due to student loan debt.
   Homelessness is an issue. Many homeless in Cloverdale are transient, and transportation service for those
    headed north is very limited.
   Farmworker housing needs to be addressed. Many are living in unsafe and overcrowded conditions. This
    population is often undercounted. It is estimated that there may be an additional “hidden” city population
    of approximately 5 percent.
   Access to financing has been difficult for developers. It has been a big challenge to build, and it will be
    important to engage developers to provide new housing.
Opportunities
 Encourage the inclusion of gardens in low-income housing developments where residents can grow their
    own food.
   Look at options for deferring or amortizing fees to make development more feasible.
   Take advantage of potential funding for veterans housing.
   Cloverdale needs a holistic approach that takes transit, jobs, and schools into account when planning for
    housing. The quality of schools is a big factor for families when selecting among housing options.
   The city has a very low crime rate. This should be advertised when trying to attract potential residents,
    housing developers, and businesses.
Consultations
The City held consultations with key stakeholder organizations to solicit information regarding housing needs
and opportunities. Organizations included the North Bay Regional Center, Housing Land Trust of Sonoma
County, North Bay Association of Realtors, Cloverdale Community Outreach Committee (CCOC), and
California Human Development. In addition, the City communicated with the Sonoma County Community
Development Commission to discuss programs, including housing rehabilitation loans, homebuyer assistance
programs, and Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                      City of Cloverdale
                                                        2-4

                                                                           CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
North Bay Regional Center
The Housing Element consultant met in person with representatives from the North Bay Regional Center on
December 31, 2013, to learn more about the center’s offerings and to better understand the special housing
needs of persons with developmental disabilities in the community. The center serves approximately 8,500
clients in the counties of Sonoma, Napa, and Solano. It offers a voluntary service to clients who become
disabled before age 18 throughout their life span.
Representatives noted that children with developmental disabilities typically live at home (although group
homes serve those with more severe needs) and many of their needs are met through school system programs.
Adults have a greater need for assistance, and support provided may include housing, work programs, and day
programs.
The center works with housing assistance providers such as the North Bay Housing Coalition and the West
Bay Housing Coalition, who interface directly with clients and families to identify appropriate housing.
Finding homes can be very difficult and affordability is a major issue, as most clients have very limited
incomes. The center and housing providers generally prefer smaller-scale, scattered-site housing solutions in
which clients can be a part of an existing neighborhood and community. Most housing is rental units, and
finding landlords who are willing to work with the center’s housing providers is problematic, particularly in
the current housing market.
To facilitate housing opportunities for persons with developmental disabilities, the North Bay Regional
Center indicates that cities can encourage greater accessibility to units (the center is supportive of universal
design) and encourage greater housing opportunities in proximity to public transportation and services and
amenities.
Housing Land Trust of Sonoma County
The Housing Element consultant spoke to a representative of the Housing Land Trust of Sonoma County
(HLTSC) on May 22, 2014, to learn more about HLTSC’s programs and discuss needs and opportunities in
Cloverdale. HLTSC works to increase homeownership opportunities for low- and moderate-income families
in Sonoma County and to establish homes that are permanently affordable. These homes stabilize housing
costs and can make it feasible for families to live in the cities in which they work, rather than commuting
from a home in a more affordable location. This contributes to better quality of life, and the availability of
affordable homes can help attract employers to a community.
HLTSC worked with the City of Cloverdale to develop a home in Ioli Ranch and is interested in working
closely with the City to provide additional affordable homes. HLTSC can work with developers to build new
homes or can purchase and rehabilitate existing homes. A strong model that has been successful in many
communities is for HLTSC to work closely with developers who are required to provide affordable units in
compliance with an inclusionary ordinance. HLTSC can market, sell, and administer these homes, relieving
developers and City staff from a potentially burdensome process.
HLTSC would like the City to include policies and programs to utilize the land trust model in the preservation
of affordable units at risk of converting to market rate, stewardship of existing affordable homes, and in
housing development, particularly to assist developers in complying with inclusionary housing requirements.
North Bay Association of Realtors
The Housing Element consultant spoke to a representative from the North Bay Association of Realtors
(NorBAR) on June 18, 2014, to discuss the Cloverdale housing market and potential policies and programs.
NorBAR encourages provisions for housing in a wide variety of types and a diverse array of programs to
assist with housing development.
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                      2-5

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
NorBAR suggested encouraging the development of second units to provide additional housing opportunities,
addressing farmworker housing through the use of special funding sources and provisions for single-room
occupancy (SRO) units, and encouraged the City to monitor fees to ensure they are consistent with area norms
so as not to discourage housing development in Cloverdale.
NorBAR noted that jurisdictions throughout the North Bay face a difficult housing market due to the lack of
housing starts in recent years, resulting in demand that outpaces supply. The inventory of homes for sale is
low throughout Sonoma County. These market conditions are likely to continue and are likely to shift only
when interest rates increase and new homes become available for purchase.
Cloverdale Community Outreach Committee
The Housing Element consultant spoke to a representative from CCOC on June 18, 2014, to discuss the
organization’s services and facilities, learn more about homeless needs in the community, and obtain
feedback on policies and programs that may improve homeless resources for the new planning period. CCOC
operates four shelter beds and six transitional housing beds, and nine supportive housing units in Cloverdale,
as well as two affordable homes for low-income families through the Neighborhood Stabilization Program.
While demand for emergency housing is somewhat seasonal (people are more likely to seek shelter beds in
the winter rather than camping or otherwise finding a place to sleep), CCOC’s facilities consistently operate at
100 percent occupancy, with typical wait times of six months.
CCOC participates in the homeless count coordinated by Sonoma County every two years and notes that
demand has been relatively steady in recent years. CCOC representatives are aware of typical places where
homeless persons camp or sleep (by the creek and in outlying areas) and estimate that long-term inhabitants of
Sonoma County comprise a large percentage of the counted population; however, CCOC noted that a small
percentage is a transient population moving through the area, staying only for a short term.
The majority of homeless persons are single adult males with chronic substance abuse and mental health
issues. Few families seek shelter housing from CCOC. Wallace House, CCOC’s shelter facility, does not
typically see requests for shelter from farmworkers. This is likely due to cultural differences and language
barriers. Some farmworker families do utilize CCOC’s food programs. In addition, CCOC is working to reach
the Spanish-speaking population through a new Spanish-speaking volunteer.
CCOC is looking to expand and provide additional beds. They would like to double their capacity, possibly
by moving forward with redevelopment plans for the Cherry Creek motel site. If possible, CCOC would set
aside 10 of the potential new units for supportive housing and manage the others, using rental income to fund
programs.
Funding is the greatest challenge for CCOC. The organization lost annual funding from the City due to the
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency. In addition to funding, CCOC would like to see greater
coordination and improved communication with Sonoma County to address homelessness and housing issues.
California Human Development
The Housing Element consultant spoke to a representative from California Human Development (CHD) on
June 23, 2014, to discuss the organization’s mission and services, learn more about farmworker housing needs
in the community, and obtain feedback on policies and programs that may improve farmworker resources for
the new planning period. CHD provides a variety of services for farmworkers, immigrants, and other special
needs groups, including employment and training, youth services, and housing. CHD is in the process of
developing a 29-unit farmworker housing project just north of Santa Rosa.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                      2-6

                                                                        CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
CHD noted that obtaining data and statistics in order to fully understand farmworker housing needs is
difficult. Based on demand for this information during the recent Housing Element update cycle, the CHD
representative noted that CHD is looking at opportunities to prepare a more comprehensive needs assessment
for Sonoma County.
CHD emphasized that housing for farmworkers is needed in a wide range of types because farmworker needs
can vary dramatically. There is a need for seasonal housing for single workers, temporary family housing,
long-term affordable rental housing, and affordable options for home ownership for families that reside
permanently in local communities.
In general, opportunities that are created to serve lower-income households will also be appropriate for
farmworkers and farmworker families. These may include single-room occupancy units, secondary rental
units, multi-family rental housing, and home ownership housing. Housing that will assist in addressing
farmworker needs does not necessarily need to be specifically developed and limited only to this population.
Housing providers should look at the wide range of funding opportunities available and leverage any available
sources, including USDA 514 and 516 programs with rental subsidies, as well as tax credits, bonds, and other
state and federal funding sources.
Public Hearings
The City conducted three public hearings as part of the Housing Element update process. The first was a
Planning Commission hearing held on July 16, 2014, to present the draft Housing Element for preliminary
approval prior to submitting the draft for review by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD).
Following HCD’s review and confirmation that the Housing Element had earned conditional compliance, the
Housing Element was presented to the Planning Commission (November 5, 2014) and City Council
(December 10, 2014) for review and adoption. Hearings were noticed in the Cloverdale Reveille and on the
City’s website, and notification was provided to individuals and organizations on the Housing Element
interest list.
City of Cloverdale                                                                2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                     2-7

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.2. Review of the 2009 Housing Element
The City’s 2009 Housing Element established goals, policies, and implementation programs for the 2007 to
2014 planning period. This section provides an overview of key accomplishments. A review of the progress in
implementing each program is provided in Table 2.1.
A total of 42 residential units were constructed in Cloverdale from 2007 to 2013. Among these, four were
deed restricted for affordability to low- and moderate-income households. The actual number of units
constructed was well below the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the period. This is
attributable to a high RHNA number (due to statewide population trends at the time) and an economy in
recession. In addition, the City’s ability to assist with the development of new low-income housing was
significantly impacted by the statewide dissolution of redevelopment agencies.
The City worked diligently to implement the 2009 Housing Element. It completed significant planning
efforts, including the adoption of a new General Plan, Station Area/Downtown Plan, and updated Zoning
Ordinance.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                               City of Cloverdale
                                                      2-8

                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                           Table 2.1 Review of 2009 Housing Element Implementation Programs
                                                                                                                                        Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                       Modify/Delete
Goal H-1 Conserve and improve the existing housing supply to provide adequate, safe, and decent housing for all Cloverdale
residents.
IP-1.1.1   Rehabilitation/Preservation Program: Continue coordination with the Sonoma          While low-interest rehabilitation      Continue
           County Housing Rehabilitation Program providing low interest loans for the          loans remained available to lower-
           rehabilitation of homes and mobile homes owned or occupied by very-low to           income households throughout the
           moderate-income households. Facilitate citizen awareness of the rehabilitation      planning period through Sonoma
           loan program by a) making pamphlets on this program available at City Hall and      County, no loans were issued to
           at the public library; b) contacting neighborhood groups in older residential       Cloverdale residents during the
           areas with this information; and c) continuing building code enforcement in         planning period.
           cooperation with the Building Department.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: Program is funded by CDBG grants.
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-1.1.2   Target Areas: Identify target areas where housing rehabilitation is most needed     The City completed a survey of         Delete
           based upon the 2008 survey of housing conditions and direct publicity for the       housing     conditions    in    2008.
           joint County/City rehabilitation program to those areas.                            However, due to limited staff
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                 resources, steps were not taken to
                                                                                               identify target areas for publicizing
           Financing: City
                                                                                               the availability of rehabilitation
           Scheduling: Identify target areas and direct publicity to those areas starting July programs.
           2009 to anticipate September 2009 CDBG funding availability. (Ongoing in
           subsequent years.)
IP-1.1.3   Capital Improvement Program: Provide for annual review by the Planning              The City adopted its Capital           Continue
           Commission and City Council of the City's Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to      Improvement Program in February
           determine what special priorities are needed for capital improvement projects       2011 for the 2010 to 2014 fiscal
           required to maintain the community's older residential neighborhoods. Review of     years. The program identifies
           the CIP shall also include verification that areas needing improvement are          important improvements to facilities
           scheduled for funding to address these needs at a specific time in the future.      and infrastructure that will benefit
           Responsibility: Planning and Public Works Departments                               older residential areas and the City
                                                                                               as a whole.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Annually as an ongoing program
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                          2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                           2-9

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                          Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                            Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                        Modify/Delete
IP-1.2.1 Mobile Home Park Maintenance: Include mobile home parks in the housing             While low-interest rehabilitation         Continue
         rehabilitation programs specified in IP-1.1.1. Ensure that funds obtained for this loans remained available to lower-
         purpose include provisions for mobile home park residents, including an            income mobile home owners
         Earthquake Reinforced Bracing System (ERBS) for mobile homes and other             throughout the planning period
         residential units to help stabilize the dwelling during an earthquake.             through Sonoma County, no loans
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                were issued to Cloverdale residents
                                                                                            during the planning period.
         Financing: Program is funded by CDBG Grants
         Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-1.3.1 Preservation of Affordable Housing: Retain affordability of existing affordable    The City worked with EAH Housing          Continue
         housing. Provide permanent affordability for owner units using the Housing Land    to rehabilitate and preserve the
         Trust. Provide permanent or minimum 55-year affordability for rental units by      affordability of 99 units restricted for
         direct City funding or by financially support state and federal programs that      affordability to low- and very low-
         require a minimum 55 year affordability guarantee.                                 income seniors. The units will remain
         Responsibility: Planning Department and Housing Land Trust                         affordable for a term of 55 years.
         Financing: Redevelopment set-aside funds, inclusionary housing funds, state and
         federal housing programs
         Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-1.3.2 Funding: To the maximum extent possible, leverage City funds 10:1 in               City funding was limited due to the       Continue
         preservation projects ($1 in City spending provides $10 in total housing benefit). loss   of     the    Redevelopment
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                Agency; however, the City has
                                                                                            worked to leverage funds to the
         Financing: City
                                                                                            greatest extent possible.
         Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-1.4.1 Urban water management plans shall include projected water use for single-         The City’s 2010 Water System              Continue
         family and multifamily housing needed for lower-income households.                 Master Plan includes an analysis of
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                water supply needed for residential
                                                                                            uses. The City continues to
         Financing: City
                                                                                            construct improvements to its water
         Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                supply and infrastructure, including
                                                                                            new wells for additional capacity.
                                                                                            However, the plan has not been
                                                                                            revised to specifically address
                                                                                            projected water needs for lower-
                                                                                            income households.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                            City of Cloverdale
                                                                          2-10

                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                         Continue/
                                    Implementation Program                                                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                       Modify/Delete
Goal H-2 Provide housing for all economic segments of the community.
IP-2.1.1   Infill Development: Wherever appropriate, the City shall grant flexibility to allow The City adopted the PUD               Continue
           development on infill parcels using the tools currently provided within the Zoning  Ordinance in 2008 and has utilized
           Ordinance (PUD permits, density bonus, and second residential unit ordinance)       density bonus provisions on an
           where adopted development standards would preclude development                      ongoing basis. An inventory of sites
           feasibility. This program can be applied on a case-by-case basis in tandem with     was made available throughout
           required discretionary review permits. Continue to provide copies of the            the planning period.
           inventory of vacant and underdeveloped land (Appendices B and C) for public
           distribution.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: The City adopted the PUD Ordinance in 2008 and has utilized density
           bonus provisions on an ongoing basis. This will continue. An inventory of sites is
           currently available and will continue to be updated and available.
IP-2.2.1   Mixed Use in the Commercial Districts: Maintain existing zoning which allows a      The      updated      Zoning   Code    Delete;
           maximum density of 20 units per acre above the ground floor and to the rear of a    (adopted        in    2012)    allows  program
           permitted commercial use in the O-R, D-C, G-C, S-C and C-R zoning districts.        multifamily residential above the      completed
           Allow ground floor residential uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit if the      ground floor as a permitted use,
           findings can be made that the residential use does not detract from the primary     subject only to Plot Plan Review, in
           commercial use of the property or interrupt the continuity of business use in a     the DTC, DTS, TOD, and O-R zoning
           commercial area.                                                                    districts and with a Conditional Use
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                 Permit in the G-C zoning district.
                                                                                               First-floor multifamily development
           Financing: City
                                                                                               is permitted (with Plot Plan Review)
           Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                 in the TOD zoning district, allowed
                                                                                               with Conditional Use Permit in the
                                                                                               DTS, O-R, and G-C zoning districts,
                                                                                               and allowed with a PUD in the DTC
                                                                                               zoning district.
                                                                                               Residential        densities      are
                                                                                               determined based on the General
                                                                                               Plan land use category (Exhibit 2.2
                                                                                               of the Land Use Element). All
                                                                                               General Plan commercial land uses
                                                                                               (except Destination Commercial)
                                                                                               allow residential densities of up to
                                                                                               20 units per acre.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                          2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                          2-11

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                                Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                              Modify/Delete
IP 2.2.2 Residential Uses in General Commercial Districts: Revise Section 18.05.020, Intents,       As part of the 2012 Zoning Code         Delete;
         of the Zoning Code, to indicate that residential uses are not discouraged in the           update, the intent of the General       program
         General Commercial district and to delete the reference to the Highway                     Commercial zoning district was          completed
         Commercial district as this classification has been deleted from the General Plan          updated and no longer states that
         as part of the GP Update process.                                                          residential uses are discouraged; it
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                        does not reference the Highway
                                                                                                    Commercial district.
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: 2010
IP-2.3.1 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Revise the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance                  The City updated the Inclusionary       Modify
         requiring below-market rate housing to be included as part of residential projects         Housing Ordinance as part of a
         as follows:                                                                                comprehensive         Zoning    Code
         1) 15 percent of the units in a rental housing project of five or more units shall be      update in 2012. The ordinance
              affordable to very low and low-income households, with low income defined             applies to residential development
              as 70% of AMI.                                                                        projects of 5 or more units. The
                                                                                                    ordinance       establishes  specific
         2) 15 percent of the units in a for-sale project of five or more units shall be            affordable unit requirements and
              affordable to very low to moderate-income households, with moderate                   provides an option for the payment
              income defined as 100% of AMI. Inclusionary units shall be built on site and          of in-lieu fees or land dedication for
              generally equivalent in appearance to market rate units in the project with           certain projects.
              respect to number of bedrooms, exterior appearance, and exterior finish;
              however, alternative unit types, such as duets in a single family area, may be
              used if equivalent appearance standards are met.
         3) Payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership units may be acceptable for projects
              less than 15 units or projects in hillside or estate areas. In-lieu fees shall be the
              15% of the difference in price between a qualified affordable unit and the
              market price of each individual unit. If the calculated or offered in-lieu fee is
              less than $15,000, on site unit shall be required, rather than a fee paid.
         4) The amount of in-lieu fees shall be established by a resolution of the City
              Council and shall be updated by the Planning Commission annually, based
              on the Sonoma County Community Development Commission affordable
              housing and rent limits and utility allowances.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                                                2-12

                                                                                                                    CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                          Continue/
                                      Implementation Program                                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                        Modify/Delete
IP-2.3.2   Standards for Inclusionary Units: Adopt the following minimum standards for           As part of the Zoning Code update     Delete;
           inclusionary housing units:                                                           in 2012, the inclusionary standards   program
               i)  the exterior appearance of inclusionary units shall not be different than for were revised to require that the      completed
                   other units in the housing development of which they are a part; and          exterior appearance of inclusionary
                                                                                                 units be consistent with other units
               ii) inclusionary units shall be dispersed or distributed throughout the
                                                                                                 in the development and that
                   development rather than being concentrated in one portion of the
                                                                                                 inclusionary units be dispersed
                   development.
                                                                                                 throughout the development.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010
IP-2.3.3   Administration of the Inclusionary Housing Program: Revise the Inclusionary           Some updates were made to the         Modify (merge
           Housing Ordinance setting out income guidelines, in-lieu fees, purchase or rent       Inclusionary Housing Ordinance in     with 2.3.1)
           levels, annual per unit compliance monitoring fees, and measures to assure a life-    the update of the Zoning Code.
           of-project affordability of inclusionary units.                                       However, due to limited staff
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                   resources,       the     inclusionary
           Financing: City                                                                       provisions were not fully revised to
                                                                                                 address elements described in this
           Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010
                                                                                                 program.
IP-2.4.1   Housing Impacts of Employment-Generating Uses: Identify housing impacts of            While the City has considered the     Modify
           new commercial, office and industrial development that will generate a                potential housing impacts of
           significant amount of housing demand as part of the development review                proposed new commercial, office,
           process and consider requirement of the appropriate mitigating measures as            and      industrial   development,
           listed in Program IP-2.5.2.                                                           mitigation measures have not been
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                   required. Development was limited
           Financing: City                                                                       during the planning period due to
                                                                                                 the economic recession.
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-2.4.2   Housing Impact Fee: Consider adopting a housing impact fee if a nexus can be          Due to the economic recession         Modify (merge
           established requiring the developer of large commercial and industrial projects to    and limited staff resources, the City with 2.4.1)
           construct the needed housing on site or in another appropriately zoned location       did not adopt a housing impact
           near the place of employment and/or pay a housing impact fee.                         fee or complete a nexus study
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                   during the planning period.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: June 2010
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                           2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                              2-13

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                             Continue/
                                  Implementation Program                                                  Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                           Modify/Delete
IP-2.5.1 Second Dwelling Unit Design: Revise the Second Dwelling Unit Ordinance (Zoning          The City’s Zoning Code (updated in      Delete;
         Ordinance § 18.08.160) as follows:                                                      2012) allows second units as a          program
            i) allow second dwelling units in all residential zoning districts with; a plot plan permitted use in all residential        completed
                 and design review, using state law as a basis for the ordinance revisions.      zoning districts. Second units are no
            ii) utilize second units in the R-2 district as a way to allow two independent       longer required to be located at
                 units and also conserve neighborhood character.                                 least 20 feet from the primary
                                                                                                 residence, and separate utility
            iii) eliminate the requirement that second dwelling units be located at least
                                                                                                 meters may be installed for second
                 20 feet from the primary residence;
                                                                                                 units located in the R-2, R-3, and O-
            iv) allow separate utility meters for second dwelling units in multi-family          R zoning districts.
                 districts.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, 2009 (in process)
IP-2.6.1 Manufactured Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance definition of a single family          The City’s Zoning Code definition of    Modify
         house to include manufactured houses and consider deleting Municipal Code               single-family dwelling was updated
         Section 15.24.                                                                          to include manufactured houses;
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                     however, Municipal Code Section
         Financing: City                                                                         15.24 was not deleted.
         Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010
IP-2.7.1 Zoning Ordinance Revisions: Adopt the following: Revise Zoning Ordinance Table          Under the updated Zoning Code           Delete;
         18.04.040-A to allow Senior Independent Living Uses in the R-CT and R-3 zoning          (adopted        in   2012),     senior  program
         districts without a Conditional Use Permit. Plot Plan and/or Design Review              independent living is defined and       completed
         approval would be required. Add a definition of Senior Independent Living Uses          allowed as a permitted use, subject
         to Zoning Ordinance §18.11.                                                             to Plot Plan Review, in the R-3
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                     zoning district.
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Complete revisions to Zoning Ordinance, June 2010
IP-2.9.1 Redevelopment Funds: Continue to use the 20 percent Housing Set Aside Funds to          Housing Set Aside funds were            Delete;     funds
         develop affordable housing and conserve and rehabilitate existing housing.              eliminated with the dissolution of      no         longer
         Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency                                                    the City’s Redevelopment Agency.        available
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Ongoing
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                               City of Cloverdale
                                                                           2-14

                                                                                                                   CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                            Continue/
                                     Implementation Program                                                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                         Modify/Delete
IP-2.10.1  To ensure parking requirements for multifamily units do not constrain                 Under the City’s updated Zoning        Modify        to
           development, the City will amend its Zoning Ordinance to remove the                   Code (adopted in 2012), the City       reflect changes
           requirement to cover the second parking space. In addition, the City will             no longer requires that more than      adopted
           facilitate and encourage shared parking and allow both on-site and/or off-site        one covered parking space be
           provision of required spaces. The City has a positive track record (such as with      required for multifamily units. In
           the approved Thyme Square project) in using shared parking for high-density           addition, the City continues to
           housing projects and nearly all the City’s opportunity sites have access to shared    encourage shared parking for
           parking.                                                                              higher-density development.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Complete revisions to Zoning Ordinance, June 2010
IP-2.10.2  To ensure the provision of a variety of housing types for all income levels           The Zoning Code was amended in         Delete;
           throughout the City, the Zoning Ordinance will be amended to remove the CUP           2012     to    remove      the   CUP   program
           for multi-family uses in R-2, R-CT and R-3 districts.                                 requirement for multifamily housing    completed
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                   in the R-2 and R-3 zones (now
                                                                                                 allowed by right).
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Complete revisions to Zoning Ordinance, June 2010
IP-2.10.3  The City currently defines family as an individual, or two or more persons related    As part of the 2012 Zoning Code        Delete;
           by blood, marriage or adoption; or a group of unrelated persons which, if it          update, the City amended its           program
           numbers five or more persons, must be living together as a group in a dwelling        definition of family to eliminate the  completed
           unit, using common cooking facilities, and as a group bear the generic                reference to the specific number of
           character of a family as a relatively permanent household.” For the purposes of       persons a family may include.
           ensuring there are no constraints to housing for persons with disabilities, the state
           has established that 6 persons be the threshold by which a single-family dwelling
           or group quarters situation is defined. Therefore, the City will amend the
           language of its family definition in the Zoning Ordinance to include a threshold of
           “more than 6 persons,” rather than “five or more persons.”
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Complete revisions to Zoning Ordinance, June 2010
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                            2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                           2-15

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                          Continue/
                                    Implementation Program                                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                        Modify/Delete
Goal H-3 Expand affordable housing opportunities for persons with special housing needs such as the elderly, the disabled,
households with very low to moderate incomes, and first time home buyers.
IP-3.1.1   Funding Sources: Apply for housing funds, as appropriate. Examples of available      The City continued to participate in  Continue
           housing funds are listed below:                                                      Sonoma County’s program to
              Rural Development Loan Program financed by the State Department of               apply for CDBG and HOME
               Housing and Community Development (HCD).                                         funding. Staff did not apply for
                                                                                                project-specific housing funds, as
              Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds.
                                                                                                no projects were proposed during
              Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement Program financed by the         the planning period.
               California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) provides reimbursement for school
               impact fees for rental housing developers who provide rental housing
               affordable by very-low income households.
              Mortgage Credit Certificate Program provides assistance to first-time lower
               income households. This program is administered for the City by the County of
               Sonoma and cities in the County.
              Mortgage Revenue Bond Program through the CHFA. The City can issue
               revenue bonds on behalf of affordable housing developers or work with
               developers to secure these bonds.
              Housing Enables by Local Partnerships Program (HELP) operated by the CHFA.
              The Low and No Downpayment Program sponsored by the California Housing
               Loan Insurance Fund (CALIF). Tax credit programs.
              HOME Programs.
           The City will promote use of these funds by listing potential funding sources on its
           website and planning staff will inform housing developers of these funding
           possibilities.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: CDBG Fund application by December 2009 and annually thereafter;
           other funding sources applied for in cooperation with housing developers at the
           time specific projects are reviewed by the Planning Department
IP-3.1.2   Housing Fund: Maintain the City’s Housing Fund, with contributions collected from    The City continues to maintain a      Continue
           private and public sources, including the in-lieu inclusionary housing fees to       Housing Fund, which is used to
           implement and/or supplement the City's housing programs. Use the Housing Fund        support     affordable      housing
           to make housing available to very low to moderate-income Cloverdale residents.       programs and services in the city.
           The fund could be used to reduce the cost of land acquisition and construction
           for affordable and special needs housing, and to prevent and reduce
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                            City of Cloverdale
                                                                           2-16

                                                                                                              CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                    Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                             Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                   Modify/Delete
           homelessness.
           Responsibility: Planning and Finance Departments
           Financing: City and other sources listed above
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-3.1.3   School Facility Reimbursement: Encourage developers of affordable housing to     State funding for the school facility Delete
           apply for the Proposition 1A School Facility Fee Reimbursement Program (SFFRP)   fee affordable housing programs
           financed by the California Housing Finance Agency. Consider making this a        has been suspended.
           requirement for development receiving subsidies or density bonuses for lower
           income rental units.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City and housing developers utilizing tax-exempt revenue bonds
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-3.2.1   Additional Housing for Senior Population: Continue to permit senior housing      The City continues to permit senior   Continue
           developments for persons aged 55 and over, with reduced parking and other        housing       developments      and
           requirements.                                                                    provides reduced parking and
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                              other incentives to encourage the
                                                                                            development of senior units.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-3.3.1   Senior Shared Housing Programs: Contact Sonoma County’s Community                The City did not pursue a senior      Delete
           Development Commission and non-profit housing organizations to determine         shared housing program during the
           whether they would be interested in jointly implementing a Senior Shared Housing planning period.
           Program.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City to apply for available funding; non-profit organization to
           implement the program
           Scheduling: Establish interest in pursuing this program by August 2009
IP-3.4.1   Grant Funding: Continue to work with developers to apply for HCD HOME grants     Due to the downturn in the            Continue
           or CDBG grants specifically to accommodate large families.                       economy,         no      developers
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                              expressed an interest in applying
                                                                                            for funds to develop units for large
           Financing: City
                                                                                            families during the planning period.
           Scheduling: Ongoing
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                      2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                          2-17

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                        Continue/
                                  Implementation Program                                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                      Modify/Delete
IP-3.5.1 Accessible Units for the Physically Disabled: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to        This program was evaluated in the      Delete
         require at least 10 percent of new residential projects and 20 percent of ground    course of the Zoning Code update
         floor apartment and condominium units for residential projects 10 units or larger   and was not implemented, based
         be accessible for physically disabled persons. Ensure that these units are barrier- on direction from the City’s
         free consistent with federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and State        attorney.
         standards.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: In progress, to be completed by June 2010
IP-3.5.2 Funding Accessibility Improvements: Consider subsidizing the construction of        The City was not able to offer         Delete;     funds
         renovations and improvements that improve the accessibility to housing for          subsidies       for     accessibility  no         longer
         seniors and persons with disabilities.                                              improvements due to the loss of        available
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                 Redevelopment Agency funds.
         Financing: Redevelopment Housing Set Aside Funds, Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu
         fund, CDBG Funding
         Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-3.5.3 Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities: Carry out a review of       The City adopted a formal              Delete;
         the City’s land use and building regulations to identify constraints that may exist reasonable          accommodations     program
         for the provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and adopt measures to   policy in September 2014.              completed
         facilitate reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. Examine, for
         example, the cost of obtaining building permits for ADA related retrofit projects.
         Publicize revisions to land use regulations providing for reasonable
         accommodation for persons with disabilities.
         Responsibility: Planning and Building Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: June 2010
IP-3.6.1 Emergency and Transitional Housing: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to permit an        The City updated the Zoning Code       Delete
         emergency and transitional housing facility as a permitted use in the G-C           in 2012 to allow emergency shelters
         General Commercial zoning district. Currently, there is approximately .95 acres     as a permitted use, subject only to
         (21 properties total) of G-C zoned land available that is made up of a mix of       Plot Plan Review, in the G-C, TOD,
         developed and undeveloped sites. The City also recently purchased a 5.3 acre        and P-I zoning districts. The City
         site zoned G-C that is available for development and could be a site for an         further amended the Zoning Code
         emergency shelter. In addition, there are 30 developed G-C parcels throughout       in 2014 to establish definitions for
         the City and by amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow emergency and                transitional and supportive housing
         transitional housing in the G-C zoning district any of these parcels would support  and treat these uses as residential
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                          City of Cloverdale
                                                                         2-18

                                                                                                                     CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                             Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                           Modify/Delete
           re-use as a homeless shelter. Emergency shelters in the G-C shall only be subject       uses, subject only to the same
           to the same development and management standards that apply to other                    restrictions as other uses of the
           allowed uses in the zone. Require Design Review approval pursuant to Health             same type in the same zoning
           and Safety Code § 50807 prior to issuance of a building permit.                         district.
           Responsibility: Planning Department
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010
IP-3.6.2   Single Room Occupancy (SRO): Adopt a Single Room Occupancy Ordinance                    The City updated its Zoning Code       Delete;
           that establishes performance standards with regard to fencing, lighting and             in 2012 to allow SROs with a           program
           reduced parking requirements for extremely low income households and                    Conditional Use Permit in the R-3,     completed
           farmworker housing and revises Zoning Ordinance Table 18.04.040A Uses                   DTS, and TOD zoning districts. In
           Permitted in Residential Districts, to allow SROs in the R-CT and R-3 Zoning Districts. addition, the City adopted SRO
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                     standards (Section 18.09.220 of the
                                                                                                   Zoning      Code)     that    specify
           Financing: City
                                                                                                   development and management
           Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010                              requirements and provide for
                                                                                                   reduced       parking     for    SRO
                                                                                                   developments.
IP-3.6.3   Ongoing Estimates of the Demand for Emergency Housing: Continue to consult              The City worked with the Sonoma        Continue
           with the Cloverdale Police Department and homeless providers in the community           County Continuum of Care to
           to maintain ongoing estimates of the demand for emergency housing in the city.          estimate the homeless population
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                     in a study completed in January
                                                                                                   2013 and works closely with
           Financing: City
                                                                                                   homeless service providers and the
           Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                     police to maintain awareness of
                                                                                                   the number of homeless persons in
                                                                                                   the city.
IP-3.6.4   Inter-Agency Cooperation: Continue to work with private, county, and State              The City continues to support the      Continue
           agencies to provide emergency housing for the homeless.                                 Cloverdale Community Outreach
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                     Committee in the operation of
                                                                                                   Wallace House and to coordinate
           Financing: City
                                                                                                   with      other    agencies      and
           Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                     organizations to identify issues and
                                                                                                   solutions.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                              2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                             2-19

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                     Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                             Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                   Modify/Delete
IP-3.6.5 Revise the City’s Zoning Ordinance to include definitions of emergency shelter,  The City’s Zoning Code was             Delete;
         transitional housing, and supportive housing, and to allow transitional and      amended in 2012 to include             program
         supportive housing in all residential areas as required by State Law.            definitions for emergency shelters,    completed
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                              transitional        housing,     and
                                                                                          permanent supportive housing. The
         Financing: City
                                                                                          Zoning Code was further amended
         Scheduling: June 2010                                                            in 2014 to clarify that transitional
                                                                                          and       supportive    housing   are
                                                                                          residential uses, subject only to the
                                                                                          same        regulations    of   other
                                                                                          residential developments of the
                                                                                          same type in the same zoning
                                                                                          district.
IP-3.6.6 Revise the City’s Zoning Ordinance to allow additional emergency shelters in the The City’s Zoning Code was             Delete;
         P-I zoning district with a use permit.                                           amended in 2012 to allow               program
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                              emergency shelters in the P-I zoning   completed
                                                                                          district as a permitted use, subject
         Financing: City
                                                                                          only to Plot Plan Review.
         Scheduling: June 2010
IP-3.7.1 Farmworker Housing: While the City will pursue the integration of units for      While the City coordinated with the    Continue
         farmworkers throughout its housing stock (units for extremely low- and very low- County on potential farmworker
         income households), the City will also work with the County’s farmworker housing housing solutions, no specific units
         program to promote the construction of farmworker housing in the community.      were proposed or completed
         The City will assist by partnering with the County to support applications for   during the planning period.
         funding to the State’s Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant Programs.
         Responsibility: Planning and Finance Departments
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Annually meet with County representatives to discuss farmworker
         housing needs and plans for additional development if needed
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                       City of Cloverdale
                                                                          2-20

                                                                                                                   CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                           Continue/
                                     Implementation Program                                                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                         Modify/Delete
IP-3.7.2   Farmworker Housing: To ensure the City’s Zoning Ordinance is compliant with          The City’s Zoning Code was              Delete;
           Health & Safety Code Section 17021.5, language will be added to explicitly           updated in 2012 to specify that         program
           acknowledge that employee housing for farmworkers accommodating six or               farmworker housing for six or fewer     completed
           fewer workers shall be considered a residential use and shall not require any        workers is allowed as a residential
           special approvals that are not required of a family dwelling of the same type in     use and does not require any
           the same zone.                                                                       special approvals that are not
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  required of a family dwelling of the
                                                                                                same type in the same zone (see
           Financing: City
                                                                                                Table 18.04.040-A and 18.05.030-A
           Scheduling: Complete Zoning Ordinance revisions, June 2010                           of the City’s Zoning Code).
Goal H-4 Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender, age, sexual orientation, marital status, or national
origin.
IP-4.1.1   Housing Discrimination: Promote equal housing opportunity by providing and           The City promoted equal housing         Continue
           distributing information regarding equal housing opportunity laws and the City's     opportunity       throughout       the
           equal housing opportunities procedures to the public at City Hall, the public        planning period by providing and
           library, social service centers, public transit providers and on the City’s website. distributing information regarding
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  equal housing opportunity laws at
                                                                                                City Hall and on the City’s website.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-4.1.2   Housing Discrimination Complaints: Establish a City procedure for investigating      The City, through its participation in  Modify
           and appropriately handling housing discrimination complaints.                        the Sonoma County urban county
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  CDBG        agreement,        provides
                                                                                                funding to Petaluma People
           Financing: City
                                                                                                Services Center (PPSC) to provide
           Scheduling: June 2010                                                                fair housing support and assist
                                                                                                residents      with     discrimination
                                                                                                complaints.     City    staff    refers
                                                                                                residents with questions, issues, and
                                                                                                complaints to the PPSC.
IP-4.1.3   Nondiscrimination Clauses: Continue to provide nondiscrimination clauses in          During the planning period, the         Continue
           rental agreements and deed restrictions for housing constructed with City            City provided assistance in the
           assistance.                                                                          preservation of Kings Valley Senior
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  Apartments (in collaboration with
                                                                                                EAH      Housing).    EAH     includes
           Financing: City
                                                                                                nondiscrimination clauses in rental
           Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                  agreements for this property.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                            2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                              2-21

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                             Continue/
                                   Implementation Program                                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                           Modify/Delete
Goal H-5 Ensure public participation in the development of the City’s housing policies.
IP-5.1.1 Workshops: Continue to hold workshops and public hearings to discuss proposed            The    City    encouraged      public  Continue
         revisions to the City’s Housing Element.                                                 participation      throughout     the
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                      Housing Element update process
                                                                                                  through workshops, consultations,
         Financing: City
                                                                                                  public study sessions, and public
         Scheduling: Ongoing until adoption of the 2009 Housing Element                           hearings.
IP-5.2.1 Continue to Prepare a Housing Annual Report: Prepare an annual report that               The City prepared annual housing       Continue
         describes the amount and type of housing constructed and housing-related                 reports     and      General     Plan
         activities for review by the Planning Commission and the City Council.                   implementation reports throughout
         Responsibility: Planning Department                                                      the planning period.
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Annually (include with the annual review of the CIP by the Planning
         Commission and City Council)
Goal H-6 Promote effective and efficient land use when meeting housing needs, including consideration of conservation of energy
and natural resources, and green building technologies.
IP-6.1.1 Education and Information: Develop informational materials for dissemination to          The City’s updated Zoning Code         Continue
         developers and project designers during the initial stages of project design and         includes specific standards for solar
         review. These materials shall include, but not be limited to, passive solar planning     and wind energy systems. Due to
         through subdivision, lot and structure orientation, protection of solar access, and      limited staff resources, the City has
         application of passive and active energy saving features. The City shall also            not yet reviewed its subdivision
         review its land use regulations and subdivision ordinance and where appropriate          regulations         or      prepared
         add provisions which promote and/or require energy conservation planning as a            informational materials.
         factor in project approval.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-6.2.1 Green Building: The City should support Green Building standards which aim to            The City adopted CALGreen Tier 1       Continue
         support a sustainable community by incorporating green building measures into            standards in March 2011. Due to
         the design, constructions, and maintenance of new commercial and residential             limited staff resources, the City did
         buildings. The City will also work with stakeholder to develop a list of incentives that not work with stakeholders to
         will help developers meet mandatory green building standards.                            develop a list of incentives.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                               City of Cloverdale
                                                                           2-22

                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                           Continue/
                                    Implementation Program                                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                          Modify/Delete
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Development list of incentives by October 2011; ongoing
IP-6.3.1   Public Transit: Work with public transit providers and developers to encourage       The City adopted a Station               Continue
           housing development located in close proximity to public transit facilities, as well Area/Downtown             Plan        to
           as incorporation of pedestrian and bicycle access and networking in project          encourage        infill      residential
           design.                                                                              development near public transit in
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  July 2010. The plan establishes a
                                                                                                vision       and         development
           Financing: City
                                                                                                regulations      to        encourage
           Scheduling: Ongoing                                                                  pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
                                                                                                residential design in the downtown
                                                                                                and in proximity to the planned
                                                                                                SMART station.
                                                                                                In addition, the City has prepared
                                                                                                funding applications for a project
                                                                                                that would link the downtown to
                                                                                                the SMART station with a greenway.
IP-6.3.2   Public Transit: Utilize City workforce housing preferences so that employees of      Workforce housing preferences            Continue
           Cloverdale businesses who live out of the City can move into Cloverdale and not      were not utilized due to limited
           need to commute in.                                                                  residential construction during the
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  planning period.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Ongoing
IP-6.4.1   Housing Annual Report and Monitoring: The City shall, through its Annual Housing     The City completed annual reports        Continue
           Report, monitor the supply of residential land to ensure sufficient developable      and monitored the supply of
           land is available for single-family and multifamily residential development. This    residential land throughout the
           program will help to achieve projected housing needs for the planning period         planning period. Due to limited
           extending through June 2014. If, at any time, the supply of sites zoned for          development as a result of the
           multifamily housing falls below the quantity of land required to accommodate         nationwide economic downturn,
           the City’s remaining need for higher density multifamily housing, the City shall     ample land remained available to
           initiate General Plan Amendments and/or rezonings to provide additional land.        accommodate             the       City’s
           Responsibility: Planning Department                                                  projected housing need.
           Financing: City
           Scheduling: Ongoing
City of Cloverdale                                                                                                             2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                          2-23

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                                                        Continue/
                                  Implementation Program                                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                      Modify/Delete
IP-6.5.1 Development Impact Fee Review: The City shall review its current development        The City reviewed and updated its      Modify
         impact fee program to confirm the appropriate level of impact fees to charge        master      fee     schedule    and
         for multifamily residential units and second units based on the demand they         development impact fee schedule
         create for public facilities and infrastructure. Where justified, the City shall    in 2014. Fees are set at appropriate
         consider reducing fees for multifamily units, second units, co-housing, and self-   levels based on the demand new
         help housing units to encourage their construction. The City shall consider         housing creates for public facilities
         reducing fees for lower-income housing on a sliding scale related to the level of   and infrastructure.
         affordability during the next impact fee review. The City shall also consider
         adopting a sliding-scale fee depending on the size of the unit or “locking” fees to
         the time of approval.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Complete review by June 2010
IP-6.5.2 Capital Improvement Program: The City shall continue to update and implement        The City updated its Capital           Continue
         its five-year Capital Improvement Program to guide development of public            Improvement Program in February
         facilities required by new residential demand and to improve existing facilities in 2011 and will continue to update it
         need of upgrading.                                                                  on a regular basis.
         Responsibility: Planning Department
         Financing: City
         Scheduling: Complete review annually
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                                          City of Cloverdale
                                                                        2-24

                                                                                   CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.3. Housing Needs Assessment
2.3.1 Population and Demographic Trends
Population Trends and Projections
According to the California Department of Finance, the Cloverdale population was 8,641 as of 2014. The
population has grown significantly since 1960. As illustrated in Table 2.2, the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) projects continued growth in the City through 2040. However, projections indicate
that growth will occur at a slower pace than in previous decades. The total population is projected to be
11,500 in 2040. Note that ABAG projections are below those of the City’s General Plan, which anticipates a
population of 12,000 in 2025.
                              Table 2.2 Population Trends and Projections, 1960 to 2040
                            Year                      Population                  Percentage Change
                            1960                          2,848                             —
                            1970                          3,251                            14%
                            1980                          3,989                            23%
                            1990                          4,294                            23%
                            2000                          6,831                            39%
                            2010                          8,618                            26%
                           2020*                          9,500                            10%
                           2030*                         10,500                            11%
                           2040*                         11,500                            10%
                 Source: California Department of Finance Historic Populations, 2013; US Census 2000, 2010;
                 ABAG Projections 2013
                 * Projected
From 2000 to 2010, the Cloverdale population increased approximately 26 percent, from 6,831 to 8,618. As
shown in Table 2.3, growth in Cloverdale outpaced that of Sonoma County as a whole and the nearby
jurisdictions of Healdsburg and Windsor, which grew at rates of 6 percent, 5 percent, and 18 percent,
respectively.
                                Table 2.3 Population Growth Comparison, 2000 to 2010
                Jurisdiction                       2000                        2010           Percentage Change
      Cloverdale                                   6,831                       8,618                    26%
      Healdsburg                                  10,722                      11,254                    5%
      Sonoma County                              458,614                     483,878                    6%
      Windsor                                     22,744                      26,801                    18%
      Sources: US Census 2000, 2010 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
Household Characteristics
A household is any group of people living together in a residence, related or unrelated. According to the
Census, there were 3,182 households in Cloverdale in 2010. The number of households grew approximately
28 percent from 2000 to 2010. According to ABAG projections, the number of households is projected to
grow steadily through 2040, though at a slightly lower rate than over the last decade.
City of Cloverdale                                                                           2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                            2-25

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Household Size and Composition
As of 2011, the average household size in Cloverdale was 2.63 persons. This is a slight decrease from the
average of 2.71 in 2000. As shown in Table 2.4, Cloverdale’s average household size is larger than that of
Sonoma County (2.54), but lower than the average in California (2.93).
                                 Table 2.4 Average Household Size, 2000 and 2011
                      Jurisdiction                        2000                             2011
             Cloverdale                                    2.71                            2.63
             Sonoma County                                 2.60                            2.54
             Source: US Census 2000; 2007–2011 ACS (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
As of 2010, approximately 70 percent of Cloverdale households were families and approximately 31 percent
were families with children under the age of 18. The average family size was 3.16 persons.
Age Characteristics
Cloverdale’s current and future housing needs are determined in part by the age characteristics of its residents.
Age can influence lifestyle preference, household size, and income.
The median age in Cloverdale was 39.7 in 2010, up from 36 in 2000. This is comparable to the median in
Sonoma County as a whole, which was 39.9 in 2010 and 37.5 in 2000.
As shown in Table 2.5, the age composition remained similar from 2000 to 2010, with slight decreases in the
percentage of the population in all age groups under 55 and increases in the 55 and older age groups. The
largest percentage increase was in the age group ranging from 55 to 64, which increased from 8 percent of the
population to 13 percent.
                                      Table 2.5 Population Age, 2000 and 2010
                                                  2000                                   2010
                Age Range
                                       Number         Percentage             Number           Percentage
            19 and younger              1,863              27%                2,278               26%
            20 to 24                     583                9%                 475                 6%
            25 to 34                     894               13%                1,061               12%
            35 to 44                    1,037              15%                1,093               13%
            45 to 54                     905               13%                1,215               14%
            55 to 64                     575                8%                1,114               13%
            65 and older                 974               14%                1,382               16%
            Total                       6,831             100%                8,618              100%
            Median Age                            36.0                                   39.7
            Source: US Census 2000, 2010 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                            City of Cloverdale
                                                        2-26

                                                                                 CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Race and Ethnicity
While the majority of Cloverdale residents were white in 2000 (69 percent) and 2010 (62 percent), the
population became somewhat more diverse. As shown in Table 2.6, the Hispanic population grew from 27 to
33 percent. There were increases in the number of residents of all races and ethnicities.
                                      Table 2.6 Race/Ethnicity, 2000 and 2010
                                                               2000                           2010
                Race/Ethnicity
                                                  Number            Percentage      Number         Percentage
    White                                           4,692               69%           5,386            62%
    Hispanic                                        1,823               27%           2,824            33%
    Black or African American                          9                <1%             33             <1%
    Asian                                             80                1%              95              1%
    American Indian or Alaska Native                   59                1%            109              1%
    Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                5                <1%             6              <1%
    Other race                                         15               <1%             11             <1%
    Two or more races                                 148                2%            154              2%
    Total                                           6,831              100%           8,618           100%
    Source: US Census 2000, 2010 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
2.3.2 Employment and Income Trends
Employment
ABAG estimated that there were 1,570 jobs in Cloverdale as of 2010 and projects that the number of jobs will
increase over the next 30 years to a total of 2,270 in 2040. Similarly, ABAG projects an increase in the
number of employed residents from 3,500 in 2010 to 4,640.
Manufacturing is a central component of the Cloverdale economy. Products include lumber, wine, beer,
geothermal power, and air brake actuators among others. Major raw material resources include steam, lumber,
gravel, and wood fiber products.
The City’s major employers include Fosters Wine Estates, MGM Brakes, Cloverdale Unified School District,
Ray’s Food Place, Cloverdale Health Care Center, and Alexander Valley Regional Medical Center.
As of 2011, education, health and social services was the largest employment sector among Cloverdale
residents, accounting for approximately 23 percent of jobs held by Cloverdale residents. Note that these jobs
are not necessarily located in Cloverdale but are those held by persons residing in Cloverdale. Employment in
this sector increased significantly over the past decade, up from 12 percent of jobs in 2000. The percentage of
residents employed in the manufacturing sector decreased slightly from 18 to 16 percent, however the number
of residents holding jobs in this sector increased. Table 2.7 shows a detailed comparison of employment by
industry in 2000 and 2010.
City of Cloverdale                                                                       2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                           2-27

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                    Table 2.7 Employment by Industry, 2000 and 2011
                                                                                2010                         2011*
                       Employment Sector
                                                                      Number       Percentage       Number       Percentage
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining                  228             7%           196              5%
 Construction                                                            316            10%           196              5%
 Manufacturing                                                           557            18%           610             16%
 Wholesale trade                                                         145             5%           117              3%
 Retail trade                                                            326            11%           543             14%
 Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                           116             4%           161              4%
 Information                                                              23             1%            21              1%
 Finance, insurance, real estate, and rental and leasing                 250             8%           110              3%
 Professional, scientific, management, administrative,
                                                                         277             9%           361             10%
 and waste management
 Education, health, and social services                                  387            12%           857             23%
 Arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation, and
                                                                         223             7%           257              7%
 food services
 Other services                                                          135             4%           274              7%
 Public administration                                                   114             4%            70              2%
 Total (employed civilian population age 16 and older)                  3,097          100%          3,773           100%
 Source: US Census, 2000; ACS 2007-2011 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
 * ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, reported figures may subject to large
 margins of error.
Unemployment
As of November 2013, Cloverdale’s unemployment rate was 9.3 percent, down from 11.8 percent in
November 2012. Despite the improvement, the unemployment rate in Cloverdale remains higher than
Sonoma County as a whole and nearby cities. Table 2.8 shows unemployment rates for Cloverdale and other
Sonoma County jurisdictions.
                                Table 2.8 Unemployment in Selected Jurisdictions, 2013
                              Jurisdiction                    Unemployment Rate (%)
                        Sonoma                                              6.1
                        Sebastopol                                          3.9
                        Santa Rosa                                          6.1
                        Healdsburg                                          6.2
                        Cloverdale                                          9.3
                        Source: California Employment Development Department, November 2013
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                 City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-28

                                                                                     CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Jobs/Housing Balance
The analysis of jobs/housing balance is used to measure the degree to which communities are inducing
commuter travel as growth occurs. A community with a balance of jobs and housing has as many jobs as
residents that are able to work. For example, a city with 4,000 employed residents requires 4,000 jobs to be in
balance. A community is out of balance if it either has more jobs than employed residents or has more
employable residents than jobs.
Like many communities, there is an imbalance between where people live and work in Cloverdale. As shown
in Figure 2.2, approximately one third of those who work in Cloverdale also live in the city. Most residents of
Cloverdale work outside the city (86 percent).
                                              Figure 2.2 Live/Work Balance, 2011
                                                    Employed in
                                                          and                Live in
                                   Employed in           Live in           City Only
                                     City Only            City
                                                          435                2,606
                                        848                           (86% of employed
                                                        (14% of
                                                                           residents)
                                                      employed
                                                      residents)
Source: ACS, 2011 via the US Census OnTheMap Application, Longitudinal-Employer Household Dynamics Program
Note: The number of employed residents estimated in this figure varies from the estimate by sector provided above because
it is from a different ACS data set. ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS figures
may be subject to large margins of error.
A jobs/housing imbalance can lead to long commute times and distances. Approximately 40 percent of
Cloverdale residents traveled less than 10 miles for work in 2011. Approximately 38 percent drove 10 to 50
miles and over 20 percent drove over 50 miles to work. The majority of these longer-distance commuters
traveled south down Highway 101 to Santa Rosa or to the San Francisco Bay Area. Table 2.9 shows the
distribution of commuting distances for Cloverdale residences.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                 2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                2-29

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                    Table 2.9 Estimated Travel Distance to Work, 2011
                        Distance to Work                          Number                      Percentage
       Less than 10 miles                                           527                            41%
       10 to 24 miles                                               245                            19%
       25 to 50 miles                                               238                            19%
       Greater than 50 miles                                        273                            21%
       Total primary jobs                                          1,283                          100%
       Source: ACS, 2011 via the US Census OnTheMap Application, Longitudinal-Employer Household Dynamics
       Program
       Note: The number of employed residents counted in this table varies from previous totals because it takes into
       account only primary jobs. ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS
       reported figures may be subject to large margins of error.
Table 2.10 shows travel time to work for Cloverdale residents. Approximately 40 percent travel for more than
30 minutes.
                                           Table 2.10 Travel Time to Work, 2012
                                  Travel to Work (minutes)                     Percentage
                           Less than 10                                            20%
                           10 to 14                                                7%
                           15 to 19                                                11%
                           20 to 24                                                18%
                           25 to 29                                                5%
                           30 to 34                                                19%
                           35 to 44                                                5%
                           45 to 59                                                10%
                           60 or more                                              6%
                         Source: ACS, 2008–2012
                         Note: ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like
                         Cloverdale, ACS reported figures may be subject to large margins of error.
The Land Use Element of the City’s General Plan addresses this issue, stating that the community will work
to establish a jobs/housing ratio of 1.0, meaning that the number of jobs equals the number of housing units.
To meet this goal, approximately 40 percent of the City’s vacant nonresidential lands are needed for
commercial and industrial uses. In other words, Cloverdale has more than enough nonresidential vacant land
capacity to meet its goals for commercial and industrial development with respect to the jobs/housing balance.
Household Incomes
As of 2011, the median household income in Cloverdale was $56,649. This is an increase from the 2000
median of $42,309 when compared directly. However, when the 2000 median is adjusted for inflation to 2011
dollars, it is equivalent to $57,117, meaning that the median income decreased slightly from 2000 to 2010.
The median income in Cloverdale was the lowest in Sonoma County. The countywide median was $64,343.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                 City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-30

                                                                                    CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Table 2.11 shows the income distribution of households in Cloverdale in 2000 and 2011. The percentage of
households in the lowest income quartiles decreased and the percentage in the highest quartiles increased.
Despite the shift, approximately 17 percent of Cloverdale households had incomes of less than $25,000.
                               Table 2.11 Household Income by Quartile, 2000 and 2011
                                                                        2000                               2011*
            Annual Household Income
                                                           Number           Percentage          Number         Percentage
Less than $24,999                                             712                28%               546             17%
$25,000 to $49,999                                            707                28%               797             25%
$50,000 to $74,999                                            550                22%               682             22%
$75,000 to $99,999                                            244                10%               537             17%
$100,000 or more                                              288                12%               584             18%
Total households                                             2,501              100%              3,146           100%
Source: US Census, 2000; ACS, 2007–2011 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
* ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS reported figures may be subject to large
margins of error.
For policy and program administration purposes, the state and federal governments have established income
categories to describe income level in relationship to the county area median income (AMI), adjusted for
household size. Income categories are defined as:
    Extremely low-income: at or below 30 percent of AMI
    Very low-income: 31 to 50 percent of AMI
    Low-income: 51 to 80 percent of AMI
    Moderate-income: 81 to 120 percent of AMI
    Above moderate income: greater than 120 percent of AMI
The 2014 income limits for Sonoma County are shown according to household size in Table 2.12 and are
based on a median income of $82,600.
                                Table 2.12 State Income Limits for Sonoma County, 2014
                                         Household Size (Number of Persons Per Household)
   Income
                      1           2            3             4               5             6              7             8
  Category
 Extremely
                  $17,400     $19,850      $22,350       $24,800         $26,800       $28,800         $30,800     $32,750
 Low
 Very Low         $28,950     $33,050      $37,200       $41,300         $44,650       $47,950         $51,250     $54,550
 Low              $45,500     $52,000      $58,500       $65,000         $70,200       $75,400         $80,600     $85,800
 Moderate         $69,350     $79,300      $89,200       $99,100         $107,050      $114,950       $122,900    $130,800
 Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development 2014
City of Cloverdale                                                                              2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                             2-31

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Table 2.13 shows the income distribution of Cloverdale residents by income category and tenure in 2010. A
much larger percentage of very low-income households are renters and a larger portion of above moderate
income households are home owners.
                               Table 2.13 Household Income Category by Tenure, 2010
                                                               Renters                            Owners
                  Income Category
                                                     Number           Percentage         Number         Percentage
        Very low                                        570                 49%             300              14%
        Low                                             235                 20%             415              20%
        Moderate                                        230                 20%             465              22%
        Above moderate                                  130                 11%             890              44%
        Total occupied units                           1,165               100%            2,070            100%
        Source: CHAS, based on 2006–2010 ACS (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
        AMI = Area Median Income
        * ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS reported figures may be
        subject to large margins of error.
The ACS does not provide a quantification of households for extremely low-income households, but it does
show households earning less than $24,999 (as shown in Table 2.11). This range has been used to estimate
the number of existing extremely low-income households. According to the ACS data, there were
approximately 546 extremely low-income households in the City as of 2011. Extremely low-income
households generally have a higher incidence of housing problems and tend to overpay for housing (paying
greater than 30 percent of their income toward housing costs).
2.3.3 Housing Stock Characteristics
Housing Types
As of 2010, there were a total of 3,427 housing units in Cloverdale. As shown in Table 2.14, detached single-
family homes comprised 76 percent of the City’s housing stock and attached single-family units made up
another 8 percent. Multifamily units made up 12 percent of housing stock and mobile homes made up the
remaining 4 percent. The City’s single family (both detached and attached) housing stock increased
significantly more than its multifamily stock from 2000 and 2010.
                            Table 2.14 Housing Units by Type in Cloverdale, 2000 and 2010
                                              2000                             2010
        Housing Unit Type                                                                         Percentage Change
                                       Units    Percentage            Units       Percentage
    Single-family, detached            1,897         72%             2,598            76%                   37%
    Single-family, attached             122           5%              279              8%                   29%
    Multi-family, 2-4 units             113           4%                91             3%                  -19%
    Multi-family, 5+units               295          11%              316              9%                    7%
    Mobile homes                        209           8%              143              4%                  -32%
    Total                              2,636        100%             3,427           100%                   30%
    Sources: US Census, 2000; California Department of Finance (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                 City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-32

                                                                                  CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Housing Age
As housing units age, they typically require reinvestment and additional maintenance. As shown in Table
2.15, approximately 33 percent of owner-occupied units and 70 percent of renter occupied units are over 30
years old.
                                             Table 2.15 Age of Housing Stock
                                                        Owner Occupied                   Renter Occupied
                       Year Built                  Number of                         Number of
                                                                    Percentage                     Percentage
                                                      Units                            Units
         1939 or earlier                               119               6%             143            12%
         1940 - 1949                                    89              4%              100             9%
         1950 - 1959                                   194              9%              106             9%
         1960 -1969                                     88              4%              196            17%
         1970 -1979                                    199              10%             271            23%
         1980 - 1989                                   211              10%             157            13%
         1990 - 1999                                   430              21%             152            13%
         2000-2009                                     740              36%              47             4%
         Total                                        2,070            100%            1,172          100%
         Source: US Census, 2010
Housing Conditions
In October 2008, City staff conducted a survey of housing conditions. The survey entailed visual observations
from public right-of-way of 10 percent of the City’s housing stock that was over 20 years old. All types of
housing units were represented, including single family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, duplex units and
mobile homes. From a map of residential areas 20 years and older, addresses were chosen at random
(approximately every 10th address) to take part in the survey. Most housing units surveyed were in sound
condition or needed only minor repairs (86 percent). A small percentage needed moderate or substantial
repairs (14 percent). Table 2.16 illustrates the overall condition of all of the homes surveyed.
                                   Table 2.16 Housing Conditions Survey Results, 2008
          Housing Type           Sound       Minor       Moderate        Substantial    Dilapidated       Total
     Single                        93          20            15               4               0            132
     Mobile                         6           2             0               0               0             8
     Duplex                         2           0             0               0               0             2
     Multifamily                    4           2             2               0               0             8
     Total                        105          24            17               4               0            150
     Percent                      70%         16%           11%              3%              0%           100%
     Source: City of Cloverdale Staff Housing Conditions Survey, October 2008
     * Totals may not add up to 100% due to rounding
City of Cloverdale                                                                          2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                             2-33

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Housing conditions were defined as follows:
    Sound: A unit that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact. The foundation should appear
     structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof lines. Siding, windows, and doors should be in
     good repair with good exterior paint condition. Minor problems such as small areas of peeling paint
     and/or other maintenance items are allowable under this category.
    Minor: A unit that shows signs of deferred maintenance, or which needs only one major component, such
     as a roof.
    Moderate: A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components and other repairs, such as roof
     replacement, painting, and window repairs.
    Substantial: A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and possibly other repairs (e.g.
     complete foundation work, roof structure replacement and re-roofing, as well as painting and window
     replacement).
    Dilapidated: A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building appears structurally unsound and
     maintenance is non-existent, not fit for human habitation in its current condition, may be considered for
     demolition at minimum or major rehabilitation will be required.
As stated in Implementation Program 1.1.1, the City will collaborate with Sonoma County to advertise the
availability of rehabilitation assistance loan programs.
Tenure and Vacancy
As shown in Table 2.17, approximately 93 percent of housing units in Cloverdale were occupied as of 2010.
Approximately 66 percent were owner-occupied.
Vacancy rates are an indicator of a healthy housing market in which there is a balance between supply and
demand. HCD suggests than an overall vacancy rate of five to six percent indicates a well-balanced housing
market. Vacancy rates that are high or low can result in downward or upward price pressures. While the
vacancy rate of 7 percent in Cloverdale would seem to suggest a relatively appropriate balance in Cloverdale,
anecdotal information provided by members of the community indicates that the supply of available housing
is low, particularly the availability of rental homes.
Among vacant units, 37 percent were for sale and 23 percent were for rent. Approximately 17 percent were
held for seasonal or occasional use.
                                  Table 2.17 Household Tenure and Vacancy, 2010
                                          Tenure                      Number     Percentage
                    Occupied                                           3,182          93%
                      Owner-occupied                                   2,102          66%
                      Renter-occupied                                  1,080          34%
                    Vacant                                              245            7%
                      For rent                                           56           23%
                      For sale                                           90           37%
                      Rented or sold, not occupied                       28           11%
                      For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use      41           17%
                      Other vacant                                       30           12%
                    Total                                              3,427         100%
                    Source: US Census, 2010
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                        2-34

                                                                                    CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Overcrowding
Overcrowding occurs when there is more than one person per room (excluding bathrooms and kitchens).
Overcrowding is often a result of an inadequate supply of affordable and decent housing. Approximately 5
percent of occupied housing units in Cloverdale are overcrowded. As shown in Table 2.18, the problem is
more prevalent among renter households. Nearly 70 percent of overcrowded units are occupied by renters.
                                     Table 2.18 Overcrowded Housing Units, 2010
                                                                Owner-Occupied                    Renter-Occupied
                                                                             Percentage                     Percentage of
                 Level of Overcrowding                                         of Total                         Total
                                                             Number                          Number
                                                                              Occupied                        Occupied
                                                                                Units                           Units
  Over-crowded (1-1.5 persons/rm)                                45               1%             75              2%
  Severely over-crowded (>1.5 persons/rm)                        10              <1%             45              1%
  Total                                                          55              2%             120              4%
  Total occupied units                                                                   3,240
  Source: CHAS, based on ACS, 2006-2010
  Note: ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS reported figures may be subject
  to large margins of error.
2.3.4 Housing Costs and Affordability
Rental Prices
The price of rental units in Cloverdale varies depending on the neighborhood, tenure, and maintenance of the
unit. A survey of rental listings found limited options and availability. Table 2.19 shows listed unit prices by
unit size. Listed prices ranged from a low of $622 per month for a studio to $2,600 for a four-bedroom home.
Based on input from the community at the Housing Element workshop, rental vacancies are very low and
prices have increased rapidly in recent years.
                                         Table 2.19 Listed Rental Prices, 2014
                      Unit Size         Average List Price               Range            Number of Listings
               Studio                          $661                     $622-$700                   2
               1 bedroom                       $704                     $700-$850                   7
               2 bedroom                      $1,171                  $900-$1,250                   9
               3+ bedroom                     $1,803                $1,525-$2,600                   8
               Source: Padmapper.com, craigslist.com, cloverdale-california.olx.com, accessed in April and
               May 2014
Home Sale Prices
According to DataQuick (www.DQNews.com), the median home sales price in Cloverdale was $313,750 in
2013. As shown in Figure 2.3, median home prices in Cloverdale followed countywide trends, decreasing
from 2010 to 2011, increasing from 2011 to 2012, and rising dramatically from 2012 to 2013. The Cloverdale
median sales price increased approximately 28 percent from 2012 to 2013. The countywide median increased
approximately 33 percent for the same period, and the cities of Santa Rosa, Windsor, and Healdsburg saw
increases of 31, 17, and 10 percent, respectively. The rise in sales prices is a result of growing demand based
on consumer confidence and the improving economy, historically low interest rates, a low vacancy rate, and a
limited supply of new housing on the market.
City of Cloverdale                                                                            2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                           2-35

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
The median sales price in Cloverdale has been consistently lower than that of Sonoma County as a whole and
nearby jurisdictions. This is primarily attributable to Cloverdale’s location in the far north of the County, a
further distance from major job centers.
                                Figure 2.3 Median Home Sales Price, 2010 to 2013
              $500,000                                              $475,000
              $450,000                                                           $424,750
                                                         $400,500
                                            $385,000
              $400,000
              $350,000         $313,750
              $300,000                                                                       2010
              $250,000                                                                       2011
              $200,000                                                                       2012
              $150,000
                                                                                             2013
              $100,000
               $50,000
                    $-
                          Cloverdale Santa Rosa      Windsor    Healdsburg   Sonoma
                                                                              County
              Source: DataQuick
Affordability
Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing expenses.
According to HUD and HCD, housing is considered “affordable” if the monthly housing cost is no more than
30 percent of a household’s gross income. Table 2.20 shows affordable rent prices and estimated affordable
purchase prices based on 2014 income limits for Sonoma County.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                     City of Cloverdale
                                                       2-36

                                                                                   CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                  Table 2.20 Maximum Affordable Housing Payments, 2014
       Income                                         Monthly Housing Costs             Maximum Affordable Price
                        Affordable Total
       Group/                                                       Taxes and
                              Monthly
      Household                                    Utilities1     Insurance (for       Ownership2     Monthly Rental3
                             Payment
         Size                                                     homeowners)
   Extremely Low
    1 person                    $435                 $75                $31              $88,954           $360
   2 person                     $496                $100                $41              $98,853           $396
    3 person                    $559                $125                $51             $106,615           $434
    4 person                    $620                $150                $61             $116,254           $470
    Very Low
    1 person                    $724                 $75                $71             $132,580           $649
    2 person                    $826                $100                $86             $148,710           $726
    3 person                    $930                $125               $101             $165,036           $805
    4 person                   $1,033               $150               $116             $181,166           $883
    Low
   1 person                    $1,138                $75               $131             $195,599          $1,063
   2 person                    $1,300               $100               $160             $195,599          $1,200
   3 person                    $1,463               $125               $189             $200,000          $1,338
   4 person                    $1,625               $150               $218             $325,228          $1,475
   Moderate
   1 person                    $1,734                $75               $256             $342,300          $1,659
   2 person                    $1,983               $100               $303             $359,520          $1,883
   3 person                    $2,230               $125               $350             $444,645          $2,105
   4 person                    $2,478               $150               $397             $496,540          $2,328
   Source: HCD State Income Limits, 2014; Realtor.com mortgage calculator
   1. Monthly utility costs are assumed at $75/person and $25 for each additional person.
   2. Based on a 10% down payment, 5% fixed-interest rate, 30-year mortgage, and a monthly payment equal to 30% of
   income (after utilities, taxes, and insurance).
   3. Based on 30% of income less estimated utilities costs.
Based on state standards, the maximum affordable monthly rent for a very low-income household of four is
$883 per month. Rents in 2014 for a two-bedroom unit ranged from $900 to $1,250, making an adequately
sized rental unit out of the affordable range for a household at this income level. Rental prices are generally
affordable for low- and moderate-income households.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest rates and
qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association fees, property
insurance rates, and other factors. As noted above, the median home sale price in Cloverdale was $313,750 as
of 2013. At the median, home purchase prices are generally affordable for four-person households earning
low and moderate incomes, but are not affordable to extremely low or very low income households.
City of Cloverdale                                                                            2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                              2-37

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Overpayment
Overpayment is defined as paying more than 30 percent of monthly household income toward housing costs,
including cost of utilities, property insurance, and real estate tax. Severe overpayment is defined as paying
more than 50 percent of income toward housing costs. As of 2010, approximately 43 percent of Cloverdale
households were overpaying for housing. This is less than the estimated 46 percent Countywide, but higher
than the percentage for the Bay Area as a whole, which was 33 percent. As shown in Table 2.21,
approximately 43 percent of owner households and 47 percent of renter households were overpaying for
housing as of 2010.
                                       Table 2.21 Overpayment by Tenure, 2010
                                                       Total           Very Low         Low                         Above
      Tenure and Level of Overpayment                                                              Moderate
                                                  Overpaying            Income        Income                       Moderate
 Owner Occupied
                                    Number              630                80           115            230            205
 Paying 30-50% of income
                                  Percentage           30%                 4%            5%           11%             10%
                                    Number              264               120            80             54             10
 Paying >50% of income
                                  Percentage           13%                 6%            4%            3%             <1%
 Renter Occupied
                                    Number              240               125           100             15             0
 Paying 30-50% of income
                                    Percent            22%                12%            9%            1%              --
                                    Number              275               275             0             0              0
 Paying >50% of income
                                    Percent            25%                25%             --            --             --
 Source: CHAS, based on ACS, 2006-2010 (ABAG Data Profiles for Housing Elements, 2014)
 Note: ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS reported figures may be subject to
 large margins of error.
2.3.5 Special Housing Needs
Senior Households
The limited incomes of many seniors can make it difficult for them to find affordable housing. In addition,
many elderly people have physical disabilities that can limit their selection of suitable housing. As of 2010,
approximately 16 percent of the Cloverdale population was seniors. As shown in Table 2.22, the number of
seniors increased by approximately 42 percent from 2000 to 2010, from 974 to 1,382.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-38

                                                                             CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                     Table 2.22 Senior Population, 2000 and 2010
                                               2000                       2010               Percentage
                   Age
                                      Number       Percentage     Number     Percentage        Change
       65 to 74 years                    520           53%           715         52%             38%
       75 to 84 years                    333           34%           491         36%             47%
       85 years and older                121           12%           176         13%             45%
       Total                             974          100%          1,382       100%             42%
       Source: US Census, 2000 and 2010
Table 2.23 shows that there were 872 households in Cloverdale with at least one person 65 years or older
living in the household as of 2010. Of these households, approximately 80 percent were owner-occupied and
20 percent were renter-occupied.
                                       Table 2.23 Elderly Households by Tenure
                                                                                  Percentage of All
                                   Age                           Number
                                                                                     Households
             Owner-Occupied
             65 to 74 years                                         352                  40%
             75 to 84 years                                         258                  30%
             85 years and over                                       86                  10%
             Total                                                  696                  80%
             Renter Occupied
             65 to 74 years                                         111                  13%
             75 to 84 years                                          58                  7%
             85 years and over                                       22                  3%
             Total                                                  176                  20%
             Total Households
             65 to 74 years                                         463                  53%
             75 to 84 years                                         316                  36%
             85 years and over                                      108                  12%
             Total Households with Senior Householder               872                 100%
             Source: US Census, 2010
Many seniors live on fixed incomes, making them vulnerable to overpayment and other issues when rents
increase or when their home is in need of maintenance or repair. As shown in Table 2.24, approximately 24
percent of senior households had annual incomes of under $30,000 and approximately 18 percent of senior
households were living below the poverty level.
City of Cloverdale                                                                     2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                          2-39

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                        Table 2.24 Senior Household Income, 2011
                              Annual Household Income                     Number             Percentage
                    Income under $30,000                                     170                 24%
                    $30,000 to $49,999                                       235                 33%
                    $50,000 to $74,999                                       137                 19%
                    $75,000 to $99,999                                       124                 17%
                    More than $100,000                                         46                 6%
                    Total                                                    712                100%
                    Below Poverty Level                                        93                18%
                    Source: ACS, 2007-2011
                    Note: ACS figures are estimates based on samples. For a small city like Cloverdale, ACS
                    reported figures may be subject to large margins of error.
Table 2.25 lists care facilities for seniors and disabled persons along with the capacity of each facility. In
total, the City has a capacity of 97 people within its care facilities that work specifically with seniors.
                             Table 2.25 Care Facilities for Seniors and/or Disabled Persons
                                                                                                     Capacity
                              Facility Name                                Address
                                                                                                     (persons)
                                                              611 Cherry Creek Rd,
               Clear Water Lodge
                                                              Cloverdale CA 95425-3845                   15
               (assisted living and general care)
                                                              Phone: (707) 894-4615
               Villas at Cloverdale                           214 W. Third Street
                                                                                                          6
               (assisted living and general care)             Cloverdale CA 95425-3845
                                                              300 Cherry Creek Road,
               Cloverdale Healthcare Center
                                                              Cloverdale CA 95425                        76
               (general care)
                                                              Phone: (707)894-5201
               Total Capacity                                                                            97
               Source: California Social Services Department community Care Licensing Division,
               www.retirenet.com, accessed online April 17, 2014
Persons with Disabilities
According to state law, disabilities include, but are not limited to physical and mental disabilities. A “mental
disability” involves any mental or psychological disorder or condition, such as mental retardation, organic
brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, or specific learning disabilities that limit a major life activity. A
“physical disability” includes any physiological disease, disorder, condition, cosmetic disfigurement or
anatomical loss of body functions. Physical disabilities include those that are neurological, immunological, or
musculoskeletal in nature as well as those that involve the respiratory, cardiovascular, reproductive,
genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic or digestive systems and those involving the special sense organs, speech
organs, skin or endocrine system.
The 2010 US Census did not collect detailed information regarding disabilities and ACS data on this subject
is presented with an unacceptable high margin of error for small communities. Thus, the most recent reliable
data regarding persons with disabilities in Cloverdale is from the 2000 US Census. As shown in Table 2.26,
approximately 20 percent of the total population had some type of disability.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                   City of Cloverdale
                                                             2-40

                                                                                CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                        Table 2.26 Persons with a Disability, 2000
                                                                                        Percentage of Total
                          Age and Disability Status                     Number
                                                                                             Population
             Persons age 5-64 with a disability                            882                   16%
             Persons age 65 + with a disability                            393                   40%
             Total persons with a disability                              1,275                  20%
             Total population (age 5+)                                    6,445                   --
             Source: US Census, 2000
             * Table should not add up to 100 percent
Table 2.27 shows the total number of disabilities for the 5 to 64 and 65 and over age groups. Many of these
persons have more than one disability, which is why there are a higher number of disabilities listed than there
are disabled persons. The greatest portion of disabilities is employment disabilities followed by physical
disabilities.
                                     Table 2.27 Disabilities by Type and Age, 2000
                                                Disabilities in Persons Ages     Disabilities in Persons Age
                     Disability Type                         5-64                             65+
                                                  Number          Percentage       Number          Percentage
            Sensory disability                      106               12%            125               32%
           Physical disability                      238               27%            318               81%
           Mental disability                        209               24%             68               17%
           Self-care disability                       84              10%             73               19%
           Go-outside-home disability               284               32%            128               33%
           Employment disability                    504               57%             --                --
           Total                                    882              100%            393              100%
           Source: US Census, 2000
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
Senate Bill (SB) 812 requires the City to include the needs of individuals with a developmental disability
within the community in the special housing needs analysis. According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, a “developmental disability” means a disability that originates before an individual attains
age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability
for that individual which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently in a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is
provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical
attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the
first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
City of Cloverdale                                                                          2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                            2-41

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based services
to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide
system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The North
Bay Regional Center (NBRC) is one of 21 regional centers in California that provides point of entry to
services for people with developmental disabilities. The center is a private, nonprofit community agency that
contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities
and their families.
According to the NBRC, the center serves 47 developmentally disabled persons who reside in and around
Cloverdale (those residing in the 95424 zip code). As shown in Table 2.28, about half of these residents are
age 22 or younger and thus are likely to live at home with family and receive services through public schools.
                           Table 2.28 Developmentally Disabled Residents by Age, 2014
    Zip Code        0-14 Years       15-22 Years    23-54 Years      55-65 Years      65+ Years        Total
      95424             22                1              17               5               2             47
 Source: North Bay Regional Center, 2014
A variety of housing types are appropriate for people living with a developmental disability: rent-subsidized
homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home
purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes. The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity
to services and transit, and the availability of group living opportunities represent some of the types of
considerations that are important in serving this need group. Incorporating “barrier-free” design in all new
multifamily housing (as required by California and federal fair housing laws) is especially important to
provide the widest range of choices for disabled residents.
While the NBRC and its service partners typically promote and work toward a scattered-site housing model in
which persons with developmental disabilities reside in housing units that are incorporated into the
community, group facilities remain an option for some clients with more severe medical needs. Sonoma
County is home to the Sonoma Developmental Center, one of four remaining large group care facilities in
California. The center is home to over 400 persons with developmental disabilities.
While plans and a specific time frame have not yet been finalized, the State is slated to close the Sonoma
Developmental Center. The closure will result in a need for new housing sites for center residents.
Implementation Program 3.4.2 directs the City to monitor the potential closing of the Sonoma Developmental
Center and work with the NBRC, relevant agencies, other local jurisdictions, and housing and service
providers to provide support and assistance, as appropriate.
Large Families
Large families are defined as households containing five or more persons. They are considered a special needs
group because there is a limited supply of adequately sized housing to accommodate their needs. A lack of
larger affordable units can force large families to reside in overcrowded conditions. As shown in Table 2.29,
approximately 10 percent of owner-occupied households and 16 percent of renter-occupied households in
Cloverdale are comprised of 5 or more people.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                     City of Cloverdale
                                                       2-42

                                                                           CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                    Table 2.29 Household Size by Tenure, 2010
                                                 Owner-Occupied                  Renter-Occupied
                 Household Size                          Percentage of                    Percentage of
                                            Number of                       Number of
                                                               Total                           Total
                                           Households                       Households
                                                           Households                       Households
        5-person household                     117              6%              79              7%
        6-person household                      57              3%              56              5%
       7+ person household                      39              2%              33              3%
       Total                                   213             10%             168             16%
       Source: US Census, 2010
Single-Parent and Female-Headed Households
Single-parent households are male- and female-headed households with children under the age of 18 living at
home. Single-parent households generally have lower incomes than a two-parent household. Single-parent
households often require special attention due to their need for affordable childcare, health care and housing
assistance. Female-headed households especially tend to have lower incomes, limiting the availability of
housing.
As of the 2010 Census, approximately 12 percent of households in the City were single-parent households
and about 75 percent of those were female-headed. Approximately 33 percent of female- headed households
were below poverty level, compared to 7 percent of all households in the City.
Farmworkers
Agriculture is a very important industry for City, county, and the region. The Sonoma County Agricultural
Commissioner’s annual report on agricultural production indicated that the value for 2012 agricultural
production was $821,345,000, an increase of approximately 41 percent from the 2011 value of $581,081,700.
The industry is a major employer. Annual agricultural employment data collected by the State Employment
Development Department (EDD) for 2013 indicated that the North Coast region, which includes Sonoma
County, had 12,500 workers employed in agriculture and 2,900 farm laborers.
According to the 2008-2012 ACS, 277 Cloverdale residents were employed in agriculture and related
industries. According to estimates from the Santa Rosa Regional Office of the Butte County Office of
Education, which administers the Migrant Education program, there were 165 students from migrant families
enrolled in Cloverdale schools as of the 2012-2013 school year. The count includes students enrolled in pre-
school through 12th grade. Migrant children are defined as those who have moved in the preceding three years
to accompany a family member or guardian in order to obtain temporary or seasonal employment in
agricultural, fishing, or logging (except lumber mills) work. The Migrant Education program addresses the
special needs of migrant children whose learning is impacted by frequent mobility, poverty, and limited
English skills.
Because migrant families may have one child, multiple children or no children, this data can not be used to
determine the number of farmworker households in Cloverdale, however, this data, along with the estimates
from the ACS confirm the need for farmworker housing and resources in Cloverdale. Specifically, this data
confirms the need for affordable family housing.
City of Cloverdale                                                                  2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                      2-43

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Many farmworkers earn extremely low and very low annual incomes. According to the State Economic
Development Department’s occupational profile, the 2013 hourly wage for farmworkers was $10.98. Low
household incomes can force farmworkers and their families to live in substandard or overcrowded
conditions.
Farmworker housing can be accommodated in a variety of types in Cloverdale. Mixed-use, multifamily and
single-room occupancy (SRO) units may be appropriate for establishing affordable options to serve this
group. In addition, the City allows agricultural housing for up to six persons as a residential use in all
residential districts.
According to the Sonoma County Task Force for the Homeless, the following resources serve farmworkers in
the county:
   Santa Rosa Junior College - English Language Classes - (707) 527-4382
   Non-seasonal job training - California Human Development Anthony Soto Employment Training – (707)
    521-4764
   Legal Assistance - California Rural Assistance (CRLA) – (707)-528-9941
   Social, educational and health services– Migrant Education Program – (707) 526-1272
   Employment training and resources – Graton Day Labor Center – (707) 829-1864
   Employment training and resources –Healdsburg day Labor Center – (707) 433-6652
   English as a Second Language (ESL) and General Educational Development (GED) classes, computer
    literacy, after school mentoring, food, rental assistance, mobile health van and family counseling – La
    Luz Center – (707) 938-5131
The City is committed to improving housing conditions and creating new affordable housing opportunities for
farmworkers. Implementation Programs 3.6.1 and 3.6.2 direct the City to work with developers trying to
obtain funding for affordable housing and to coordinate with Sonoma County to address farmworker housing
needs.
Homeless Persons
The housing needs of homeless and individuals present a particular challenge because of the variety and
complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness. The nature of homelessness makes it difficult to
accurately quantify the number of homeless persons in the City. Persons seeking shelter fluctuates based on
the season, with more persons seeking shelter during the cold winter months.
Over the last decade, homelessness has increased dramatically. According to the Sonoma County Continuum
of Care 10-year Homeless Action Plan published in 2007, approximately 600 new people became homeless
every year between 1997 and 2007. The most comprehensive data regarding the number of homeless persons
in Cloverdale is a point-in-time count conducted every two years by the Sonoma County Task Force for the
Homeless. This count was most recently completed in January 2013 and found 4,280 homeless persons
countywide, approximately 77 percent of whom were unsheltered. Among these, 111 were counted in
Cloverdale.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                     2-44

                                                                            CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
The 2013 Cloverdale count is comparable to the 2011 count, which found 114 homeless persons in the City.
Counts may fluctuate due to actual changes in the homeless population or due to variations in survey
methodology. In 2013, 87 percent of homeless persons counted in Cloverdale were unsheltered.
Countywide, approximately 71 percent of homeless persons counted were male. Approximately 33 percent
were age 24 or under. The majority, 80 percent, resided in Sonoma County prior to becoming homeless.
Wallace House, operated by Cloverdale Community Outreach Committee (CCOC), provides shelter beds,
transitional and supportive housing, and support services to homeless persons and low-income households.
CCOC participates in the homeless count coordinated by Sonoma County and notes that demand for shelter
and services has been relatively steady in recent years. CCOC representatives are aware of typical places
where homeless persons camp or sleep (by the river and in outlying areas) and estimate that long-term
inhabitants of Sonoma County comprise a large percentage of the counted population; however, CCOC noted
that a small percentage is a transient population moving through the area, staying only for a short term.
Wallace House offers four shelter and six transitional beds. Wallace House strives to initially provide shelter,
and then get persons the resources and the assistance they need to achieve a stable housing solution. This is
done through coordination with other agencies and resources and an emphasis on case management.
In addition to providing shelter, CCOC works to prevent homelessness by paying rent and utility bills on an
emergency basis and by providing security deposits for rental units. It also refers clients to support services
and other agencies that can assist in finding long-term housing and rent subsidies.
While Wallace House provides essential services for the homeless and lower-income persons in the
community, there is a need for additional capacity. As noted in the Community Participation section in
Chapter 2, Wallace House facilities consistently operate at 100 percent capacity with a typical wait list of six
months. CCOC is actively pursuing expansion opportunities and will work with the City on the development
of housing facilities at Cherry Creek Village.
As stated in Implementation Programs 3.1.1, 3.5.1, and 3.5.2, the City will continue to monitor homeless
needs and work to pursue funding and assistance for organizations providing shelter and assistance. In
addition, as noted in Implementation Program 2.1.3, the City anticipates initiating development plans for
Cherry Creek Village and Thyme Square as soon as a resolution is reached regarding former Redevelopment
Agency assets.
2.3.6 Assisted Housing Inventory
Assisted housing is defined as units in which all or part of the costs are subsidized by the public sector so that
housing is available to lower-income households at affordable rates. Additionally, affordable units have been
developed through the City’s inclusionary housing and density bonus programs. As shown in Table 2.30,
assisted housing developments in Cloverdale provide a total of 275 affordable housing units. The City has
utilized a variety of funding sources to assist in the development of affordable housing, including
redevelopment set aside funds (no longer available due to the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency),
inclusionary housing fees, grants, and Low-Income Housing Tax Credits.
City of Cloverdale                                                                    2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                       2-45

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                               Table 2.30 Assisted Housing Developments in Cloverdale
                                                                                                       Earliest
              Name of                                                                 Affordable
                                               Address             Funding Source                      Date of
          Development                                                                    Units
                                                                                                     Conversion
 Citrus Commons                        19 Clark Avenue           TCAC, CDBG, RDA          34            2061
                                                                    USDA Rental
 Cloverdale Garden
                                       18 Clark Avenue            Assistance/TCAC,        70            2041
 Apartments
                                                                          RDA
 Divine Seniors Apartments             141 Healdsburg Avenue             TCAC             32            2036
 Kings Valley Apartments               100 Kings Circle         HUD/TCAC, Section 8       99            2033
 Oak Meadows Apartments                121 Healdsburg Avenue         Inclusionary          2            2061
 Quincy Court                          408 N. Cloverdale Blvd.      Density bonus          2            2036
 Vineyard Manor                        19 Clark Avenue                TCAC, RDA           36            2046
 Total                                                                                    275
 Source: California Housing Partnership Corporation, 2014
Units at Risk of Converting to Market Rate
HCD defines “at-risk units” as affordable housing units that are eligible to convert to market rate within ten
years of the start of the current planning period (through 2025). As shown above, none of Cloverdale’s
affordable units are at-risk of conversion during this time period. This is due to extensive work to preserve
and rehabilitate affordable units in recent years. Most recently, the City worked with EAH Housing to
rehabilitate and preserve the affordability of the 99 senior units in Kings Valley Apartments.
The City also provided funding and assistance in the preservation and rehabilitation of Citrus Commons,
Cloverdale Garden Apartments, and Vineyard Manor. The preservation of existing affordable housing is a
core component of the City’s housing program.
The City has funded its at-risk program through the use of inclusionary housing fees and redevelopment set
aside funds (as noted above, these funds are no longer available). The City’s goal is to achieve a ten-fold
investment in affordable rental housing above its initial investment, so that every dollar of City funds results
in ten dollars invested in the project overall.
While no units are at-risk during this planning period, Implementation Program 1.3.1 commits the City to
continuing to monitor the affordable housing stock and work proactively to retain units. As potential
conversion issues arise, the City will work to partner with an appropriate non-profit entity. Qualified entities
include (but are not limited to): Affordable Housing Foundation, BRIDGE Housing Corporation, Burbank
Housing Development Corporation, Christian Church Homes of Northern California, Inc., Community Home
Builders and Associates, Eden Housing Inc., Foundation for Affordable Housing, Inc., Housing Land Trust of
Sonoma County, Nehemiah Progressive Housing Development Corporation, Pacific Community Services
Inc., Petaluma Ecumenical Properties Inc., Senior Housing Foundation, and Sonoma County Community
Development Commission.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                      City of Cloverdale
                                                          2-46

                                                                          CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.4 Land Inventory and Housing Resources
State law requires the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) to project
statewide housing needs and allocate the anticipated need to each region in the State. For the greater San
Francisco Bay Area, HCD provides the regional need to the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG),
which then distributes the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) to the cities and counties within the
ABAG region.
Projected housing needs in the RHNA are described by income categories as established by HCD: very low,
low, moderate, and above moderate income. Additionally, State housing element statutes require that
jurisdictions project housing needs for extremely low-income households. This is assumed to be half of the
very low-income allocation.
Cloverdale’s share of the 2014 to 2022 RHNA is 211 units. Table 2.31 provides a breakdown of units by
income category.
                             Table 2.31 2014–2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
          Income Category
                                                  Number of Units                  Percentage of Total
         (Percentage of AMI)
 Extremely low (<30%)                                    19                                 9%
 Very low (31-50%)                                       20                                  9%
 Low (51-80%)                                            29                                 14%
 Moderate (81-120%)                                      31                                 15%
 Above moderate (>120%)                                 112                                 53%
 Total                                                  211                                100%
 Source: ABAG 2014–2022 RHNA, 2013
Local governments can employ a variety of strategies to meet RHNA housing production goals, as provided
in Government Code Section 65583(c)(1), including vacant land zoned for residential uses, development of
second units, and the potential for redevelopment of underutilized sites.
As shown in Table 2.32, Cloverdale has adequate sites to accommodate the RHNA. Identified sites provide a
realistic capacity for 750 units in a range of densities, suitable to meet the needs of a variety of household
types and income levels. The inventory includes specific residential projects that are planned or approved for
development, as well as vacant and underutilized sites that are appropriate for housing development.
A map of sites is included as Figure 2.4. The map shows the location of planned/approved projects, vacant
sites, and underutilized sites, as well as the location of the planned SMART station. The inventory includes 12
sites that are located within a half-mile radius of the station site. A half-mile is widely considered to be a
comfortable walking distance. As stated in Implementation Program 6.3.1, the City will encourage the
development of housing in close proximity to the SMART train as well as the services and amenities in the
downtown area to promote walking and biking.
As stated in Implementation Program 2.1.1, the City will continue to track and monitor the inventory of
available sites throughout the planning period to ensure that adequate sites remain available to accommodate
the City’s RHNA.
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                         2-47

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                      Table 2.32 Capacity to Meet the 2014–2022 RHNA
                                                 Planned/
                                                                      Vacant      Underutilized
                                                Approved                                                                Remaining
                               2014-2022                               Land2            Sites3            Total
  Income Category                                Projects1                                                                 RHNA
                                 RHNA                               (see Table      (see Table         Capacity
                                                (see Table                                                               (surplus)
                                                                       2.34)            2.35)
                                                    2.33)
Extremely Low                      19
Very Low                           20                 19                149               23               191             (123)
Low                                29
Moderate                           31
                                                     137                306              116               559             (416)
Above Moderate                    112
TOTAL                             211                156                455              139               750             (539)
Sources: ABAG 2014–2022 RHNA, 2013; City of Cloverdale, 2014
1. Planned/approved sites capacity are based on specific development proposals or permitted development plans. The
number of units affordable to lower-income households is estimated based on the City’s inclusionary housing regulations.
2. Vacant land capacity is based on allowed density, adjusted to 50% of the maximum for mixed-use sites and 80% of the
maximum for sites zoned only for residential uses. These realistic capacity assumptions are based on development regulations
on past development activity. The number of units that may be appropriate for potential lower-income units is based on
density and parcel size. In accordance with the state’s default density provision, sites with densities of 20 units or more per
acre are assumed to be appropriate for accommodating lower-income housing development. Sites that are approximately 1
acre or larger in size are assumed to provide potential capacity for lower-income units.
3. Underutilized land capacity is based on allowed density, adjusted to 80% of the maximum (without a density bonus). The
potential for lower-income units is from one site – a 1.8-acre property owned by the City that is planned for future affordable
housing development (Cherry Creek).
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                      City of Cloverdale
                                                                2-48

                                                         CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                   Figure 2.4 Residential Land Inventory
City of Cloverdale                                               2015–2023 Housing Element
                                    2-49

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.4.1 Land Inventory
Projects Planned and Approved
As shown in Table 2.33, 156 new housing units are planned or entitled in three development projects in
Cloverdale: Alexander Valley Resort, Southcrest Acres, and Vista Oaks Subdivisions. While the Vista Oaks
and Southcrest Acres projects have agreed to pay fees in lieu of building on-site affordable units to meet the
City’s inclusionary requirements, the City anticipates that the Alexander Valley Resort project will provide 19
affordable units. The location of the projects is depicted on the map in Figure 2.4.
                                  Table 2.33 Planned or Approved Residential Projects
                                                                                       Units Planned/
                Map #                         Project Name                   Acres
                                                                                         Approved
                   1            Alexander Valley Resort                        254           130
                   2            Southcrest Acres (Cherry Creek Road)           2.20            7
                   3            Vista Oaks Subdivision                        42.62           19
           Total                                                             298.82          156
           Source: City of Cloverdale Community Development Department, 2014
Alexander Valley Resort
The Alexander Valley Resort project is entitled for the development of single-family residences, a golf
course, a hotel, and other commercial uses. The property, formerly home to a wood processing plant, has
undergone extensive environmental cleanup, including treatment of contaminated ground water and soil.
Alexander Valley Resort is likely to be marketed as a luxury lifestyle community. Thus, it is assumed that
units that are not restricted for affordability will be affordable only to households with above moderate
incomes. While the property has an approved specific plan, building permits have not yet been issued. The
construction schedule is dependent on market conditions.
Southcrest Acres
The Southcrest Acres development consists of 7 single-family homes on approximately 2.2 acres of land.
Homes will be available at market rates, affordable to moderate and above moderate income households. This
project was initially approved in 2007 but stalled due to financing issues and market conditions. As of this
writing, the project is moving forward and is slated for construction in summer 2014.
Vista Oaks Subdivision
Vista Oaks Subdivision is a development of 19 custom single-family homes on approximately 43 acres of
land. The planned homes will range in size from approximately 2,800 to 4,800 square feet. Based on the
development plan and site conditions, the City Council has approved the payment of in-lieu fees rather than
the provision of on-site affordable units to satisfy the development’s inclusionary housing obligation. Thus it
is assumed that all homes in this development will be affordable only to moderate or above moderate income
households.
Vacant Land
Table 2.34 provides a detailed inventory of vacant land zoned for residential development. The location of
vacant sites is depicted in the map in Figure 2.4. The City identified a total of 72.93 acres of land. Based on
General Plan and zoning standards, this land can accommodate a maximum of 637 units (without a density
bonus); however, the realistic capacity is estimated at 455 units. All listed sites are served by City
infrastructure and are not limited by specific physical or environmental constraints.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                      City of Cloverdale
                                                         2-50

                                                                            CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Sites designated Downtown Commercial (DTC) and Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) may develop at
residential densities of up to 20 units per acres. The DTC emphasizes mixed-use development; thus residential
uses are permitted on upper floors, but only with a PUD on the first floor. While the TOD district is also
intended to facilitate a mix of uses, multifamily residential-only developments are permitted. Sites in these
districts range in size from small infill parcels to multiple acres. The realistic capacity for sites in mixed-use
districts is estimated at 50 percent of the maximum allowed to account for potential commercial development.
Site number 16, known as “Thyme Square,” serves as an important opportunity site for the City. This 5.3-acre
property is centrally located at the entrance to downtown Cloverdale and is located within a half mile of the
planned SMART station. The site was purchased by the Redevelopment Agency (RDA) and planned for a
residential mixed-use development. However, the dissolution of the RDA and recessed economy halted
development plans. The City is working closely with the State to resolve remaining issues related to the RDA
dissolution. As stated in Implementation Program 2.1.3, the City is prepared to make the site available for
development as soon as possible within the planning period.
Site number 23, the Riverdale Ranch site, is located outside of the City limits but is under review for
annexation. A project consisting of 220 single-family homes, commercial uses, and a public park was
proposed for the site but was unable to move forward due to economic conditions. Upon approval of the
annexation, City water and sewer service will need to be extended to serve the area.
City of Cloverdale                                                                    2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                        2-51

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                         Table 2.34 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                              Max.
                                                                                         Max.      Realistic
 Map                                                                         Density
            APN                 Address/ Location             Acres   Zone             Capacity    Capacity
  #                                                                         (units per
                                                                                        (units)     (units)1
                                                                              acre)
Downtown Commercial (DTC)
   4    001-175-004   123 N. Cloverdale Blvd. (Cook)           0.13    DTC      20         3            1
   5    001-175-005   119 N. Cloverdale Blvd. (Cook)           0.09    DTC      20         2            1
   6    001-172-012   117 E. 2nd Street (parking lot)          0.14    DTC      20         3            1
   7    001-173-001   123 Broad Street (next to bike shop)     0.20    DTC      20         4            2
                      Railroad Avenue (adjacent to RR
   8    001-111-040                                            0.14    DTC      20        3             1
                      Station Bar and Grill)
                      220 S. Cloverdale Blvd. (next to S.
   9    001-111-021                                            0.19    DTC      20        4             2
                      Andrews Sheet Metal)
Subtotal DTC                                                   0.89                       19            8
Transit-Oriented Development (TOD)
        001-211-018
  10                  221 Live Oak Lane (Glucas)               4.43    TOD      20        89           44
        001-211-012
  11    001-122-026   1 Citrus Fair Drive (fairgrounds)        1.05    TOD      20        21           11
  12    001-103-041   129 Railroad Avenue (parking lot)        0.57    TOD      20        11            6
  13    001-103-038   105 Railroad Avenue (south side)         0.27    TOD      20         5            3
                      NW Corner of Healdsburg Ave. and
  14    001-440-050                                            1.52    TOD      20        30           15
                      N. Cloverdale Blvd.
                      Asti Road and Citrus Fair Drive
  15    116-260-032                                            2.55    TOD      20        51           26
                      (across from rail station)
                      NW Corner of Healdsburg Ave. and
  16    001-440-049                                            5.30    TOD      20       106           53
                      N. Cloverdale Blvd. (Thyme Square)
                      SE Corner of Citrus Fair Drive and N.
  17    001-103-044   Cloverdale Blvd. (adjacent to            0.36    TOD      20         7            4
                      quonset hut)
Subtotal TOD                                                  16.05                      320          162
High Density Residential
        001-280-005   815 S. Cloverdale Blvd. (PD17,
  18                                                           2.05     PD      16        33           26
        001-280-007   Brookside)
Subtotal HDR                                                   2.05                       33           26
Medium Density Residential
  19    001-021-021   531 N. Cloverdale Blvd. (PD15, rink)     0.50     PD      8          4            3
        001-151-028
  20                  Creekside Subdivision (PD16)             2.48     PD       8        20           16
        001-151-038
  21    001-162-012   306 N. Cloverdale Blvd. at E 3rd St.     0.28     R-2     8          2            2
  22    001-151-023   612 N. Cloverdale Blvd. at N St.         1.18     R-2     8          9            8
        115-150-002
        115-150-007
  23    115-150-039   Riverdale Ranch Annex2                    47     n/a     n/a       220          220
        115-150-052
        115-150-055
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                 City of Cloverdale
                                                        2-52

                                                                                       CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                                                                             Max.
                                                                                                            Max.       Realistic
 Map                                                                                        Density
              APN                     Address/ Location                 Acres     Zone                   Capacity     Capacity
   #                                                                                      (units per
                                                                                                           (units)      (units)1
                                                                                             acre)
          115-150-067
          115-150-068
          115-150-074
          115-150-075
          115-160-038
           15-160-058
Subtotal MDR                                                            51.44                                255          249
Low Density Residential
  24      117-350-003      103 Polaris Court (PD14)                      0.25       PD         4              1            1
  25      117-350-008      102 Polaris Court (PD14)                      0.20       PD         4              1            1
  26      117-350-011      103 Orion Court (PD14)                        0.25       PD         4              1            1
  27      117-350-014      102 Orion Court (PD14)                        0.27       PD         4              1            1
  28      117-350-007      106 Polaris Court (PD14)                      0.25       PD         4              1            1
  29      117-350-005      107 Polaris Court (PD14)                      0.33       PD         4              1            1
  30      117-350-009      100 Polaris Court (PD14)                      0.23       PD         4              1            1
  31      117-350-013      104 Orion Court (PD14)                        0.29       PD         4              1            1
  32      117-350-010      101 Orion Court (PD14)                        0.19       PD         4              1            1
  33      117-350-012      106 Orion Court (PD14)                        0.24       PD         4              1            1
Subtotal LDR                                                             2.50                                 10           10
TOTAL                                                                   72.93                                637          455
Source: City of Cloverdale Community Development Department, 2014
1. Realistic capacity is assumed at 50% of the max. allowed in the DTC and TOD mixed-use districts and at 80% of the max.
allowed in residential districts. These assumptions are based on past projects and development applications and are
intended to account for unique site considerations and the potential for commercial development. Actual density may be
lower, at the max. allowed, or higher with the use of a density bonus.
2. The Riverdale Ranch site is located outside of City limits but under review for annexation (thus it has not yet been zoned).
Underutilized Land
Table 2.35 identifies sites that are currently in use but hold potential for additional residential use. Sites are in
a range of sizes and are located in zones that allow densities of up to 16 units per acre. Because of the
maximum allowed density, it is assumed that residential development on these sites will primarily serve to
provide opportunities for moderate- and above moderate-income households.
The exception is site number 27, which is owned by the City of Cloverdale. The site is currently occupied by
a residential motel that serves as a transitional housing facility. This 1.8-acre property was purchased by the
RDA and is planned for affordable housing. Due to the dissolution of the RDA and economic recession, the
development plans were put on hold. The City is working diligently with the state to resolve former RDA
property issues as soon as possible.
City of Cloverdale                                                                                2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                                2-53

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                          Table 2.35 Underutilized Land Inventory
                                                                    Max.
                                                                                  Max.      Realistic
Map                             Address/                          Density
              APN                              Acres    Zone                   Capacity     Capacity         Existing Use
  #                             Location                         (units per
                                                                                 (units)     (units)*
                                                                   acre)
High Density Residential
                            422 S. Franklin                                                               Single-family
  34       001-300-011                          0.60     R-3         16            10            8
                            street                                                                        residence
                                                                                                          Residential
                                                                                                          motel (Cherry
                            520 S.
           001-310-041                                                                                    Creek);
  35                        Cloverdale          1.80     R-3         16            29           23
           001-310-042                                                                                    constrained by
                            Blvd.
                                                                                                          a creek and
                                                                                                          flood plain
Subtotal HDR                                     2.4                               39           31
Medium Density Residential
                            530 N.
                                                                                                          Single-family
  36       001-151-013      Cloverdale          0.93     R-2          8            7             6
                                                                                                          residence
                            Blvd.
                            548 N.
                                                                                                          Single-family
  37       001-151-009      Cloverdale          0.80     R-2          8            6             5
                                                                                                          residence
                            Blvd.
                            532 N.
                                                                                                          Single-family
  38       001-151-007      Cloverdale          0.92     R-2          8             7            6
                                                                                                          residence
                            Blvd.
                            606A N.
                                                                                                          Single-family
  39       001-151-035      Cloverdale          0.30     R-2          8            2             2
                                                                                                          residence
                            Blvd.
                            720 N.
                                                                                                          Single story four-
  40       001-151-024      Cloverdale          0.80     R-2          8            6             5
                                                                                                          plex
                            Blvd.
                            231 University                                                                Single-family
  41       001-161-001                          1.50     R-2          8            12           10
                            Street                                                                        residence
Subtotal Medium Density Residential             5.25                               40           34
Low Density Residential
                            204 Live Oak                                                                  Single-family
  42       001-211-015                          0.40     R-1          4            2             1
                            Lane                                                                          residence
  43       116-110-025      Fourth Street       9.20     R-1          4            37           29        Agriculture
                                                                                                          Single-family
  44       116-110-026      Second Street      13.76     R-1          4            55           44
                                                                                                          residence
Subtotal LDR                                   23.36                               94           74
TOTAL                                          31.01                              173          139
Source: City of Cloverdale Community Development Department, 2014
* Realistic capacity is assumed at 80% of the maximum allowed. This assumption is based on past projects and development
applications and is intended to account for unique site considerations. Actual density may be lower, at the maximum
allowed, or higher with the use of a density bonus.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                                City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-54

                                                                           CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.4.2 Financial and Administrative Resources
In addition to sites that are appropriately zoned for housing, programs that provide affordable units through
regulations, and assist in the development of affordable units through funding and development assistance, are
essential in providing affordable homes and improving the feasibility of affordable housing development.
Assistance and resources are available locally, regionally, and from the state and federal governments.
City and County Resources
Inclusionary Housing Program
Units
Housing developments of five or more units are subject to the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance. The
ordinance is intended to increase the number of affordable units in the community and ensure that affordable
homes are provided in locations throughout the City and in a wide variety of housing types and styles.
Affordable homes developed under this program are intended to be indistinguishable from market rate homes.
Fees
Under certain circumstances, a developer may pay fees, rather than providing the actual units. These fees are
used to assist in the development of additional affordable units or fund housing and housing-related service
programs.
City Housing Preference Program
The City has established a set of preferences to guide housing program administration. The preferences were
established as part of a larger effort to make Cloverdale a whole community where residents can live, work,
shop, and play. Preference elements are:
1) Provide affordable housing so that those who provide essential services to the community (police officers,
    teachers, health care workers, public employees, etc.) are able to respond quickly to issues and
    emergencies from homes in Cloverdale rather than from commute locations.
2) Provide affordable housing so that employers located in Cloverdale can find employees who live in
    Cloverdale and minimize the need for employees to commute from lower-cost housing outside of
    Cloverdale.
3) Provide affordable housing so that families are not divided by housing costs. Young adults do not have to
    leave when starting a new household. Family members can move into Cloverdale and find an affordable
    place to live.
4) Meet housing needs locally, with a progression of housing services to allow residents to move from
    affordable units to market rate ownership, including a progression from homeless shelter/transitional
    housing to standard housing.
Mortgage Credit Certificates
The Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC) provides a federal credit that can reduce potential federal
income tax liability, creating additional net spending income that borrowers can use toward their monthly
mortgage payment. Assistance for this program is typically provided by the Sonoma County Community
Development Commission; however, as of this writing in May 2014, Sonoma County does not have any MCC
resources. Interested parties should seek assistance through the California Housing Finance Agency
(CalHFA).
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                      2-55

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Community Development Block Grants (CDBG)
The City participates in the Sonoma County CDBG program. The program funds a wide variety of housing
and community development activities. Funding may be used for land acquisition for new affordable housing
projects, rehabilitation of existing housing, infrastructure improvements, fair housing services, and other
public services.
Home Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program
The City participates in a consortium of communities to apply for and allocate HOME funds annually. The
program is administered through the Sonoma County Community Development Commission. HOME funds
can be used to support affordable housing activities that benefit very low- and low-income households.
Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
Lower-income Cloverdale homeowners are eligible for low-interest housing rehabilitation programs
administered by Sonoma County. Loans are typically issued at 3 percent interest for a 20-year term. The
maximum loan amount is $50,000 for repairs to single-family homes and $24,000 for repairs to mobile
homes. The loan can be used to fund a variety of repairs. Typical projects include re-roofing, gutter
replacement, window replacement, new furnaces and water heaters, structural repairs, porch replacement (this
list is not comprehensive; contact the Sonoma County Community Development Commission for details).
The loan program is funded by CDBG.
Housing Choice Vouchers (Section 8)
The Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program assists low-income households with rent payments. The
program is intended to give participating families flexibility in choosing a home of the type and in the
location of their choosing. For most of Sonoma County, Section 8 vouchers are administered by the Sonoma
County Community Development Commission. As of June 2014, 108 Cloverdale households were utilizing
these vouchers. Unfortunately, due to limited program funding and high demand, the wait list for new
families seeking assistance through the program is long. There are approximately 20,000 households on the
list and typical wait times range from four to six years. The County has a total of 2,800 vouchers, which
become available only when a household leaves the program.
State and Federal Resources
State and federal funding resources are typically provided directly to affordable housing developers. The City
can provide technical assistance and local funds for leverage (when available). Funding sources include:
    Housing Enables by Local Partnerships Program (HELP), administered by CHFA
    Joe Serna, Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant Program, administered by HCD
    Low-Income Housing Tax Credits
    Mortgage Revenue Bond Program, administered by CHFA
    Multifamily Housing Program, administered by HCD
    Rural Development Loan Program financed by HCD
    Transit-Oriented Development Housing Program, administered by HCD
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                      2-56

                                                                           CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.5 Potential Constraints
The availability, cost, and quality of housing for all income groups is influenced by a number of factors,
including the availability of financing; governmental practices and regulations; local housing market
conditions; public and private attitudes toward housing for local residents, particularly housing for lower-
income households and individuals; and environmental issues and infrastructure capacity. This section
examines these topics to identify potential local constraints to housing production.
2.5.1 Governmental Constraints
While local ordinances and policies are typically adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
residents, they may also create a barrier to the development of housing. Some barriers are intentional, such as
the City’s Urban Growth Boundary, while others may be unintentional such as building standards and impact
fees.
This section reviews the governmental regulations and procedures that apply to housing development in
Cloverdale. The section analyzes potential limitations imposed by City standards and where applicable,
describes actions taken or planned to minimize or eliminate constraints.
Land Use Controls
General Plan
The City of Cloverdale General Plan was adopted in 2009 and amended in 2010. The General Plan establishes
policies that guide new development by establishing the amount and distribution of land allocated for
different land uses in the City. Table 2.36 shows the General Plan land use designations that allow for
residential development. Land use designations provide for a wide variety of housing, from very low density
rural residential to high-density transit-oriented and mixed-use development.
Densities are provided according to the maximum dwelling units per net acre. Net acres are “net” after
deleting “environmentally sensitive lands,” defined as lands over 20 percent slope, lands in required stream or
creek setbacks, woodlands, or lands with federal or state listed endangered species.
City of Cloverdale                                                                   2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                        2-57

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                  Table 2.36 General Plan Land Use Designations Allowing Residential Development
                                 Maximum
       Designation           Density (dwelling                                    Description
                               units per acre)
                                                   Allows high-density condominiums or apartments and is
 High Density
                             16 units/net acre     intended for areas that are close to services such as shopping,
 Residential (HDR)
                                                   employment, or transportation.
                                                   Allows a variety of development types including single-family
 Medium Density
                              8 units/net acre     detached units, duplexes and triplexes, and lower-density rental
 Residential (MDR)
                                                   units.
 Low Density Residential                           Intended for traditional single-family subdivision development. It
                              4 units/net acre
 (LDR)                                             applies primarily to areas that have been subdivided since 1960.
                                1 unit/5 net       Applies to hillside, hilltop, and ridgeline areas, generally defined
 Rural Residential (RR)
                                    acres          as areas that are above 400 feet in elevation.
                                                   Provides for community-serving commercial uses. Applies to
 General Commercial
                             20 units/net acre     areas around the downtown and the Furber Ranch Plaza
 (GC)
                                                   shopping center.
                                                   Creates a center for the city, an accessible focal point that
 Downtown                                          provides neighborhood- and pedestrian-oriented commercial
                             20 units/net acre
 Commercial (DTC)                                  uses. Allows a wide variety of uses and encourages residential
                                                   above first-floor businesses.
                                                   Intended to encourage recreation and tourist-commercial uses
 Destination
                              2 units/net acre     to serve as a distinctive entry into the city. Residential
 Commercial
                                                   development is a secondary use.
                                                   Intended to manage and preserve biological, visual, and
                               1 unit/160 net
 Conservation                                      agricultural resources. Housing units are allowed at very low
                                    acres
                                                   densities.
                                                   Promotes a combination of professional office and moderate-
 Office/Residential (OR)     20 units/net acre     density housing and acts as a transitional buffer area between
                                                   the higher intensity DTC and residential uses.
 Transit-Oriented                                  Provides high-density residential and destination uses that
                             20 units/net acre
 Development (TOD)                                 directly contribute riders for the SMART rail.
 Source: City of Cloverdale General Plan, 2009 (amended in 2010)
Development Standards (Zoning)
Zoning regulations establish specific development standards to implement the land use vision and policies
described in the General Plan. Standards include lot area, height, setbacks, and parking requirements. Table
2.37 shows these development standards for zones that allow residential development. Minimum residential
lot areas range from 6,000 square feet to 30 acres. The maximum height limit for residential units ranges from
35 to 40 feet (two to three stories).
Development standards are consistent with the vision for the City but are flexible in accommodating a variety
of residential types and styles. These standards are not considered to be a constraint to residential
development.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                              City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-58

                                                                                                                         CHAPTER 2. HOUSING BACKGROUND ASSESSMENT
                                                          Table 2.37 Residential Development Standards by Zoning District
                                                                                              Setback 2                                                       Distance
                                                         Lot         Lot                                                                     Floor Area
                                Density     Lot Area                                                                           Building                       Between        Open Space
       Zoning District                                  Width      Depth                                                                         Ratio
                                (max.)        (min.) 1                                                                     Height (max.)                     Buildings         (per unit)
                                                        (min.)     (min.)       Front            Side         Rear                              (max.)
                                                                                                                                                               (min.)
Rural Residential (RR)            0.2        30 acres    150’       100’          35’             20’          30’                                               20’                —
Single-Family Residential                     6,000 sf
                                    4                    60’        100’          20’                          20’                           0.35 sites of       10’                —
(R-1)                                        (interior)                                       5' single-                   35’ or 2 stories
                                                                                               story or                                       0 to 4,000
Two-Family Residential                        7,000 sf                                                                      (whichever is        net sf
                                    8        (exterior)  60’        100’          20’        10’ for two       20’               less);                          10’
(R-2)                                                                                            story                                         0.40 sites
                                                                                                                          14’ for accessory
                                                                                              (interior);   10’ for 1-         buildings     4,001 net sf                  100 sf public and
Multi-Family Residential                                                                     15’ (street      story;                         and larger                       60 sf private
                                   16        10,000 sf   60’        100’          20’            side)                                                           10’
(R-3)                                                                                                       20’ for 2-
                                                                                                              story
Downtown Commercial                                                                                                        40’ or 3 stories;
                                   20            —        —           —           —                —            —                                 3.0             —                 —
(DTC)                                                                                                                        min. of 25’
Downtown Support                                                                                                           35’ or 2 stories;
                                   20            —        —           —           —                —            —                                 2.0             —                 —
(DTS)                                                                                                                        min. of 25’
                                                                                                                                                                           150 sf public and
                                                                                                                                                                            60 sf private per
                                                                                                           10’ or 20’ if
Transit Oriented                                                              15’ max;                                     40; or 3 stories;                               res. unit, and 100
                                   20            —        —           —                           10’     abutting R-1                            1.0            20’
Development (TOD)                                                              10’ min.                                     min. 2 stories                                    sf public per
                                                                                                              or R-2
                                                                                                                                                                                1,000 sf of
                                                                                                                                                                                 building
                                                                                             5’ interior;   15’ or 20’
                                                                              20’ max.,
Office/Multi-Family (O-R)          20         6,000 sf   60’        100’
                                                                               no min.
                                                                                              15’ street  abutting R-1                            0.8             —                 —
                                                                                                 side         or R-2
                                                                                                                           35’ or 2 stories
                                                                                              0 interior;
General Commercial                                                           15’ max.,,
                                   20         6,000 sf   60’        100’                       10’ side        10’                                1.0             —                 —
(G-C)                                                                          no min.
                                                                                                street
Source: City of Cloverdale Zoning Ordinance, 2012
1. For detached single-family units, including detached units with PUD permits, planned developments, and specific plans, no more than 25% of lots in any development may be less than
4,000 square feet.
2. When residential is proposed to be located adjacent to or across the street from a developed industrially zoned property, a minimum setback of 50 feet from the property line is
required. The 15 feet of the setback located adjacent to the street or industrial district boundary line must be landscaped and include a 3-foot-high wall or berm; the remainder of the
setback area may be used for parking.
          City of Cloverdale                                                                                                                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                                                                2-59

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Parking Requirements
Parking requirements are established based on the type of residential use and/or the size of units in a
residential development. Table 2.38 shows parking requirements by residential use type.
For mixed-use residential developments in the DTC, DTS, and TOD zoning districts, residential parking
may be reduced to 1 space per unit with a use permit. This is subject to the condition that the square
footage for each floor of residential use does not exceed twice the square footage of the first-floor
commercial use and the required parking is provided for the commercial portion of the development. In
addition, the City offers a shared parking program for uses in the DTC and DTS zoning districts.
To facilitate the development of single-room occupancy (SRO) units, the Zoning Ordinance notes that
SRO projects providing extremely low-income and farmworker housing may be granted reduced parking
requirements, subject to the discretion of the approving body.
                                   Table 2.38 Residential Parking Requirements
           Residential Use Type                                  Off-Street Parking Requirement
                                              2 spaces/unit, 1 of which must be covered
 Single-family dwelling                       Spaces must be outside required setbacks and have a minimum
                                              driveway length of 20’ between the property line and the
                                              parking space
 Cluster housing
                                              1 covered space/unit; plus 1.5 unrestricted shared spaces per
 (single-family dwelling in a small-lot
                                              unit; plus 0.5 spaces/unit, which may be restricted to specific
 PUD, townhouses, condominiums, and
                                              uses or unrestricted
 attached housing)
                                              1 space/unit
 Second residential dwelling units            Space may be in tandem and may be located in a driveway
                                              behind a required parking space
                                              Studio: 1 covered space/unit plus 0.5 unrestricted shared
                                              spaces/unit
 Apartments and multifamily dwellings
                                              1-bedroom: 1 covered space/unit plus 1 unrestricted shared
 (generally designed for rental
                                              space/unit
 occupancy)
                                              2+ bedrooms: 1 covered space/unit plus 2 unrestricted shared
                                              spaces/unit
                                              1 covered space/unit plus 0.5 shared unrestricted space per
 Senior housing                               studio and 1-bedroom unit and 1 shared unrestricted space per
                                              2+ bedrooms unit
 Single-room occupancy (SRO) living
                                              0.5 space/unit plus 1 bicycle space/unit (that can be locked)
 unit
                                              1 uncovered space/3 beds plus 1 space per employee on the
 Residential care facility
                                              largest work shift
                                              1.75 spaces/unit (may be in tandem), 1 of which must be
 Mobile home park
                                              covered
 Source: City of Cloverdale Zoning Ordinance, 2012
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                      City of Cloverdale
                                                         2-60

                                                                       CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Specific Plans
Specific plans provide a detailed vision and policies to implement the vision for a defined portion of the
City. Cloverdale has adopted two specific plans—the Station Area/Downtown Plan and the Alexander
Valley Resort Specific Plan.
Station Area/Downtown Plan
The Station Area/Downtown Plan establishes a transit-oriented development strategy, development
regulations, and implementation/revitalization strategy for the downtown and areas in close proximity to
the planned Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) station. Development regulations include design
provisions to encourage pedestrian-oriented features and architectural elements. The regulations default to
the Zoning Ordinance for basic development standards, allowed uses, and parking requirements.
Alexander Valley Resort Specific Plan
The Alexander Valley Resort Specific Plan directs the development of an approximately 254-acre site
fronting on Asti Road/Highway 101, between the east side of the road and the Russian River. The site
previously contained a wood processing mill, and the site has undergone extensive cleanup in preparation
for development. The specific residential development potential for this site is described in Section 2.4,
Land Inventory and Housing Resources. This development will be guided by policies, land use
regulations, and design standards set forth in the Specific Plan.
Provisions for a Variety of Housing
In addition to specific development standards, the City’s Zoning Ordinance specifies the type of
residential uses allowed in each zoning district as well as the level of review required to obtain approval.
Table 2.39 summarizes housing types permitted without discretionary review (“P”), permitted with Plot
Plan Review (“PP”), permitted with a Planned Unit Development Permit (“PUD”), conditionally
permitted (“C”), and prohibited (“—”) in Cloverdale.
City of Cloverdale                                                               2015–2023 Housing Element
                                                     2-61

                                                                               CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                               Table 2.39 Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
        Residential Uses/Zones            R-R     R-1       R-2    R-3      DTC        DTS      TOD       O-R    G-C
  Single-family detached                   P        P        P      —        —          —        —        PP      —
  Small lot single-family                                                                        —
                                          PUD     PUD      PUD      —        —          —                  —      —
  detached
  Single-family attached                   —      PUD      PUD      C        —          —        —         —      —
  Single-room occupancy                    —       —         —      C        —          C        C         —      —
  Condominium                              —       —         —      C        —          —        —         —      —
  Multiple-family attached or
                                           —       —         P      P     PP/PUD1     PP/C2      PP      PP/C2    C
  detached
  Second residential dwelling unit         P        P        P      P        —          —        —         —      —
  Permanent supportive housing             C       C         C      C        —          —        —         —      —
  Residential care facility, 6 or
                                           P        P        P      P
  fewer persons
                                                                             —          C        C         C      C
  Residential care facility, 7 or
                                           —       —         —      C
  more persons
  Senior independent living uses           —       —         —     PP        —          —        —         —      —
  Convalescent homes                       —       C         C      C        —          C        C         C      C
  Mobile home park                         —       —         —      C        —          —        —         —      —
  Manufactured home                        C       C         C      —        —          —        —         —      —
  Boarding/rooming house                   —       —         —      C        —          —        —         —      —
  Guest quarters                           P       PP        C      —        —          —        —         —      —
  Emergency shelters                       —       —         —      —        —          —        PP        —      PP
  Source: City of Cloverdale Zoning Ordinance, 2012
  Key: “P” = Permitted; “PP” = Permitted subject to Plot Plan Review; “C”= Permitted subject to approval of a
  Conditional Use Permit; “PUD” = Permitted subject to approval of a Planned Unit Development Permit; “—” = Not
  permitted
  1. Allowed with a PP permit above a commercial or office use; allowed with a PUD permit on the first floor.
  2. Allowed with PP permit above a commercial or office use; allowed with a CUP on the first floor.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
The City allows a variety of housing types and options for persons with disabilities. Residential care
facilities for six or fewer persons are permitted by right (without a discretionary permit) in all residential
zones, and there are no restrictions for the siting of these homes. Large and small residential care facilities
are allowed with a Conditional Use Permit in the DTS, TOD, O-R, and G-C zoning districts.
Convalescent homes are permitted with a Conditional Use Permit in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential
zoning districts as well as in the DTS, TOD, O-R, and G-C zones.
In September 2014, the City amended the Zoning Code to establish a procedure for the submittal and
processing of requests for reasonable accommodation in the application of land use regulations and
policies to accommodate disabled households.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                            City of Cloverdale
                                                            2-62

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Emergency Shelters
The City’s Zoning Ordinance allows emergency shelters with Plot Plan Review in the G-C, TOD, and
Public Institutional (PI) zoning districts. As described below, Plot Plan Review is completed at the staff
level and is intended only to ensure compliance with Zoning Ordinance standards. Emergency shelters are
not subject to any special provisions or specific development standards.
The City has approximately 8.65 acres of vacant land on six sites in zoning districts that allow emergency
shelters. Vacant parcels range in size from 0.27 to 5.3 acres. There are additional opportunities to convert
existing structures within these zoning districts to an emergency shelter. Potential shelter sites within the
TOD and G-C zoning districts are centrally located in the City, with access to services, amenities, and
transit.
Transitional and Permanent Supportive Housing
Senate Bill 2 (2007) requires that the City’s Zoning Ordinance define and allow transitional and
supportive housing as residential uses, subject only to those restrictions that apply to the same residential
types in the same zone.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance was amended in September 2014 to achieve compliance with Senate Bill 2.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance provides definitions for supportive housing and transitional housing and
specifies that these uses must not be distinguished from other residential uses of the same type in the
application of permit requirements or building standards.
Single-Room Occupancy Units
The Zoning Ordinance allows single-room occupancy units (SROs) in the R-3, DTS, and TOD zoning
districts, subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit. SROs can serve as a valuable source of
affordable housing. They can serve as an entry point into the housing market for those with extremely low
incomes, formerly homeless people, farmworkers, and persons with other special needs.
SROs are subject to the property development standards for the zoning district in which the SRO
development is to be located, as well as the following:
    Excluding the closet and bathroom area, SRO units must be a minimum of 150 square feet and a
     maximum of 400 square feet.
    Each SRO must be designed to accommodate a maximum of two persons.
    SROs must have at least 10 square feet of common usable open space per unit, and all SRO projects
     must provide at least 200 square feet of common outdoor space and 200 square feet of common
     indoor space. Common open spaces must be designed and furnished for use by residents.
    Outdoor balconies for individual SROs may not be visible from the street or public right-of-way.
    Laundry facilities with a minimum of one washer and one dryer must be provided in a separate room.
     Additional units must be provided for developments of 20 units or more.
    Each unit must have its own bathroom and facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils.
    All SRO units must have access to a separate usable storage space within the project.
    SRO projects with 10 or more units must have 24-hour on-site management. SRO projects with fewer
     than 10 units must include an on-site management office.
    SRO projects must have a management plan approved by the Planning Department.
City of Cloverdale                                                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                     2-63

                                                                      CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Mobile homes and manufactured housing can serve as an affordable housing option for lower- and
moderate-income households. State law requires that manufactured homes on foundation systems be
allowed on lots zoned for conventional single-family dwellings, subject to the same development
standards (Government Code Section 65852.3). While the City’s definition of single-family detached
dwelling unit currently includes manufactured homes with a permanent foundation, the residential use
tables describe manufactured homes as a separate use. Manufactured homes are currently allowed with a
Conditional Use Permit in the R-R, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts and are subject to Design Review for
overhang, roofing, and siding materials.
Implementation Program 2.5.1 commits the City to amending the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate
manufactured homes as a separate use in the residential use tables and clarify that manufactured homes on
permanent foundations are subject to the same level of review and development standards as conventional
single-family homes.
There are three existing mobile home parks in the City, and mobile home parks are conditionally
permitted in the R-3 zoning district. Applications for mobile home parks are subject to specific standards
and review by the Building Department and Health Officer. Standards include record keeping rules and
regulations, owner/manager duties, design standards, and sanitary requirements.
Agricultural Employee Housing
In keeping with state law (Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5), the City’s residential zoning district
use table specifies that agricultural housing for six or fewer workers is considered a residential use,
subject only to the approvals and standards required of other homes of the same type in the same zoning
district.
Agricultural employees and their families may also be served by SROs, mobile homes, and multifamily
apartments. Implementation Programs 3.6.1 and 3.6.2 commit the City to working to expand affordable
housing opportunities for farmworkers.
Permits and Procedures
Conditional Use Permits
Conditional Use Permits (CUPs) are intended to allow uses that are generally consistent with the purpose
of the zoning district in which they are proposed, but require special consideration because of their
potential impacts on the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. CUPs must be approved by the
Planning Commission, subject to the following findings:
1) The proposed use is permitted within the subject district and complies with all the applicable
     provisions of Zoning Ordinance, the goals and objectives of the Cloverdale General Plan, and the
     development policies and standards of the City.
2) The proposed use would not impair the integrity and character of the district in which it is to be
     established or located.
3) The site is suitable for the type and intensity of use or development that is proposed.
4) There are adequate provisions for water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure public
     health and safety.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                     2-64

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
5) The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially
     injurious to properties and improvements in the vicinity.
If a CUP to allow residential uses on the ground floor in commercial zoning districts is proposed, the
following additional finding must be made:
1) The residential use does not detract from the primary commercial use of the property or interrupt the
     continuity of business use in a commercial area.
Plot Plan Review
Plot Plan Review is intended to verify that a proposed use meets all applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance. Plot Plan Review is conducted at the staff level, with approval at the discretion of the
Planning Director. To approve a Plot Plan Review application, the Planning Director must make findings
confirming that the proposed use is in keeping with the Zoning Ordinance and the General Plan, the use
would not impair the character of the surrounding area, and the site is appropriate for the use as proposed.
Plot Plan Review adds minimal time to the development process as well as a minor fee, but is not
considered to act as a constraint to the development of residential use types for which it is required.
Planned Unit Development Permit
The Planned Unit Development Permit (PUD Permit) is intended to allow greater design freedom for uses
and sites in which typical development standards may not be appropriate. PUD Permits are subject to
review and approval or conditional approval by the Planning Commission. To approve a PUD Permit, the
Planning Commission must find that the proposed use is in keeping with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and the General Plan, the site is appropriate for the use as proposed, there is adequate
infrastructure to serve the use, and the use will not be detrimental to community health, safety, or welfare.
The PUD Permit can benefit proposed projects by providing greater flexibility; however, the PUD permit
requirement adds cost and processing time for potential developments.
Development and Design Review
The intent of the Design Review process is to preserve and improve the natural beauty of the City’s
setting and to ensure that new development is visually harmonious with the surroundings. Design Review
is required for new housing with two or more units on a parcel, second dwelling units, emergency
shelters, and transitional housing.
The Planning Commission serves as the City’s Design Review Committee. The Zoning Ordinance
establishes a specific list of standards for use in the evaluation of proposed projects, as well as specific
findings for project approval. Review criteria emphasize development that is harmonious with the City’s
existing character and does not impose costly or unnecessary design elements.
The Design Review process does add to the cost and processing for potential developments, but is seen as
essential in preserving key qualities of the Cloverdale community.
Permit Processes and Timelines
The specifics of each proposal dictate the level of review needed; thus, processing times can vary widely
from one project to another. The approximate permit processing times for permits is provided in Table
2.40. The typical permit processing time for residential development greatly depends on whether the
proposed development is a permitted use or if a rezone or Conditional Use Permit is required. Permitted
uses that do not require any discretionary review take two to four weeks to process. Proposals that require
City of Cloverdale                                                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                      2-65

                                                                                  CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
public hearings with one or more decision-making body (e.g., the Design Review Committee, Planning
Commission, and/or City Council) may take three to nine months to process.
                                  Table 2.40 Typical City Permit Process and Timelines
                                                       Review           Typical Time
                 Project Type                                                                          Notes
                                                      Authority            Frame
                                                                                          Plan check prior to issuance
 Individual single-family house                         Staff            2–4 weeks
                                                                                          of building permit
                                                                                          Tentative Map: 1–3 months
 Minor subdivision                                 DRC, PC, CC           3–5 months
                                                                                          Final Map: 1–2 months
                                                                                          Tentative Map: 2–5 months
 Major subdivision                                 DRC, PC, CC           3–9 months
                                                                                          Final Map: 3–4 months
 Duplex or triplex in R-2 or R-3 district                                                 Plan review prior to issuance
                                                     Staff, DRC          1–2 months
 (rental)                                                                                 of building permit
                                                                                          Conditional Use Permit/
 Multifamily housing project (for sale)               DRC, PC            2–3 months       Planned Unit Development
                                                                                          Permit
                                                                                          Plan check prior to issuance
 Second dwelling unit                                Staff, DRC          4–6 weeks        of building permit, design
                                                                                          review
                                                                                          Project with no land division
 Mixed residential/commercial (PP,
                                                      DRC, PC            3–6 months       requires a PP, PUD, or CUP
 PUD, or CUP)
                                                                                          and design review by the PC
 CEQA negative declaration                             PC, CC              Varies         Processed jointly with project
 CEQA environmental impact report                     PC, CC           12–18 months       Processed jointly with project
 General Plan amendment                                PC, CC            6–9 months       12–18 months if EIR is required
 Rezone                                               PC, CC             6–9 months       12–18 months if EIR is required
                                                                                          No variance applications in
 Variance                                                PC              3–6 months
                                                                                          past 3 years
 Source: City of Cloverdale Planning Department, 2014
 Note: All applications for a single site are processed concurrently to minimize processing times.
 DRC = Design Review Committee; PC = Planning Commission; CC = City Council
Planning Fees
Planning application fees vary greatly from one jurisdiction to another in amount and methodology.
Table 2.41 shows selected planning application types that are common for residential development
projects. Several nearby jurisdictions are included as a basis for comparison: Healdsburg, Windsor, and
the County of Sonoma. Direct comparisons are difficult because each jurisdiction has a unique planning
process. However, overall, the City of Cloverdale seems to have planning application fees that are
comparable to the other jurisdictions. Fees for major subdivisions are higher in Cloverdale than in other
jurisdictions.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                              City of Cloverdale
                                                             2-66

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Total fees (including development impact fees as further described below) for a hypothetical four-unit
single-family subdivision would total $164,920, for a per unit cost of $41,230. This assumes that no
rezoning or General Plan amendment is needed. Fees would include minor subdivision fees,
environmental review (assumes an initial study/negative declaration), plot plan review, design review,
and development impact fees. In this scenario, fees total approximately 12 to 17 percent of construction
costs, depending on a number of construction variables.
Total fees for a hypothetical 20-unit multifamily development would total $591,110, for a per unit cost of
$29,555. This assumes that no rezoning or General Plan amendment is needed. Fees include plot plan
review, design review, environmental review (assumes an initial study/negative declaration), and
development impact fees. The cost per unit of multi-family housing is less than that of single family
homes and, in this scenario, fees total from 10 to 12 percent of construction costs.
                                               Table 2.41 Planning Fees
             Application Type                  Cloverdale*      Healdsburg         Windsor        Sonoma County
                                                                  $1,420–
  Conditional Use Permit                          $1,850                            $3,739                —
                                                                   $2,621
                                                                   $640–
  Design Review                                $500-$1,950                            —              $656-$4,796
                                                                   $1,920
  Environmental review – initial
                                                                                $1,494 (initial
  study/mitigated negative                        $2,200           $3,584                               Varies
                                                                                 study only)
  declaration
  Environmental review – EIR                     $15,0002       Cost + 15%       Cost + 12%             Varies
  General Plan amendment                          $3,500           $2,597           $4,204         $1,179–$5,8531
  Lot merger (max. 2 lots)                         $700            $1,773             —                  $204
  Plot Plan Review                                 $400              —                —                   —
  PUD Permit                                      $1,900             —                —                   —
  Specific Plan                                   $3,500             —                —                   —
                                                                                   $4,813 +
  Subdivision, major (5 lots or more)             $9,100           $7,595                              $6,3701
                                                                                    $20/lot
  Subdivision, minor (4 lots or less)             $2,250           $3,896           $3,270        $3,840 + $386/lot
                                                                  $1,160-
  Variance                                        $2,250                             $663               $4,857
                                                                   $1,960
  Zoning text or map amendment                    $3,800           $2,679           $3,526         $1,721–$5,0931
  Sources: City of Cloverdale 2014 Master Impact Fee Schedule; City of Healdsburg, Planning Section fee summary,
  accessed online June 2014; Town of Windsor Master Fee Schedule 2013–2014; County of Sonoma, Project Review
  Application Fee Schedule, effective July 1, 2013
  * Costs stated are minimums; actual charges vary and may increase depending on the specifics of the project.
Development Impact Fees
Development costs vary depending on the type of development. Table 2.42 shows the City’s current
development impact fees. These fees are necessary to provide adequate services and infrastructure to
service new developments.
City of Cloverdale                                                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                          2-67

                                                                             CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Development impact fees can impact project feasibility and thus can act as a potential constraint to
housing development. Total impact fees are $39,530 for a two-bedroom single-family home and $29,328
for a two-bedroom multifamily unit. Note that fees are subject to change. Interested parties should contact
the City for the current fee schedule.
The draft Sonoma County 2015–2023 Housing Element (dated May 15, 2014) includes a comparison of
impact fees in three Sonoma County cities and in Marin County (Table 4-42). The comparison was based
on fees for a three-bedroom, 1,500-square-foot single-family home. The impact fee categories included in
the comparison were water, sewer; traffic, parks, storm drainage, affordable housing, and other. The totals
for each city ranged from $27,479 to $37,690, with Cloverdale ranking lowest among the cities, but
higher than Sonoma and Marin counties.
                                   Table 2.42 Development Impact Fees, 2014
                                                                           Fee per Unit or Acre
                  Impact Fee Type                        Single-Family              Multifamily     Mobile Home
 Administration                                                $572                     $423             $462
 Fire Facilities                                              $1,251                  $1,224            $1,090
 Health Care                                                    $95                      $93              $83
 Parkland Acquisition (non-Quimby)                            $6,029                  $4,450            $4,860
 Quimby Act Parkland Acquisition                              $6,029                  $4,450               —
 Parks and Recreation Facilities                              $3,581                  $2,643            $2,888
 Public Facilities                                            $4,772                  $3,522            $3,847
 Storm Drainage                                                $212                      $56               —
 Streets and Thoroughfare System
   4-bedroom unit                                             $2,622                  $2,122               —
   3-bedroom unit                                             $2,133                  $1,644               —
   2-bedroom unit                                             $1,699                  $1,183               —
 Water Capacity                                               $5,992                  $4,422            $4,830
 Wastewater Capacity                                          $9,298                  $6,862            $7,496
 Source: City of Cloverdale 2013 Development Impact Fees, Effective July 1, 2014
Building and Code Enforcement
The City has adopted the 2013 California Building Code, which regulates the construction of all physical
structures in the city. Because this code is used in jurisdictions throughout California, it is not considered
to be a constraint to housing development in Cloverdale. This predictable set of standards is familiar to
developers who work in communities throughout the state. This may reduce design and development
costs because there is no need to learn an additional set of codes.
The City strives to perform thorough but expedient permit processing, with average processing times
equal to or less than similar jurisdictions. The City has an active code enforcement team and building
inspection program that work to uphold all adopted codes and encourage the improvement of existing
substandard dwelling units. Violations are incurred primarily on a complaint basis or through the general
observation of building code officers. Code violations help the City to know where rehabilitation needs
are.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                       City of Cloverdale
                                                      2-68

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
On- and Off-Site Improvements
The City requires new development to provide on- and off-site improvements necessary to maintain
public health, safety, and welfare. Typical improvements include storm drainage, sidewalks, streets,
curbs, utilities, streetlights, and street trees. The City requires typical street widths with a 56-foot right-of-
way, with 24-foot travel lanes, 8-foot parking lanes, and 4-foot sidewalks.
Required improvements are standard for California cities and although they may add to the cost of
development, they do not pose a significant constraint to residential development. These improvements
are necessary given California’s system of local finance, which limits the ability of property taxes and
imposition of other taxes to fund needed services and infrastructure.
Inclusionary Housing
The City’s inclusionary housing program is intended to create affordable housing in development projects
throughout the City. The City requires that 15 percent of dwelling units in projects of five or more units
be restricted for affordability to lower-income households. The requirements offer some flexibility in
certain circumstances, allowing developers to satisfy the affordable housing obligation through the
payment of an in-lieu fee or land dedication.
The City’s inclusionary housing program is not considered to be a constraint to housing development and
is an established and proven method to ensure the construction of affordable housing. The cost of
providing inclusionary units is generally passed on to market-rate units, reduces the profit margin of the
developer, or is reflected in a reduction in the value/purchase price of the land. These impacts can be
offset through density bonuses or other incentives for providing on-site affordable units.
The City intends to revise the inclusionary housing ordinance to address recent state court decisions
regarding the legality of certain inclusionary zoning provisions. In addition, the City will consider
revisions to encourage fee payment as a form of compliance and changes to improve the clarity of the
requirements and their implementation. As stated in Implementation Program 2.2.1, the City will consider
these revisions by 2015.
Density Bonus
In keeping with state law, the City offers a density bonus for the provision of housing units affordable to
lower-income households. The City currently offers a bonus of up to 25 percent Citywide and a bonus of
up to 40 percent in the R-2, R-3, and S-C zoning districts based on the construction of a certain
percentage of units at specific levels of affordability. Developers may take advantage of the density bonus
program using affordable units provided to satisfy the inclusionary obligation.
In addition to increased density, the City offers concessions or incentives such as the reduction or
elimination of covered parking requirements, increases in the allowed percentage of lot coverage, a
reduced rear setback requirement, and/or other concessions or incentives as proposed by the developer.
As of this writing, the City is in the process of updating its density bonus provision in compliance with
state law to provide a density bonus of up to 35 percent Citywide.
Growth Management Program
The City has a Growth Management Program to monitor the level of residential growth in the community
and the availability of public services. The Growth Management Program requires that the City annually
review the inventory of residential development approvals. If more than 200 residential units are
City of Cloverdale                                                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                        2-69

                                                                        CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
approved or estimated for construction in the coming year, the City will conduct an infrastructure audit
and establish a building allotment for the year.
Each year, the Planning Department prepares an inventory of residential projects under City review, or
previously approved, identifying their infrastructure demands. The inventory only identifies those
residential units to be constructed over the next calendar year, by virtue of their having filed a building
permit application or made substantial progress on the recording of a Final Subdivision Map.
The Growth Management Program has not limited growth or constrained development. It is used to
ensure that the City’s infrastructure keeps pace with development and that shortfalls are identified and
remedied in an expeditious manner. The City Council has made findings supporting the Growth
Management Program’s compliance with the Housing Element goals and policies as part of the annual
resolution adopting the residential inventory.
Urban Growth Boundary
In order to manage long-term growth and protect the small-town character of Cloverdale, the City adopted
an Urban Growth Boundary in 2010. The boundary was envisioned in the City’s 2009 General Plan. The
boundary is generally consistent with the City’s existing limits, except in the northernmost and
southernmost sections of the City.
As shown in the land inventory (Section 2.4), Cloverdale has ample sites for infill on vacant and
underutilized sites. Thus, the Urban Growth Boundary is not considered to be a constraint to housing
development during the planning period.
2.5.2 Non-Governmental Constraints
Potential non-governmental constraints to housing development are driven by the market and typically
fall outside the direct control of the local government. These constraints include construction costs, land
costs, the availability of financing, and community sentiment.
Construction Costs
Construction costs vary widely according to the type of development. On a per unit basis, multifamily
housing is generally less expensive to construct than single-family homes. Costs are influenced by the
type of construction, materials, site conditions, finishing details, amenities, and structural configuration.
According to the Craftsman Book, mid-range standard construction is estimated at $247,225 to $345,959,
or $124 to $173 per square foot for a 2,000-square-foot home. Table 2.43 shows a range in estimated
costs from luxury to the minimum standard. Note that these estimates do not include development fees or
the cost of land. This cost is comparable to costs found in Sonoma County as a whole. According to the
draft 2015–2023 Sonoma County Housing Element, construction costs were estimated at $140 per square
foot.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                    City of Cloverdale
                                                      2-70

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                      Table 2.43 Estimated Construction Costs
                         Construction Quality                                            Estimate
    Luxury                                                                              $759,378
    Custom                                                                              $516,405
    Best standard                                                                       $345,959
    Good standard                                                                       $247,225
    Average standard                                                                    $196,425
    Minimum standard                                                                    $153,767
    Source: Craftsman Book Company (www.building-cost.net, accessed online December 30, 2013)
    Note: The above estimates are based upon a 2000-square-foot, single-story, 4-corner wood-frame house with a
    400-square-foot attached, unfinished garage, and central heating and air conditioning, constructed within a
    subdivision.
Price of Land
In addition to construction costs, the price of land is one of the largest factors in housing development
costs. Land costs may vary based on location, allowed uses and development intensity, existing use, and
site constraints such as environmental issues.
As of June 2014, listed prices for land zoned for multifamily uses in Cloverdale ranged from $149,000 for
a 0.33-acre lot (equivalent to $451,515 per acre) to $299,000 for a 0.48-acre lot (equivalent to $622,916
per acre). Both multifamily lots were centrally located in Cloverdale.
Undeveloped single-family lots in a subdivision on the south end of Cloverdale were priced from
$129,000 to $179,000 for lots of around 0.25 acre. Two large-scale properties offering entitled
development projects were listed for sale. A 42.62-acre site planned for 19 single-family homes was listed
for $3,000,000, equivalent to $70,389 per acre. The site is located in the hills on the north end of the City.
The Alexander Valley Resort property discussed in detail in the Land Inventory and Resources section
(Section 2.4) was listed for sale at $27,500,000, a price per acre of $102,996.
Availability of Financing
The cost of borrowing money to finance the construction of housing or to purchase a house affects the
amount of affordably priced housing in Cloverdale. Increases in interest rates can eliminate potential
homebuyers from the housing market or render a housing project that could have been developed at lower
interest rates infeasible. Typically, when interest rates decline, sales increase. The reverse has been true
when interest rates increase.
Interest rates have been at historic lows for the past few years. While they are anticipated to remain low
relative to historic norms, rates are anticipated to increase during the planning period. Table 2.44 shows
interest rates as of December 31, 2013. The table presents both the interest rate and the annual percentage
rate (APR) for different types of home loans. The interest rate is the percentage of an amount of money
that is paid for its use for a specified time, and the APR is the yearly percentage rate that expresses the
total finance charge on a loan over its entire term. The APR includes the interest rate, fees, points, and
mortgage insurance and is therefore a more complete measure of a loan's cost than the interest rate alone.
However, the loan's interest rate, not its APR, is used to calculate the monthly principal and interest
payment.
City of Cloverdale                                                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                        2-71
                                                                          CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
                                          Table 2.44 Interest Rates, 2013
                                                                 Interest             APR
             Conforming
             30-year fixed                                        4.61%              4.65%
             15-year fixed                                        3.57%              3.76%
             5-year ARM                                           3.18%             3.097%
             Jumbo
             30-year fixed                                        4.75%              4.79%
             5-Year ARM                                           4.63%              6.17%
             FHA
             30-Year Fixed                                        4.75%              4.53%
            Rates are subject to change on a daily basis.
            Source: www.wellsfargo.com, December 31, 2013
Community Sentiment
Community attitudes toward housing play a crucial role in determining the type of housing that will be
built in the City. A key to obtaining development approvals is to secure the support of the local
neighborhood. Developers of potentially controversial housing projects should make the effort to address
the legitimate community concerns regarding the type of housing proposed, the characteristics of the
potential occupants of the housing units, noise, increases in traffic, and the impact that the proposed
development will have on City services.
Involving the community in the early phases of a project is essential for creating the basis for cooperation
and constructive participation in the planning process. Cloverdale residents value the unique character of
the downtown and the City’s residential neighborhoods. Most residents would concur that housing should
be available to all economic segments of the community, and there has been little opposition to the
affordable housing units built to date.
2.5.3 Infrastructure and Environmental Considerations
The 2009 General Plan Update Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) identified various competing
goals and policies regarding the provision of adequate housing. There is a recognized need to
accommodate a variety of housing types in the community. However, there is also a need to address the
effects of global climate change and preserve the existing quality of life for the community, including
preservation of the Russian River wildlife corridor and views of nearby hillsides. Table 2.0-1 of the DEIR
provides summary information related to how potentially significant environmental impacts of the
General Plan’s proposed land uses can be mitigated to a level that is less than significant. The General
Plan is considered self-mitigating in that all impacts (except those associated with greenhouse gases) are
mitigated by General Plan policies and implementation measures.
2.5.4 Public Facilities
Potential residential development is contingent on the availability of adequate public facilities including
electricity, water, sewer, and solid waste disposal. This section provides an overview of these facilities.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                                  City of Cloverdale
                                                          2-72

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
Electricity
Electricity and natural gas service is available through Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E). The extension of
power and gas to service new residential development has not been identified as a constraint.
Water
City staff reported that the City uses five groundwater wells with a total capacity to produce about 2.8
million gallons per day (mgd). The City is currently connecting two new wells, expected to be completed
in July 2014, to provide additional capacity for reliability and future growth. With the addition of those
wells, the total Citywide capacity will be 3.7 mgd.
The wells are part of the $4.42 million Water Systems Improvements Project which, in addition to the two
new wells, consists of increasing the reliable capacity of the water treatment plant from 3.08 mgd to 4.35
mgd, well monitoring and control system improvements, a transmission main, 0.75 million gallons of new
water storage, and rehabilitation work on several existing water tanks. Construction has begun on the
project and is expected to continue through 2015.
The General Plan anticipates a long-term buildout population of 12,000, which would require 4.48 mgd
water capacity. After completion of the water system improvements, the source capacity will be adequate
for additional growth and within 0.78 mgd of the projected buildout maximum day demands of 4.48 mgd
and the treatment plant capacity will be close to meeting those buildout demands as projected in the 2010
Water Master Plan. Additional long-term system improvements are planned to meet the buildout demands
and include additional storage tanks, additional wells, and new water mains.
Implementation Program 6.4.2 commits the City to continue working to add water capacity to address the
needs of planned City growth. With the current drought and upcoming requirement for the City to
complete an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) in 2015, the City is realizing significant reductions
in short-term and long-term water use. The extent to which these reductions impact planned future water
improvements will be documented in the 2015 UWMP and future updates of the Water Master Plan.
Sewer
The City provides sewer service primarily through a gravity flow collection system. Repairs to older lines
in neighborhoods north of Porter Creek are ongoing. The City’s wastewater treatment plant is located in
the southeast corner of the City and currently treats to a secondary level. According to the General Plan
DEIR, planned expansion and improvement of the sewer system will accommodate future projected
growth. Sewer treatment capacity is not expected to be a constraint to housing development.
Solid Waste Disposal
Solid waste collection and disposal services are provided by the Cloverdale Disposal Service. The waste
is trucked from Cloverdale to the Healdsburg transfer station and ultimately transported to landfill sites
outside of Sonoma County, but within the Bay Area. Adequate landfill capacity exists in the Bay Area for
the next 15 years, and it is expected that new contracts will be authorized to accommodate the City of
Cloverdale’s landfill needs within the time frame of this Housing Element.
Water and Sewer Priority for Affordable Projects
Senate Bill 1087 was enacted to improve the effectiveness of the law in facilitating housing development
for lower-income families and workers. SB 1087 includes provisions to ensure that affordable residential
projects receive priority in the event of a shortfall in water or sewer capacity. In this case, the City is the
service provider.
City of Cloverdale                                                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                      2-73

                                                                      CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
This Housing Element includes Implementation Program 6.5.1 to implement SB 1087. The City will
adopt written policies and procedures that grant first priority for service hookups to developments that
help meet the community share of the regional need for lower-income housing. The law prohibits water
and sewer providers from denying, conditioning the approval, or reducing the amount of service for an
application for development that includes housing affordable to lower-income households, unless specific
written findings are made. Urban water management plans must include projected water use for single-
family and multifamily housing needed for lower-income households.
2015–2023 Housing Element                                                               City of Cloverdale
                                                  2-74

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING ASSESSMENT
2.6 Opportunities for Residential Energy Conservation
Energy conservation features reduce housing costs and contribute to greenhouse gas reduction. The City
has adopted policies and implemented programs to encourage energy conservation in residential projects.
The City’s subdivision regulations require that residential projects be reviewed to ensure that buildings
maximize solar access and energy conservation in terms of building orientation, street layout, lot design,
landscaping, and street tree configuration. Residential structures must meet the requirements of Title 24
relating to energy conservation features of the Uniform Building Code.
This Housing Element includes policies and implementation programs to improve residential energy
efficiency through education, encouragement, and support for local conservation and green building
efforts (Implementation Programs 6.1.1 and 6.2.1). The Conservation, Design, and Open Space Element
of the General Plan also includes policies and programs to promote efficiency in the use of water and
energy. The City also adopted a Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (Chapter 15.30 of the Municipal
Code) in 2010.
In addition to City policies, a variety of resources are available to educate homeowners about energy
conservation opportunities and provide financial assistance in completing upgrades:
        California Solar Initiative Rebates – Rebates vary according to system size, customer class, and
         performance and installation factors (www.gosolarcalifornia.org).
        California Solar Initiative Single-Family Low Income Program (SASH) – Fully subsidized 1-
         kilowatt systems are available to very low-income households who financed their home through
         local, state, or federal housing assistance programs and whose household income is at or below
         50 percent of the area median income.
         Highly subsidized solar systems are available to other low-income households as determined by
         housing stock eligibility and eligibility for the California Alternative Rates for Energy (CARE)
         Program.
        California Solar Initiative Multifamily Affordable Solar Housing (MASH) – The MASH program
         provides solar incentives for qualifying affordable multifamily dwellings. The MASH program
         provides two types of incentives. Track 1 incentives provide fixed, upfront capacity-based
         incentives for solar photovoltaic (PV) systems that offset common area and tenant loads. Track 2
         offers higher incentives to applicants who provide quantifiable “direct tenant benefits” (i.e., any
         operating costs savings from solar that are shared with their tenants). Track 2 incentives will be
         accepted every six months through a competitive process. The application and review process for
         MASH Track 2 is currently in development.
        Federal Investment Tax Credit – The Federal Investment Tax Credit for residential and
         commercial solar systems is 30 percent of net system cost. This tax credit is available through
         December 31, 2016.
        Sonoma County Energy Independence Program (SCEIP) – On March 25, 2009, under the
         authority of Assembly Bill (AB) 811, the Sonoma County Board of Supervisors approved the
         SCEIP to fund energy efficiency and water conservation projects on private property. Residential
         and commercial property owners who participate must repay low-interest loan(s) through their
         property tax assessments over 5, 10, or 20 years, depending on the value of the loan. Because the
         assessments are tied to the properties, they may be passed from one owner to the next. More
         information is available at www.sonomacountyenergy.org.
        Pacific Gas & Electric – PG&E serves the electrical and gas needs in Cloverdale and offers a
         variety energy conservation programs and rebates. Details are available at www.pge.com.
City of Cloverdale                                                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                     2-75


