AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION and OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Principals:
  That resources such as prime capability soils are highly productive whether for agricultural
   purposes, watershed or natural habitat.
  Resources that are irretrievable and/or irreplaceable need to be protected and preserved.
  Individuals and the community have a responsibility to future generations as well as to
   wildlife to preserve and protect finite natural resources.
  Resources lands contribute to overall public health, safety and welfare beyond provision of
   basic necessities such as food, fiber and livelihood.
  Land Use and urban development shall be managed and limited to that which can be
   sustained by the available resources and serviced by the circulation and other infrastructure
   systems.
AGRICULTURE OBJECTIVES and POLICIES:
Ag1 Avoid and or mitigate loss of prime farmland soils and conserve non-prime
     Agriculture use and natural resource lands.
     Ag1-1     Designate prime farmland soils that are not predominately committed to non-
               Agricultural development as Agriculture (Ag) and/or Agriculture Preserve (AgP),
               whether or not in current agricultural productive use.
     Ag1-1.1 Prime Farmland Soils shall include all land, whether a single parcel or contiguous
               parcels, that if irrigated, qualifies for rating as Class I or Class II in the USDA
               Natural Resources Conservation Service land use capability classification whether
               or not the land is actually irrigated, provided that irrigation is feasible.   (This
               definition is derived from the Local Government Reorganization Act of 2000 as
               reorganized and amended in 2000. Section 56064(a)). Prime farmland soils shall
               also include farmland of Statewide importance as identified in the USDA, Natural
               Resources Conservation Services, outlined in the Land Inventory and Monitoring
               (LIM) Project Soil Survey for San Luis Obispo County, California, Coastal Part,
               September 1984.
               Ag1-1.2    Public facilities are permitted on agricultural and natural resource land
                          when required by health, safety, or welfare of the public.
               Ag1-1.3    Either Agriculture or Agriculture Preserve zoning are consistent with the
                          Agriculture classification of the plan.
     Ag1-2     Designate as Conservation/Open Space (C/OS) or County Rural Lands all non-
               prime Ag lands with important natural resource or open space values that the
               community intends to conserve.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                          AgC/OS - 1

           Ag1-2.1    Areas with a C/OS designation shall be subject to special measures
                      and/or programs designed to conserve natural resources and protect the
                      community from their loss, including measures or programs that may be
                      developed subsequent to adoption of this General Plan Update.
    Ag1-3  Support existing programs and develop strategies to retain areas of farmland soils
           for agricultural use, and other Conservation/Open Space (C/OS) areas in a natural,
           undeveloped state.
           Ag1-3.1    Encourage Williamson Act participation and acquisition of Agricultural
                      Conservation Easements by agricultural landowners. An inventory of
                      parcels under Williamson Act contract and those with easements within
                      the City shall be maintained by the Community Development Department
                      and the status of those contracts/easements reported to the Planning
                      Commission and City Council. The City’s objective shall be 100% of
                      either Williamson Act enrollment of qualified parcels or agricultural
                      conservation easement acquisition. The City’s aim shall be to maintain
                      contiguity of Ag and C/OS parcels and avoid fragmentation of areas
                      having prime farmland soils or non-prime Conservation/Open Space
                      designation.
           Ag1-3.2    Encourage dedication of conservation easements over parcels having
                      Conservation/Open Space (C/OS) designation.             An inventory of
                      conservation easements and similar restrictions within the City shall be
                      maintained by the Community Development Department and reported
                      annually to the Planning Commission and City Council. The City’s
                      objective shall be to maintain 100% of the Conservation/Open Space
                      designation under interim or permanent open space or conservation
                      easements.
    Ag1-4  Establish and apply a significance criterion (threshold of significance) for CEQA
           analysis, as provided by CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.7, that considers loss of
           prime farmland soils as a significant adverse environmental impact.
           Ag1-4.1    Loss of prime farmland soils shall refer to their unavailability for
                      agricultural use. Loss may occur through natural causes or development
                      such as coverage (e.g., paving, construction of buildings, etc.), or
                      conversion to urban/suburban use (including residential yards/gardens
                      and recreational areas). Cessation of agricultural use shall not constitute
                      loss so long as the parcel remains fallow or is allowed to revert to a
                      natural undeveloped state. Site improvements that are intended to
                      support agricultural operations - such as grading, irrigation or drainage
                      facilities, unpaved roads, or farm buildings and structures -- shall not
                      constitute loss so long as the improvements do not substantially diminish
                      the capability of agricultural operations on the parcel or within the area
                      and the improvements are directly related to agricultural production on
                      the site.
           Ag1-4.2    Possible mitigation for loss of areas having prime farmland soils may
                      include permanent protection of prime farmland soils at a ratio of at
                      least 1:1 and up to 2:1 with regard to the acreage of land removed from
                      the capability for agricultural use. Permanent protection may involve,
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                     AgC/OS - 2

                     but is not limited to, dedication of a perpetual agriculture or conservation
                     easement or other effective mechanism to ensure that the area chosen
                     as mitigation shall not be subject to loss of its prime farmland soils.
                     Suitability of location shall be determined by the City Council. The aim
                     shall be to protect and preserve prime farmland soils primarily within and
                     contiguous to City boundaries, secondly within the Urban Land Use
                     Element area, and thirdly within the larger Arroyo Grande Valley and La
                     Cienega Valley within the Area of Environmental Concern. Other
                     potential mitigation measures for loss of areas having prime farmland
                     soils include payment of in-lieu fees or such other mitigation acceptable
                     to the City Council.
           Ag1-4.3   Since prime farmland soils occur naturally and are geographically
                     specific, the only means for mitigation to less than significant is
                     preservation. The City’s aim shall be to maintain contiguity of Ag and
                     C/OS parcels and avoid fragmentation of areas having prime farmland
                     soils. The City shall avoid development of prime farmland soil areas by
                     directing growth potential to more suitable urban locations. Only after
                     the imposition of available mitigation and consideration of alternatives to
                     avoid the proposed action, may the City Council approve development on
                     prime farmland soils subject to overriding considerations as permitted by
                     California Government Code Section 15093.
    Ag1-5  Conserve topsoil by encouraging cooperation between property owners, agriculture
           operators and growers, agencies and organizations that will result in effective soil
           conservation practices.
           Ag1-5.1   Assure that city streets, drainage systems and other infrastructure do not
                     adversely impact agricultural lands and that the roads, drainage and
                     utility systems are properly maintained.
           Ag1-5.2   Actively encourage conservation of soil resources.
                  Ag1-5.2.1 Make available to area farmers, in conjunction with Natural
                               Resource Conservation Service, voluntary guidelines for farming
                               operations on erodible soils.
           Ag1-5.3   Minimize flood damage potential to farmland.
                  Ag1-5.3.1 Assure that urban developments incorporate adequate runoff
                               and drainage detention and flood control.
Ag2 Allocate and conserve ground and surface water resources for agricultural use
    and minimize potential Fringe Area and urban development that would divert
    such resources from agriculture.
    Ag2-1  Maintain water resources for production agriculture, both in quality and in quantity,
           so as to prevent the loss of agriculture due to competition for water with urban
           development.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                     AgC/OS - 3

           Ag2-1.1    Minimize County Fringe Area and urban development that would
                      adversely affect: (1) water supplies and quality or (2) groundwater
                      recharge capability needed for agricultural use.
           Ag2-1.2    Support efforts to provide needed surface and/or ground water
                      resources for agricultural irrigation to those properties zoned Agriculture,
                      Very Low Density and Low Density.
    Ag2-2  Identify groundwater recharge areas that are pertinent to agricultural water usage.
           Ag2-2.1    For purposes of this policy, ‘groundwater recharge area’ refers to all
                      areas with sufficient soil permeability or appropriate geologic structure
                      such that surface water penetrates to one or more subterranean aquifers
                      that are currently used or could reasonably be used in the future for
                      agricultural irrigation.
           Ag2-2.2    The location and suitability of groundwater recharge areas shall be
                      identified in CEQA analyses and considered with regard to impacts on
                      agricultural land uses.
    Ag2-3  Ensure that urban land use and Residential Rural or Suburban development
           projects result in no net decrease in groundwater recharge and no adverse effect
           on agricultural water supplies.
           Ag2-3.1    Require mitigation measures that result in no net decrease in
                      groundwater recharge.
    Ag2-4  Detention, retention and recharge basins shall be designed as open space and
           habitat resources in addition to flood control and other functions associated with a
           development.       Their extent and engineering shall permit establishment of
           vegetative growth and utilization for passive recreation or compatible agricultural
           uses.     The design of such Facilities shall include specific operation and
           maintenance programs that ensure that the capacity is not reduced.
    Ag2-5  Encourage water conservation by both agricultural and urban water users.
           Ag2-5.1    Require water-conserving design in urban development proposals.
           Ag2-5.2    Distribute irrigation standards for urban area agricultural uses.
Ag3 Current acreage of agricultural uses within                   Arroyo   Grande’s     Area    of
    Environmental Concern shall be maintained.
    Ag3-1  Designate all lands currently in agricultural use, and vacant lands having been in
           agricultural use for at least six (6) months within the past ten (10) years, as
           Agriculture (Ag) unless otherwise classified and partially developed for non-
           Agricultural uses.
           Ag3-1.1    Agricultural use shall include grazing by domesticated animals (e.g.
                      horses, cattle, sheep, goats, etc) or other animals (e.g. buffalo, ostrich,
                      deer, etc.) managed for commercial or conservation purposes; tending
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                      AgC/OS - 4

                      of animals (e.g. chickens, rabbits, etc.) for commercial products (e.g.,
                      eggs, meat, fur) or for conservation purposes (e.g., wildlife refuge);
                      cultivation of food crops intended for human or animal consumption,
                      including products requiring substantial processing after harvest;
                      cultivation of flowers, trees or ornamental flora, including landscaping
                      materials; active management of orchards or vineyards; or any other
                      activity where the soil and climate provide an essential component of
                      commercial productivity.
           Ag3-1.2    Commercial value and significance with regard to agricultural use shall
                      refer to the purpose of the activity rather than to any particular
                      economic threshold. The criterion is whether the activity is pursued with
                      the intent to sell agricultural products, directly or indirectly and whether
                      profitable or not. Activity pursued for personal consumption or pleasure
                      (e.g., keeping a horse for family riding, a goat for household milk, or a
                      small vineyard for home vinting) does not qualify as an agricultural use.
           Ag3-1.3    Agricultural land shall encompass parcels with agricultural uses and one
                      or more residential structures and/or outbuildings designed to shelter or
                      contain animals or store agricultural products or equipment and supplies.
           Ag3-1.4    Parcels with no agricultural uses, of a primarily residential nature, shall
                      be considered residential. Parcels with no agricultural uses, which
                      contain uses related to and supportive of agricultural operations, shall be
                      considered agricultural.
           Ag3-1.5    Vacant or undeveloped agricultural land shall refer to fallow cropland,
                      grazing land or land supporting other agricultural uses as identified in
                      AG3-1.1, that is not in productive use at the time of any designation
                      action or re-designation request.
    Ag3-2  Outside the City limits and within Arroyo Grande’s Area of Environmental Concern,
           designate those lands identified in San Luis Obispo County’s General Plan as
           Agriculture, which are currently in agricultural use or have been in agricultural use
           for at least six (6) months within the past ten (10) years, as Agriculture (Ag).
           Ag3-2.1    County designation shall be as determined as of December 15, 1998, the
                      date of adoption by the Board of Supervisors, of the County’s Agriculture
                      & Open Space Element.
           Ag3-2.2    Should landowners of parcels in this area request consideration for
                      inclusion within the City’s Sphere of Influence and/or annexation to the
                      City of Arroyo Grande, the request shall be evaluated based on the City’s
                      criteria for Agriculture designation and zoning, and be subject to all
                      policies and regulations pertaining to that use.
    Ag3-3  Agricultural land shall be considered as two sub-types: Prime and non-prime.
           Because of soil and slope conditions, and non-expandable nature of these areas,
           prime Agriculture areas shall have the highest priority for protection from
           conversion to urban uses.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                     AgC/OS - 5

           Ag3-3.1   Prime Agriculture shall comprise what are commonly referred to as
                     “bottom lands” within the Arroyo Grande Valley, Huasna Valley, Cienega
                     Valley and Los Berros Valley. These are typically flat, irrigated, and in
                     intensive crop production.
           Ag3-3.2   Non-prime areas shall comprise what are commonly referred to as “grass
                     lands” on hillsides and sloped areas generally southeast, east and north
                     of the urban area. These are typically non-irrigated and support grazing
                     or dry-land crops.
    Ag3-4  Encourage the expansion of agricultural land uses.
           Ag3-4.1   Encourage requests for re-classification of lands in Residential Rural and
                     Residential Suburban and/or Urban land use districts to the Agriculture
                     district.
    Ag3-5  All Ag-designated lands shall be considered ‘Agricultural Preserve’ for Land
           Conservation Act (Williamson Act) purposes and eligible to enter into Williamson
           Act contracts to the extent that statutory qualifications are satisfied. The City shall
           encourage agricultural conservation easements for lands that are not eligible for
           Williamson Act contracts.
           Ag3-5.1   Promote Williamson Act contracts, or agricultural conservation
                     easements, on Ag-designated properties within the City limits and in the
                     City's Area of Environmental Concern. The City’s aim shall be 100%
                     participation of qualified Ag-designated properties that are otherwise not
                     protected in perpetuity.
           Ag3-5.2   Encourage the County to support participation in the Williamson Act
                     program by Ag-designated properties within the Area of Environmental
                     Concern under jurisdiction of the County. The City’s aim shall be 100%
                     participation of qualified Ag-designated properties that are otherwise not
                     protected in perpetuity.
    Ag3-6  Encourage lot mergers and consolidations, within the Ag district, and among
           properties seeking inclusion into the Ag district, or meet minimum parcel size
           requirements for Williamson Act participation and City standards for Agriculture
           uses, and encourage joint participation in linked agricultural conservation
           easements.
           Ag3-6.1   Establish incentives for lot mergers and consolidations. The City’s aim
                     shall be 100% of Ag-designated properties to be qualified for Williamson
                     Act participation and compliant with City standards, or subject to
                     agricultural conservation easements.
    Ag3-7  Where lot mergers and consolidations are impractical, encourage the establishment
           and maintenance of small-scale agricultural uses, specialty crops, and specialized
           animal facilities.
           Ag3-7.1   Discourage rural residences as the primary use on existing small Ag
                     designated parcels.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 6

           Ag3-7.2   Advise owners of legally non-conforming Ag parcels that City policy
                     promotes continued agricultural use including specialty crops and right-
                     to-farm adjoining Ag properties.
    Ag3-8  Encourage the establishment and succession of agricultural usage.
           Ag3-8.1   Cooperate with the County Agricultural Commissioner and Farm Advisors
                     to distribute information encouraging establishment of agricultural uses
                     and conversion to higher value crops to preserve Agriculture and
                     conserve Conservation/Open Space lands.
    Ag3-9  Discourage subdivision of Ag designated property.
           Ag3-9.1   The minimum parcel size for new land division of Ag designated parcels
                     that are irrigated shall be 20 acres.
           Ag3-9.2   The minimum parcel size for new land division of Ag designated parcels
                     that are non-irrigated shall be 40 acres.
    Ag3-10 Where land division of an Ag designated property is proposed, the resulting parcels
           shall be designed to ensure the long-term protection of agricultural resources.
           Ag3-10.1 Refer proposed divisions of Agriculture lands to the County Agricultural
                     Commissioner for review and advisory comment as to whether the
                     proposed parcels would be sustainable as agricultural parcels.
           Ag3-10.2 Require that Ag parcels meet Williamson Act eligibility standards and
                     enter into Williamson Act contracts if not otherwise protected in
                     perpetuity.
           Ag3-10.3 Require that divisions of Ag designated parcels include covenants,
                     conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) notifying subsequent owners that
                     land is an Agricultural reserve and that the City supports its ‘Right-to-
                     Farm’ Ordinance.
           Ag3-10.4 Restrict the building sites of a subdivided Ag parcel to no more than 1
                     acre.
           Ag3-10.5 Accessory buildings or structures shall be sited to minimize disruption of
                     agricultural operations, avoid conversions of productive farmland, and
                     take maximum advantage of existing infrastructure.
           Ag3-10.6 Maintain existing irrigation infrastructure.
   Ag3-11 Allow residential density of no more than two primary dwelling units on each legal
          parcel of 20 acres or larger within the Ag category. Accessory units for farmworker
          housing at a higher density may be allowed on parcels greater than 20 acres
          subject to obtaining a conditional use permit. Allow no more than one primary
          dwelling unit on each parcel of less than 20 acres; exceptions may be allowed for
          farmworker housing located on non-prime Agriculture designated lands subject to
          obtaining a conditional use permit.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 7

   Ag3-12 Except as provided below, permit only Ag-related uses in areas designated
          Agriculture (Ag).
           Ag3-12.1 Ag-related shall mean activities and structures associated with the
                       growing and/or production of agricultural products for income.
           Ag3-12.2 Incidental activities (such as roadside stands or bed-and-breakfast/farm
                       stay accommodations) may be permitted, so long as those activities are
                       related to the primary use, are clearly secondary to agricultural use, and
                       that all building sites in the aggregate compose less than 1 acre of
                       conforming (or less than 10% of the non-conforming) parcel size and are
                       situated such that they do not impinge upon the agricultural activities of
                       the parcel and/or the Ag district.
    Ag3-13 Discourage conversion of land within Ag designated areas to non-Agriculture uses.
           Ag3-13.1 Cooperate with the County, special districts, and agricultural
                       organizations/agencies to establish urban service and urban reserve lines
                       that will protect agricultural land and stabilize agricultural uses within the
                       Area of Environmental Concern.
   Ag3-14 Consider re-classification of an Ag parcel (or contiguous set of parcels), only if and
          when the parcel or set of such parcels is less than minimum size (e.g. legally non-
          conforming as to area) and is isolated from other agricultural uses.
           Ag3-14.1 "Isolated" shall refer to a parcel or set of parcels being predominately
                       separated from other nearby Agriculture areas, or predominately
                       surrounded by existing non-agricultural uses, such that it lacks contiguity
                       with or connection to other areas of existing or potential agricultural use.
           Ag3-14.2 In cases considered for conversion, the parcel(s) shall be adequately
                       served by appropriate infrastructure and any development application
                       shall be subject to environmental analysis as referenced in AOSCE Policy
                       Ag1-4.
   Ag3-15 Re-designation requests shall avoid leapfrogging of parcels in agricultural use that
          would result in other Ag parcels being widowed, including uses within County
          jurisdiction as well as uses within City.
Ag4 Support continued economic viability of agriculture as a specialized site-specific
    industry.
    Ag4-1  Support increased productivity and enhancement of markets and/or Ag uses, such
           as vineyards, in appropriate areas, especially in locations that would retain Ag.
           Lands and/or improve or reestablish agricultural productivity.
           Ag4-1.1     Continue support of the Farmers Market in Arroyo Grande on a regular
                       basis in one or more appropriate locations.
    Ag4-2  Support the development of new techniques and new practices in agricultural
           production.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                      AgC/OS - 8
            Ag4-2.1    Favorably consider proposals for agricultural uses and practices that are
                       compatible with surrounding uses.
            Ag4-2.2    Minimize the burden to agricultural operators of any review and
                       permitting requirements by the City.
            Ag4-2.3    Affirm the City’s Right to Farm Ordinance and its extension to new
                       techniques and practices.
    Ag4-3   Provide incentives for landowners to maintain land in productive agricultural uses.
            Ag4-3.1    Encourage the establishment of small-scale agricultural uses, specialty
                       crops, and specialized livestock facilities other than processing on
                       existing small land parcels in the Ag category.
    Ag4-4   Allow incidental visitor-serving and incidental retail use and facilities in Ag
            designated areas that are beneficial to the agricultural industry and are compatible
            with long-term agricultural use of the land. Such uses shall be clearly incidental
            and secondary to the primary agricultural uses of the site, and meet the criteria of
            Ag3-12.2.
            Ag4-4.1    Visitor-serving uses may include tourism facilities such as bed-and-
                       breakfast/farm stay lodging or food-serving establishments. Such uses
                       shall be of a small-scale nature with discrete signage.
            Ag4-4.2    Incidental retail uses may involve on-site, area-specific or product-
                       specific promotion and marketing of agricultural products, such as wine
                       tasting at a vineyard. Such uses shall be of a small-scale nature with
                       discrete signage.
            Ag4-4.3    Locate visitor-serving and incidental retail uses on the least productive
                       agricultural lands unless there are no other feasible locations
      Ag4-5            Promote the establishment of service commercial type uses related to
                       the support of local agricultural production outside Ag areas.
            Ag4-5.1    Locate Ag related service commercial uses in commercial or industrial
                       districts with convenient access to areas of agricultural production.
                       Service commercial type uses may include, but are not limited to, farm
                       equipment rental and repair services, veterinary services, and bulk
                       supplies.
    Ag4-6   Promote the establishment of compatible industrial facilities that support local
            agricultural production, processing, packing, and related industries.
            Ag4-6.1 Compatible industrial facilities include facilities that are fully enclosed
                       and do not generate dust, odors or other emissions that may adversely
                       affect residents or workers. Such facilities may include small-scale
                       wineries, breweries, ice manufacturing, and other facilities as evaluated
                       on a case-by-case basis.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                      AgC/OS - 9

           Ag4-6.2    Incompatible agricultural facilities of an industrial nature may include
                      poultry operations, hog farms, feed lots, feed and grain mills, meat-
                      packing plants, food processing plants, produce packing sheds, and
                      certain types of transportation facilities for agricultural products and
                      supplies, as evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
           Ag4-6.3    Locate agriculturally related industrial facility uses in commercial or
                      industrial districts with convenient access to areas of agricultural
                      production.
Ag5 Promote coexistence of agricultural and urban land uses.
    Ag5-1  Affirm the Right-to-Farm Ordinance.
           Ag5-1.1    Extend Right-to-Farm provisions to new areas that are adjoining lands
                      approved for addition to the Agriculture district.
    Ag5-2  Establish criteria for buffers between Agriculture land use designations and non-
           Agriculture land use designations.
           Ag5-2.1    Buffers shall be established on all parcels proposed for non-agricultural
                      development adjacent to agricultural uses, when the property is exposed
                      to agricultural operations.
           Ag5-2.2    No portion of any new residential structure within a non-Agricultural land
                      use designation shall be located closer than 100 feet from the site of
                      agricultural operations within an Agricultural land designation. Greater
                      distances may be required based upon site-specific circumstances, to
                      include consideration of established or existing farming operations or
                      practices.
           Ag5-2.3    The buffer area shall be noticed and/or fenced and landscaped in such
                      manner to discourage human and domestic animal movement between
                      the urban and agricultural areas and to screen urban uses from dust and
                      wind-borne materials.
           Ag5-2.4    The buffer area shall contain a minimum 20 feet depth of landscaping.
                      Plantings shall be sufficiently dense and mature to provide aerosol
                      protection within the first year of establishment. Greater landscaping
                      depth may be required based upon site-specific circumstances, to include
                      consideration of established or existing farming operations or practices.
           Ag5-2.5    Buffer standards associated with non-residential structures and roadways
                      shall account for the type of use, building orientation and building and
                      roadways design.
    Ag5-3  Land use conversions shall not adversely affect existing or potential agriculture
           production on adjacent lands designated Ag.
    Ag5-4  Design special assessments that are equitable with regard to benefits, such that
           agricultural landowners are not disproportionately assessed for services that accrue
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 10
            to urban residents more than farmers or ranchers. Examples of such urban
            services include fire protection, park and recreation services and neighborhood
            street lighting.
     Ag5-5  Minimize trespassing into agricultural areas, through signage, access restrictions,
            fines and other available means
     Ag5-6  Establish a grievance or arbitration committee to mediate land use disputes
            between farmers and adjoining non-farm residents.
Ag 6 Agriculture classification shall include minimum development standards:
     Ag6-1  Ag zoning classifications shall prescribe minimum parcel sizes of 20-acres for
            cultivated, irrigated and/or prime agricultural land, and 40 acres for non-cultivated,
            non-irrigated and/or non-prime agricultural lands.
     Ag6-2  Ag Zoning classifications shall allow 1 dwelling unit per 10 acres and accessory
            structures provided all buildings comply with Ag 3-10.4, Ag 3-10.5 and Ag 3-11.
CONSERVATION and OPEN SPACE OBJECTIVES and POLICIES
C/OS1 Protect visually accessible scenic resources.
     C/OS1-1 Identify and protect scenic resources and view sheds associated with them
        C/OS1-1.1      For purposes of this policy, a ‘scenic resource’ may refer to agricultural
                       land, open spaces, hillsides, ridgelines, canyons, valleys, landmark trees,
                       woodlands, wetlands, streambeds and banks, as well as aspects of the
                       built environment that are of a historic nature, or unique to the City, or
                       contribute to the rural, small town character of the City.
        C/OS1-1.2      For purposes of this policy, a ‘view shed’ refers to locations from which a
                       scenic resource is visible. Such locations may be privately owned but
                       generally accessible to the public. Public vantage points, such as travel
                       paths (roadways, trails) or public facilities (schools, parks, etc) are
                       especially important view sheds to maintain.
        C/OS1-1.3      Establish designated scenic corridors along public roads and highways
                       that have unique or outstanding scenic attributes, such as views of
                       prominent hills, mountains or canyons; views of stands of trees or
                       wildflowers; views of the Pacific Ocean or streams.
        C/OS1-1.4      Locate structures, roads and grading on portions of a site so as to
                       minimize visual impact.         Locate developments below prominent
                       ridgelines and hilltops such that they are not silhouetted against the sky.
        C/OS1-1.5      Use natural landforms and vegetation to screen development.
        C/OS1-1.6      Minimize signs, especially freestanding signs. Secure removal of non-
                       conforming signs within scenic corridors as part of discretionary
                       development projects.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                      AgC/OS - 11

        C/OS 1-1.7    Prohibit    off-premise     advertising     signs    in    all    Agriculture,
                     Conservation/Open Space, and Residential designated areas of the City
                     and planning area.
    C/OS1-2 Identify unique landforms and designate them as Conservation/Open Space
             (C/OS) to require or encourage their protection, conservation and/or
             preservation.
C/OS2 Safeguard important environmental and sensitive                     biological     resources
      contributing to healthy, functioning ecosystem.
    C/OS2-1 Designate all streams and riparian corridors as Conservation/Open Space (C/OS).
        C/OS2-1.1    ‘Creeks’ and ‘riparian corridors’ shall include buffer area corresponding at
                     least to edge of riparian habitat and/or creek bank.
        C/OS2-1.2    Preserve stream and riparian corridors in their natural state, except
                     where necessary for flood control, periodic maintenance, creekbank
                     protection, and creek restoration consistent with State and Federal
                     permits. Concrete channels and underground piping of creeks and
                     drainages shall be minimized and allowed if it is determined by the City
                     Council to be necessary for public health, safety and welfare. Bridges
                     are preferred over arched or piped culverts.
        C/OS2-1.3    Where feasible, maintain a development setback of 25 – 50 feet from
                     the top of stream bank or edge of riparian habitat depending on slope,
                     habitat and floodplain characteristics. Locate development outside the
                     setback.
        C/OS2-1.4    Creekside trails may be designed to integrate with stream and riparian
                     corridor protection, and implement mitigation measures including those
                     for erosion control, drainage and vegetation management and allowed
                     within building setback if it is not feasible to place the trail outside of the
                     setback area.
        C/OS2-1.5    Creeks and riparian vegetation and the natural hydrological system and
                     the existing or potential ecological function of creeks shall be evaluated
                     in accordance with CEQA within 100 feet of the Top of Bank or upland
                     edge of riparian vegetation, whichever is greater, within which various
                     setbacks and other measures may be designed and implemented in
                     accordance with City codes with the objective of protecting the
                     environmentally sensitive creek habitats.
        C/OS2-1.6    Plan, design, and develop sites to: Protect scenic resources, water
                     quality and natural creekside habitat, including opportunities for wildlife
                     habitation, rest, and movement. Further the restoration of damaged or
                     degraded habitat, especially where a continuous riparian habitat corridor
                     can be established.
                          Allow for natural changes that may occur within the creek
                              corridor;
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                   AgC/OS - 12

                            Maintain predevelopment site hydrology by using site design
                             techniques that store, infiltrate, evaporate, or detain runoff
                             according to the City Drainage Master Plan or any applicable Site
                             Design Guidelines for Storm Water Quality and Water
                             Conservation as amended;
                            Protect areas that provide important water quality benefits or
                             are particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
                            Limit impervious area by design and the use of best
                             management practices;
                            Limit land disturbance activities, such as clearing and grading
                             and cut and fill, to reduce erosion, sediment loss, and soil
                             compaction; and
                            Preserve natural drainage features and vegetation to the extent
                             possible.
       C/OS2-1.7    Incentive programs and creek management resources shall be developed
                    to assist property owners in protecting creek corridors.
       C/OS2-1.8    Property in the vicinity of creeks is considered Archaeologically Sensitive
                    due to the likelihood of previous settlement patterns and known cultural
                    sensitivity of creek areas. Require Cultural Resources Surveys for all
                    discretionary projects in the vicinity of creeks.
       C/OS2-1.9    Culverting or channelization for existing open creeks should not occur
                    unless there is strong evidence that there is no other means to prevent
                    erosion of foundations of other existing structures.
       C/OS2-1.10   Coordinate through a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) agreement
                    with other watershed jurisdictions, groups, and stakeholders and other
                    interested parties to develop and implement public education programs
                    and water quality enhancement activities and provide technical
                    assistance to minimize storm water pollution. Use watershed planning
                    approaches to resolve water quality problems.
       C/OS2-1.11   Design, construct, and maintain City facilities, roads, bridges, drainage
                    and other facilities to minimize sediment and other pollutants in storm
                    water flows. Develop and implement “best management practices” for
                    ongoing maintenance and operation.
       C/OS2-1.12   Continue requiring grading plans that include measures for avoiding soil
                    erosion and consider upgrading requirements as needed to minimize
                    sedimentation in storm water.
       C/OS2-1.13   Require that discretionary projects, to the maximum extent pracitable,
                    maintain or increase the site’s pre-development absorption of runoff to
                    recharge groundwater. Implementation would include standards to
                    regulate impervious surfaces, vary by project type, land use, soils and
                    area characteristics, and provide for water impoundments, protecting
                    and planting vegetation, cisterns and other measures to increase runoff
                    retention and groundwater recharge.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                  AgC/OS - 13

    C/OS2-2 Identify unique or sensitive habitat areas and designate them Conservation/Open
             Space (C/OS) overlay.
        C/OS2-2.1     Designate wetlands as Conservation/Open Space.
    C/OS2-3 Identify and designate Conservation/Open Space (C/OS) other public or private
             properties containing scenic resources or public vistas of scenic importance.
    C/OS2-4 Identify and protect wildlife           corridors    that  link   habitat  areas   as
             Conservation/Open Space (C/OS).
        C/OS2-4.1     Encourage agricultural landowners and managers of Conservation/Open
                      Space to adopt range and farmland management practices that will not
                      interfere with the movement of wildlife through their properties.
        C/OS2-4.2     Public or private developments that require discretionary permit or
                      propose a land division, shall avoid disturbance of significant wildlife
                      corridors, and/or wetlands identified by City or County environmental
                      studies.
        C/OS2-4.3     When evaluating discretionary proposals as part of the CEQA process,
                      require mitigation measures that would re-establish damaged or
                      disturbed corridors and provide for long-term viability.
C/OS3 Plan for a well-maintained system of footpaths and non-vehicular trails that
      provide access to areas of non-urban environment.
    C/OS3-1 In Residential Rural and Suburban County areas and developments in the
             unincorporated portions of the planning area, and in all urban land use
             developments adjoining possible trail alignments within the City, provide for
             equestrian, hiking and biking trails, particularly those providing access to schools,
             parks and community facility activity areas.
    C/OS3-2 Access trails shall not conflict with Agriculture use or significantly disturb
             environmentally sensitive resources.
C/OS4 Preserve historic and cultural resources of public interest that reflect the
      legacy of earlier human settlement.
    C/OS4-1 Identify historic and cultural resources that should be protected as C/OS
             combining designations.
    C/OS4-2 Avoid disturbance of archaeological and culturally sensitive sites.
    C/OS4-3 Encourage acquisition of significant designated C/OS sites by public agencies,
             historical or conservation organizations for preservation and restoration where
             feasible, or require private conservation by adaptive reuse if not.
    C/OS4-4 Protect the character of significant historical features and settings by C/OS
             designation. Maintain a listing of historic and cultural resources.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 14
C/OS5 Conservation/Open Space classification shall include minimum development
      standards:
    C/OS5-1 C/OS zoning classifications shall prescribe minimum parcel sizes of 5 acres, 10
             acres or 20 acres (e.
    +g. C/OS5) as determined appropriate by the City based on existing parcel size or
             sensitivity to development.
    C/OS5-2 C/OS zoning classifications shall allow 1 dwelling unit per parcel provided all
             buildings and related grading and infrastructure complies with Ag3-10.4 and
             Ag3-10.5 related to conservation of natural resources.
C/OS6 The City of Arroyo Grande shall manage land use and limit its urban
      development potential to that which can be sustained by the available water
      resources and serviced by circulation and other infrastructure.
    C/OS6-1 Water resources currently available include 1200 acre-feet annually of
             groundwater extraction from Arroyo Grande Basin, 2290-acre feet annual
             entitlement from Lopez Lake and 100 acre feet per year from the Pismo
             formation. The 3590 ac. ft/year minimum supply during drought conditions is
             estimated as capable of supporting a City of 20,000 residents (at 160 gpd per
             capita average consumption).
        C/OS6-1.1      The City shall consider more efficient water utilization and conservation
                      measures in subsequent Water Management Master Plan amendments to
                      reduce average annual per capita consumption including the Best
                      Management Practices already identified. The City will monitor water
                      use by type and density of land use including agriculture, residential,
                      office and commercial. The City will reflect any changes to regional
                      water resources available to the City by periodic amendment to the City’s
                      Water Master Plan.
    C/OS6-2 Residential Rural and Residential Suburban uses in the unincorporated Arroyo
             Grande Fringe Area utilize individual wells and septic systems located in the
             Arroyo Grande Creek watershed which cumulatively impact water quantity and
             quality available for agriculture and urban uses.
Implementation Measures
    Ag/C/OS.1    Designate all deed-restricted open space, identified as part of a Planned
                 Development entitlement or Specific Plan, as Permanent Open Space (P/OS).
    Ag/C/OS.2    Re-designate all open space, which becomes deed-restricted through
                 voluntary dedication or in conjunction with development activities, as
                 Permanent Open Space.
    Ag/C/OS.3    Maintain an inventory of P/OS and C/OS designated open space, along with
                 specific restrictions.
    Ag/C/OS.4    Encourage private landowners to voluntarily protect and maintain open space
                 resources on their properties.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 15

    Ag/C/OS.5    Encourage and support efforts to protect lands containing open space
                 resources by state and federal agencies, the County, special districts, and
                 non-profit and conservation organizations.
    Ag/C/OS.6    Encourage application of Williamson Act programs and Conservation/Open
                 Space easements to all eligible private properties.
    Ag/C/OS.7    Coordinate efforts to acquire significant conservation and Permanent Open
                 Space lands with other public agencies and conservation organizations.
    Ag/C/OS.8    Actively seek available grants and aid programs from state and federal
                 agencies and private foundations to fund acquisition and maintenance of
                 Open Space and Agriculture lands.
    Ag/C/OS.9    Actively seek contributions of land, development rights, easements, and
                 money from individuals and corporations, both for preservation of open
                 space and recreation land in general and for acquisition of specific priority
                 properties. Consider using San Luis Obispo Parks, Open Space and Trails
                 Foundation as a vehicle for donations and gifts.
    Ag/C/OS.10   Encourage the use of cluster land divisions and cluster development that will
                 locate development on the least environmentally sensitive portions of
                 properties where the balance of land is preserved in Permanent Open Space.
    Ag/C/OS.11   Where a landowner proposes a land division, the proposed parcels shall
                 maintain or enhance the long-term protection of Open Space.
    Ag/C/OS.12   Park sites and recreation areas shall protect scenic and environmentally
                 sensitive resources, and shall not conflict with Agriculture uses.
    Ag/C/OS.13   Develop a Strategic Action Plan for Agriculture and Open Space preservation
                 (prioritize locations, identify actions, responsible entities, funding, timing,
                 and performance monitoring).
    Ag/C/OS.14   Consider an impact mitigation fee program as adjunct to, or in lieu of, direct
                 dedication of off-site Agriculture or conservation easement.
    Ag/C/OS.15   Establish a fund for the purchase of Permanent or Conservation/Open Space
                 easements and investigate all available revenue sources for funding,
                 including:
                      a. grants/loans from State or Federal agencies;
                      b. grants/loans from private foundations/organizations;
                      c. citywide tax or participation in countywide tax; and,
                      e. mitigation fees
    Ag/C/OS.16   Assist in developing a public education and outreach program relative to
                 conservation easements (personal advantages) and permitted uses and
                 activities on easement areas.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 16
    Ag/C/OS.17   Collaborate with the County, SLOCOG and/or adjacent jurisdictions (e.g.,
                 Cities of Pismo Beach, Grover Beach and Oceano CSD) to develop a “model
                 agricultural conservation easement” document to be used as the basis for
                 negotiation with individual property owners.
    Ag/C/OS.18   Establish a program that provides the City with a low cost option or
                 contractual arrangements with agricultural landowners to acquire “right of
                 first refusal” with regard to acquisition when the owner becomes interested
                 in selling a property.
    Ag/C/OS.19   Establish or contract with an existing Land Trust to administer ownership of
                 Ag parcels and manage agricultural activities.
    Ag/C/OS.20   The City should initiate a program for riparian corridor acquisition, wetland,
                 restoration and storm Water Pollution Prevention programs.
    Ag/C/OS.21   Support the establishment of a local funding mechanism, as identified by City
                 Council, which allocates funds toward the voluntary purchase of agricultural,
                 conservation, and open space easements.
    Ag/C/OS.22   Coordinate with volunteer organizations that provide services or programs
                 that implement City Conservation Element policies including creek clean-up
                 events, creek restoration activities, and creekside trail maintenance.
    Ag/C/OS.23   In order to reduce impacts to natural habitats form night lighting, require all
                 sustained/constant exterior lighting to be low intensity and shielded to
                 reduce its visibility from surrounding areas and to minimize impacts to
                 wildlife.
    Ag/C/OS.24   Disseminate information regarding the potential harmful effects of invasive
                 plant species on native plant communities and harmful effects of toxic
                 chemical substances and safe alternatives to toxics for home and garden
                 use. City employees and contractors shall use Best Management Practices in
                 construction and maintenance of City-used or owned properties, facilities,
                 trails, and rights of way.
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007                    AgC/OS - 17

                                  Map C/OS – 1
                      Creeks Within the City of Arroyo Grande
AMENDED JUNE 12, 2007          AgC/OS - 18

CIRCULATION ELEMENT
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Streets and Highways Standards
CT1.     Plan and develop a coordinated and efficient, functional classification system
         of local streets and highways throughout the community that designates the
         purpose and physical characteristics of the roadway, composed of the five
         categories.
      CT1-1      State Freeway 101, 4 to 6 lane with interchange access: Caltrans design
                 standards or as mutually approved. Typically 120’ or more.
      CT1-2      Major Arterial Street – 4 lane with or without median; City controlled access, on-
                 street parking optional; include bike lanes, sidewalks, transit turnouts and other
                 design features: 80’ – 104’ r of w.
      CT1-3      State Highway 227 or Minor Arterial Streets – 2 to 4 lanes with or without
                 median/turn lane: State or City controlled access, on-street parking optional;
                 includes bike lanes, sidewalks, some transit and other design features: 64’ – 104’
                 r of w.
      CT1-4      Collector Streets – 2 lanes with or without turn lane, controlled access, on-street
                 parking optional; includes bike lanes, sidewalks, some transit and other design
                 features: 84’ r of w.
      CT 1-5     Local Streets – 2 lanes, access and on-street parking; includes some bike lanes,
                 sidewalks on one or both sides, other design variables in hillside, cul-de-sac, or
                 other special conditions: 42’ – 60’ r of w.
      CT1-6      All street standards shall be reviewed and revised as determined appropriate
                 including optional features such as landscaped medians, curb bulbouts and
                 parkways and/or street trees and similar design amenities when approved by the
                 City. Alternative local street standards for neo-traditional subdivisions or Planned
                 Developments/Specific Plans will also be considered.
Level of Service
CT2.     Attain and maintain Level of Service (LOS)’C’ or better on all streets and
         controlled intersections.
      CT2-1      Where deficiencies exist, mitigate to an LOS ‘D’ at a minimum and plan
                 improvement to achieve LOS ‘C’ (Los ‘E’ or ‘F’ unacceptable = significant adverse
                 impact unless Statement of Overriding Considerations or CEQA Findings
                 approved). The design and funding for such planned improvements shall be
                 sufficiently definite to enable construction within a reasonable period of time.
      CT2-2      The City should conduct periodic traffic counts, monitor selected streets and
                 model arterial and collector street network to determine where LOS ‘C’ is not
                 attained and provide a current baseline for development project impact analyses.
                                                 CE - 1

CT2-3    Require that General Plan Amendments, Rezoning Applications or development
         projects involving 20 or more estimated peak hour trip additions provide traffic
         studies according to City LOS policy, including subsequent amendments and
         refinements.
      CT2-3.1     Traffic studies shall include roadway capacity, safety and design analysis
                  using Highway Capacity Manual methodology.
      CT2-3.2     Traffic studies shall describe possible mitigation measures available to
                  attain LOS ‘C’ or better and project-related methods of funding.
      CT2-3.3     Public Works Director should meet with applicants prior to application to
                  discuss study scope, probable impacts and mitigation.
CT2-4    The City should periodically review LOS policy and actual system performance to
         identify model deficiencies and consider Capital Improvement Programs,
         mitigation measures and/or policy revision and refinement.
                                          CE - 2

CE - 
   Circulation/Transportation Map-3
             Scenic Routes
   Bikeways and pedestrian Facilities
            Recreation Trails
(Refer to Parks and Recreation Element)
              CE - 4
Alternative Circulation and transportation Systems
CT3.     Maintain and improve existing “multi- modal” circulation and transportation
         systems and facilities, to maximize alternatives to new street and highway
         construction.
      CT3-1      In cooperation with SCAT and CCAT or other operators, provide for safe and
                 efficient transit system for local and regional travel, particularly for youth,
                 elderly, low-income or disabled persons.
             CT3-1.1       The City should encourage convenient routes and schedules on arterial
                           and/or collector streets including stops, shelters, bus benches, turnouts,
                           park and ride, transfer and other facilities or features to be provided in
                           connection with new developments.
             CT3-1.2       The City should encourage major employers to promote use of public
                           transit and/or provide van/car pools, private shuttles or other trip
                           reduction (flex time, telecommuting, bike) and transportation demand
                           management.
      CT3-2      Cooperate with Lucia Mar Unified School District to plan improved school bus
                 transportation system, including parking and loading, maintenance and storage,
                 bike ad sidewalk access facilities.
             CT3-2.1       Consider shared corporation yard to relocate existing maintenance and
                           storage from residential neighborhoods.
             CT3-2.2       Program a priority system of school bus routes, stops/shelter, sidewalks
                           and bike lanes to serve schools and parks and link with other transit and
                           alternative transportation.
      CT3-3      Promote non-motorized bike and pedestrian circulation facilities to serve all areas
                 of the City and linking with regional systems, with priority coordination with
                 school, park, transit and major public facilities.
             CT3-3.1       Improve bike lanes and sidewalks serving all school, parks, and selected
                           transit and community facilities as priority system, including
                           neighborhood connections in addition to conventional streets.
             CT3-3.2       Plan and prioritize Village Core and E. Grand Avenue Mixed Use corridor
                           improvements.
             CT3-3.3       Update City Bikeway Plan to meet State guidelines to seek increase
                           regional and state funding assistance.
             CT3-4.4       Plan and prioritize greenway trail network along Arroyo Grande, Tally Ho
                           and Meadow Creeks and linking with other open space or recreational
                           trails within the City and region.
      CT3-4      Design and designate efficient truck and emergency access routes utilizing the
                 arterial and collector street network to minimize impact on local streets,
                 particularly residential neighborhoods.
                                                   CE - 5

            CT3-4.1      Truck routes should coordinate with County and adjoining Cities
                         designated routes and avoid traversing residential areas.
            CT3-4.2      Emergency access design standards should limit cul-de-sac lengths,
                         provide a logical grid or connected system of local streets providing at
                         least two directions of neighborhood access, and minimize through traffic
                         on local streets, particularly traversing single family residential
                         neighborhoods.
      CT3-5     The City should designate a connected system of “scenic streets and highways”
                and consider specific design guidelines and landscaping standards appropriate to
                this network for resident and visitor enjoyment.
            CT3-5.1      The basic scenic route system should include these streets and highways
                         as shown on the Circulation Element Map.
            CT3-5.2      Discourage on-street parking in Agriculture areas to enhance visibility
                         and minimize trespassing.
            CT3-5.3      Develop adequate public or shared off-street parking lots conveniently
                         located behind and beside buildings in Village Core and Mixed Use
                         Corridors, according to area design guidelines.
Coordinated Land Use and Circulation
CT4.    Ensure compatibility and complementary relationships between the
        circulation/transportation system and existing and planned land uses,
        promoting environmental objectives such as safe and un-congested
        neighborhoods, energy conservation, reduction of air and noise pollution,
        transit, bike and pedestrian friendly characteristics.
      CT4-1     Promote “transit-oriented developments” and coordinated, compatible land use
                pattern by encouraging multiple family residential and special needs housing in
                Mixed Use Corridors, Village Core and near Office, Regional Commercial,
                Business Park and major Community Facility areas.
            CT4-1.1      Transit routes should serve E. Grand Avenue Mixed Use corridor, Village
                         Core, and West Branch street Regional Commercial areas.
            CT4-1.2      Future transit loop to serve Halcyon/Fair Oaks, Offices, Village Core,
                         James Way and Rancho Parkway residential areas.
            CT4-1.3      Consider higher density allowance and reduced parking requirements
                         within one-quarter mile of transit routes when updating Development
                         Code.
      CT4-2     Utilize the circulation system as a positive element of community design,
                including street trees and landscaped parkways and medians, special streetscape
                features in Mixed Use corridors and Village Core, undergrounding of utilities,
                particularly along major streets.
                                               CE - 6

Planning and Funding
CT5.   Coordinate circulation and transportation planning and funding of collector
       and arterial street and highway improvements with other local, County,
       SLOCOG, State and federal agencies. Request County contribution to major
       street improvement projects.
      CT5-1    Update the Regional Transportation Plan to include the Circulation and
               Transportation Element of the City of Arroyo Grande General Plan Update.
      CT5-2    Request that Caltrans, SLOCOG and the County give high priority to
               Brisco/Halcyon and Traffic Way/El campo interchange improvements to Freeway
               101.
      CT5-3    Ask the County to establish a “Road Impact Fee” within Arroyo Grande Fringe
               and other non-Agriculture areas of the Arroyo Grande Area of Environmental
               Concern, and add to the fees for South County/Nipomo Mesa area based on cost
               studies for needed improvements (including portions of City street systems
               impacted by regional traffic increases) to serve new development.
      CT5-4    Review and revise City circulation and transportation impact fees associated with
               new development in Arroyo Grande to assure either facility and system
               improvements and/or in-lieu fee payments to maintain adequate facilities and
               services at LOS ‘C’ to General Plan buildout, including regional traffic increase
               and funding assistance.
      CT5-5    Define and preserve “study area” corridors and alternatives for future freeway,
               arterial and collector street connections, extensions, completions, reconstruction,
               widening, frontage road alternatives or extensions, and/or other improvements
               to Circulation and Transportation networks until cooperative resolution of
               Element revisions and/or Capital Improvement Programs. (See PSR and other
               study areas on Circulation Element).
            CT5-5.1     Include Brisco/Halcyon Project Study Report (PSR), Traffic Way/El
                        Campo PSR and its western connection and other north, west and
                        eastside study areas.
            CT5-5.2     Establish “plan lines” for widening, extension or realignment when
                        determined by design and environmental analysis, including proposed
                        funding and priority schedule estimates. (None adopted/Add to CE).
            CT5-5.3     When new development occurs in vicinity of study areas or plan lines,
                        and where legally and financially feasible, require all or portion of rights-
                        of-way and improvements associated with new development.
      CT5-6    Encourage Caltrans, SLOCOG and the County to refine and maintain a regional
               traffic model to assist in regional and local circulation and transportation
               planning, CIP funding and new development project environmental analysis.
            CT5-6.1     Request that the Caltrans, County and SLOCOG evaluate Nipomo Mesa
                        cumulative growth and development impacts on Arroyo Grande area
                        circulation and transportation systems prior to Willow Road or other
                        interchange alternative construction.
                                               CE - 7

      CT5-6.2     Request that the County, Caltrans and SLOCOG consider proportional
                  participation in projects involving regional traffic impacts.
CT5-7    Utilize assessment and improvement districts and other supplemental private
         funding to correct local area deficiencies such as inadequate parking, transit and
         streetscape enhancement or completion of local street or trail segments that
         benefit the area.
                                         CE - 8
                 Economic
    Development
                      Element
               of the Arroyo Grande
                             General Plan
Prepared by the City of Arroyo Grande     Adopted by City Council Resolution No. 4489
Community Development Department          on October 9, 2012
Table of Contents
Section 1. Background and Primary Goals ................................................................................................. 3
Section 2. Community Image Enhancement.............................................................................................. 4
Section 3. Office, Mixed Uses, Light Manufacturing, and Technology ...................................................... 6
Section 4. Agriculture................................................................................................................................. 8
Section 5. Retail/Commercial .................................................................................................................... 9
Section 6. Tourism, Marketing, and Promotion....................................................................................... 11
Section 7. Development Process ............................................................................................................. 13
Section 8. Sustainability ........................................................................................................................... 15
                                                                 General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                                               Background and Primary Goals
                                Section 1. Background and Primary Goals
                                Background
                                The purpose of the Economic Development Element is to provide a
Create a thriving economy       framework for residents, business owners, prospective new
                                business owners, and City officials to guide the City’s economic
                                growth for the next 10 years. The goals, objectives, policies and
                                implementation measures are intended to encourage the
                                development of the types of business and commercial activities that
                                serve the community and promote a healthy, thriving economy. A
                                balance is continually sought between economic vitality and the
                                preservation of the City’s quality of life and small-town character.
Meet unmet community needs      Goals
                                There are four primary goals related to the City’s economic
                                development that should be considered when establishing
                                priorities, weighing economic impacts of land use decisions, and
                                determining the progress toward policy implementation. The four
                                goals are:
                                    1.   Create a thriving economy
Promote business activity           2.   Meet unmet community needs
                                    3.   Promote business activity
                                    4.   Provide superior customer service
Provide    superior    customer
service
                                                                                                         3

                               General Plan Economic Development Element
                                           Community Image Enhancement
Section 2. Community Image Enhancement
Objective
ED2: Develop a marketing program to enhance the City’s attractive
and vibrant small town image.
Policies
ED2-1: Maintain a long range, comprehensive marketing program
to promote the City as a business friendly community with small
town character.
ED2-2: Create a balanced economic image of agriculture, history,
technology and commerce for the City of Arroyo Grande.
ED2-3: Encourage investment through the provision of sustainable
infrastructure, attainable housing opportunities and attractive
commercial areas and create an awareness of business
opportunities within the City.
ED2-4:     Promote participation with diverse partnerships to
implement improvements and programs for community
development.
ED2-5: Promote businesses that foster or derive benefit from multi-
modal transportation opportunities such as bike touring, bus, and
car-pool commuters.
Implementation Measures
ED2-1.1: Prepare updated marketing plans identifying issues and
opportunities consistent with the long-range, comprehensive
marketing program.
ED2-1.2:     Implement a community signage, public art, and
landscaping design program by working with business groups and
interest groups such as Arroyo Grande in Bloom.
ED2-1.3: Develop coordinated promotional marketing materials for
the City through social media.
ED2-1.4:      Leverage limited marketing dollars with local
organizations such as the Economic Vitality Corporation and State
                                                                       4

                                General Plan Economic Development Element
                                            Community Image Enhancement
trade and commerce groups to increase the visibility of the City’s
economic development programs.
ED2-1.5: Cultivate community pride and participation by local
residents and businesses through fostered partnerships with
business and non-profit groups such as Arroyo Grande in Bloom.
ED2-1.6: Conduct, promote, and encourage training workshops
through the Arroyo Grande Valley Chamber of Commerce, the
Economic Vitality Corporation, the Cuesta College Institute for
Professional Development/Business & Entrepreneurship Center, Cal
Poly’s Small Business Development Center for Innovation, and Cal
Poly’s Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship.
ED2-1.7: Continue implementing community outreach programs
including active participation with the Arroyo Grande Valley
Chamber of Commerce, the Village Improvement Association, and
local service clubs.
ED2-1.8: Promote the Economic Vitality Corporation’s Revolving
Loan Fund and micro-loan programs to Arroyo Grande businesses.
ED2-1.9: Collaborate with the support organizations that contribute
to the economic well-being of Arroyo Grande, including but not
limited to the Chamber of Commerce, SLO Vintners, the Economic
Vitality Corporation, the Visitors and Conference Bureau, the San
Luis Obispo County Farm Bureau, Cal Poly, and Cuesta College.
                                                                        5

                                   General Plan Economic Development Element
                       Office, Mixed Uses, Light Manufacturing, and Technology
Section 3. Office, Mixed Uses, Light
                 Manufacturing, and Technology
Objective
ED3: Enhance business retention and expansion consistent with the
General Plan Land Use Policies to promote and enhance baseline
job opportunities within the City for local residents.
Policies
ED3-1: Encourage adequate infrastructure to support business
expansions, redevelopment, and new development.
ED3-2: Continue outreach and networking with industry and
technology groups, real estate brokers, developers, and others
including accountants, lenders, and attorneys to promote and
enhance baseline job opportunities within the City for local
residents.
ED3-3:     Incorporate zoning regulations that promote infill
development with opportunities for retaining and expanding
businesses.
ED3-4: Continue to balance economic goals with strong policies and
programs that promote and maintain the community’s
environment, quality of life, and rural character.
Implementation Measures
ED3-1.1: Assist the City’s small business community in retaining and
expanding businesses by fostering partnerships and providing
forums for information, training, and shared resources.
ED3-1.2: Work with the Economic Vitality Corporation to monitor
and measure business trends to develop programs and policies
appropriate for Arroyo Grande.
ED3-1.3: Continue to develop “one-stop” development-related staff
meetings with businesses prior to submission of any formal
applications to the City.
ED3-1.4: Support a citywide building and land availability database
in partnership with the local real estate and broker groups.
                                                                             6

                                  General Plan Economic Development Element
                      Office, Mixed Uses, Light Manufacturing, and Technology
ED3-1.5: Review and annually monitor the Home-Based Business
Development Plan to support the needs of the home-based
business owners.
ED3-1.6: Provide pertinent information on business development
efforts and opportunities in Arroyo Grande to business owners,
property owners, tenants, site locators, and other agencies to
promote business expansion and head of household jobs.
ED3-1.7: Identify workforce training services and programs at Lucia
Mar Unified School District (i.e. school to career programs), Cuesta
College, Cal Poly, SCORE “Counselors to America’s Small Business”,
San Luis Obispo County Farm Bureau, Mission Community Services
Corporation, and the Better Business Bureau of San Luis Obispo
County.
ED3-1.8: Encourage business participation in general plan and
development code amendment processes through social media
outreach.
ED3-1.9: Identify, amend, and approve neighborhood enhancement
plans or form-based codes, including adopting appropriate
environmental documents for sections of El Camino Real, Halcyon
Road, and East Grand Avenue appropriate for intensified infill
expansion. This will provide certainty for allowed development and
to attract and facilitate larger scale (e.g. >20,000 SF) office and
manufacturing uses.
                                                                            7

                                  General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                                 Agriculture
Section 4. Agriculture
Objective
ED4: Encourage and support the retention and expansion of
agricultural business activities.
Policies
ED4-1: Provide adequate support services and resources to
maintain economically viable commercial agriculture.
ED4-2:       Recognize    and     increase     value-added     agricultural
opportunities.
Implementation Measures
ED4-1.1: Collaborate with the San Luis Obispo County Farm Bureau,
the U.C. Cooperative Extension, SLO Vintners, the Economic Vitality
Corporation, farmers’ market associations, the San Luis Obispo
County Farm Bureau, and others to develop and implement
agricultural opportunities that enhance agricultural business and
tourism for the City and region.
ED4-1.2: Work with the foregoing organizations to promote the
sales and expansion of value-added agricultural opportunities.
                                                                           8

                                General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                 Retail/Commercial Services
Section 5. Retail/Commercial Services
Objective
ED5: Pursue unique opportunities to promote continuity within
commercial service and retail business sectors of the City.
Policies
ED5-1: Promote local patronage and strong performance in
satisfying local demand for goods and services and the creation of
additional jobs.
ED5-2: Continue to enhance connectivity and increase retail
utilization of the East Grand Avenue corridor, the Village Core, and
the Traffic Way and El Camino Real mixed-use corridors.
ED5-3: Implement revitalization and rehabilitation of historic and
older structures and provide incentives for adaptive reuse.
ED5-4: Expand and enhance the Village Core as a focal point for
civic and tourist activities.
ED5-5: Promote a pro-retail and hospitality program.
Implementation Measures
ED5-1.1: Assist the City’s small business community in retaining and
expanding businesses through recognition events with the Chamber
of Commerce and the development of social media programs.
ED5-1.2: Implement comprehensive design guidelines pertaining to
both public and private improvements, including, but not limited to,
building façade restoration, landscaping, street furniture
installation, undergrounding of utilities, historic district character,
and the development of parking facilities.
ED5-1.3: Determine the feasibility of the voluntary formation of a
Business Improvement District.
ED5-1.4: Incorporate infrastructure projects into the City’s Capital
Improvement Program that address deficiencies in commercial
corridors that include major street reconstruction, provision of
fiber-optic cable, storm drain and sewer improvements, water
capacity improvements, underground utility projects, public parking
                                                                          9

                               General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                Retail/Commercial Services
improvements, improvements to park facilities, recreation areas,
community facilities, and other public buildings.
ED5-1.5: Work with the Village Improvement Association and the
South County Historical Society to preserve the historic nature of
the Village as the City’s commercial and cultural center.
                                                                        10

                                  General Plan Economic Development Element
                                           Tourism, Marketing, and Promotion
Section 6. Tourism, Marketing, and
                 Promotion
Objective
ED6: Develop a strategy that promotes the importance of tourism
and capitalizes on the City’s natural resources.
Policies
ED6-1: Become an active participant in countywide tourism
programs.
ED6-2: Enhance the image of the City through special events and
promote and increase those events in the off-peak retail season and
at sites that are economically accessible to residents and visitors
alike.
ED6-3: Capitalize on development opportunities to increase lodging
facilities.
ED6-4: Expand the City’s tourism potential through the Internet and
social media.
Implementation Measures
ED6-1.1: Financially support the San Luis Obispo County Visitors
and Conference Bureau and continue partnerships with the
Chamber of Commerce.
ED6-1.2: Participate with the Vintners Association to promote City
wine related business.
ED6-1.3: Continue to work with the hospitality industry to ensure
overall understanding of the importance of customer service.
ED6-1.4: Promote and maintain a “tourist friendly” customer
service policy within and among City staff and departments.
ED6-1.5: Work with local event coordinators, including the
Chamber of Commerce, Village Improvement Association, and the
San Luis Obispo County Visitors and Conference Bureau to promote
special events, activities, and attractions.
                                                                          11

                              General Plan Economic Development Element
                                       Tourism, Marketing, and Promotion
ED6-1.6: Assist in planning and executing special events and
promotions focusing on economic development, cultural
awareness, interaction, education, and other civic causes. These
may include expanded farmers’ markets, street fairs, parades,
outdoor dining/cafes, wine tasting, outdoor music, and concerts in
the park.
ED6-1.7: Develop additional tourist attractions and lodging in the
City such as the development of cultural-related facilities.
ED6-1.8: Work with developers, landowners, and others to site and
design appropriate hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and country
inns.
ED6-1.9: In collaboration with the Chamber of Commerce, provide
links and support a calendar of local events and activities available
through social media and on the City’s website.
                                                                      12

                                 General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                       Development Process
Section 7. Development Process
Objective
ED7:     Develop a pro-business community image, including
simplifying and improving the development review process.
Policies
ED7-1: Monitor and modify where necessary the development
review process and identify ways in which it can be streamlined and
improved.
Implementation Measures
ED7-1.1: Update guidelines for design and development review for
East Grand Avenue and El Camino Real.
ED7-1.2: Prepare clear thresholds for level of project review and
required improvements.
ED7-1.3: Provide a helpful pre-application service available for all
prospective projects to establish a level of predictability of City
requirements, concerns, process, and anticipated timelines.
       Customize the level of pre-application review according to
        project size.
       For larger projects, provide workshops/charrettes to
        facilitate the understanding of project objectives and buy-in
        from stakeholders.
       Scope CEQA documents considering input from public
        meetings and benefits depending on the anticipated
        magnitude of impacts.
ED7-1.4: Maximize efficiency and communication for customer
service by specifying one staff contact to be a project shepherd.
ED7-1.5: Clarify responsibility and role of each advisory committee
and commission, and reduce redundancy and potential conflict in
project review where feasible.
ED7-1.6: Use new technologies allowing developers, builders, and
business owners to submit plans, access updates, receive approved
building plans, etc. via an online system to eliminate any
unnecessary costly printed copies.
                                                                        13

                                  General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                        Development Process
ED7-1.7: Explore options and consider incentives for projects that
meet any of the four primary goals of this Element.
ED7-1.8: Consider both community and project-specific economic
impacts of land use and policy decisions.
ED7-1.9: Provide City staff with ongoing education and training to
facilitate efficient application processing, emphasize the importance
of timely responses to applicants, measure progress, and provide
accountability.
                                                                         14
                               General Plan Economic Development Element
                                                            Sustainability
Section 8. Sustainability
Objective
ED8: Support and encourage a sustainable local economy.
Policies
ED8-1: The City shall encourage businesses that use green
practices.
ED8-2: The City shall conduct public education and outreach to
support employment opportunities that minimize the need for
automobile trips, such as live/work developments, telecommuting,
satellite work centers, and home occupations, in addition to mixed-
use development strategies.
ED8-3: The City should purchase green products from local
businesses whenever feasible.
                                                                       15
CITY OF ARROYO GRANDE
                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                      June 30, 2014 – June 30, 2019
                               Adopted March 22, 2016
                                 City Council Resolution No. 4715
                        Prepared for the City of Arroyo Grande by
                                                 Lisa Wise Consulting
                                                      983 Osos Street
                                           San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
                                                      (805) 595-1345
                                          www.lisawiseconsulting.com

City of Arroyo Grande               2014-2019 Housing Element
City Council
Jim Hill, Mayor
Barbara Harmon, Mayor Pro Tem
Jim Guthrie
Tim Brown
Kristen Barneich
Planning Commission
Lan George, Chair
John Keen, Vice Chair
Glenn Martin
John Mack
Terry Fowler-Payne
Department of Community Development
Planning Division
Teresa McClish, AICP
Community Development Director
Kelly Heffernon, AICP
Associate Planner
Matt Downing, AICP
Planning Manager
                                  3
City of Arroyo Grande                                                                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................ 9
  1.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................ 9
  1.2 RELATIONSHIP TO CITY GENERAL PLAN..................................................................................................... 10
       General Plan Consistency ................................................................................................................................... 10
  1.3 ORGANIZATION OF HOUSING ELEMENT .................................................................................................... 11
  1.4 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION .......................................................................................................................... 11
CHAPTER 2 – GOALS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES .......................................................... 13
  2.1 HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS .............................................................................. 13
       Goal A – Housing for All Income Groups within the Community ................................................................. 13
       Goal B – Affordable Housing .............................................................................................................................. 20
       Goal C – Identify Funding for Extremely Low, Very Low, and Low-Income Housing ................................ 22
       Goal D – Encourage Diverse Housing Stock .................................................................................................... 24
       Goal E – Regulate Condominium Conversions ............................................................................................... 25
       Goal F – Inclusionary Housing ............................................................................................................................. 26
       Goal G – Mitigate Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................. 27
       Goal H – Housing Conservation and Rehabilitation ....................................................................................... 29
       Goal I – At Risk Unit Preservation ........................................................................................................................ 30
       Goal J – Special Needs Housing ........................................................................................................................ 32
       Goal K– Housing for the Homeless ..................................................................................................................... 34
       Goal L – Housing for Persons with Disabilities ................................................................................................... 37
       Goal M – Energy Conservation .......................................................................................................................... 39
       Goal N – Equal Opportunity and Fair Housing................................................................................................. 40
       Goal O – Public Participation ............................................................................................................................ 42
       Goal P - Housing Element Consistency ............................................................................................................. 42
  2.2 SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES .................................................................................................... 44
CHAPTER 3 – BACKGROUND INFORMATION ................................................................................................................ 45
  3.1 INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................... 45
  3.2 DEMOGRAPHIC OVERVIEW..................................................................................................................... 48
       Population Trends ................................................................................................................................................. 48
       Household Data .................................................................................................................................................... 50
       Incomes .................................................................................................................................................................. 51
       Employment ........................................................................................................................................................... 52
  3.3 HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS................................................................................................................... 54
       Types of Housing ................................................................................................................................................... 54
       Vacancy Rates...................................................................................................................................................... 54
       Overcrowded Units ............................................................................................................................................... 56
       Age of Housing Units............................................................................................................................................. 56
       Condition of Units .................................................................................................................................................. 57
  3.4 HOUSING AFFORDABILITY ....................................................................................................................... 58
       Housing Prices ........................................................................................................................................................ 58
       Rental Unit Rates ................................................................................................................................................... 59
       Affordability Thresholds ........................................................................................................................................ 60
       Overpayment ........................................................................................................................................................ 61
       Long-Term Affordability ........................................................................................................................................ 61
  3.5 SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS GROUPS.......................................................................................................... 62
       Elderly/Senior Households.................................................................................................................................... 62
       Families with Female Heads of Households ..................................................................................................... 63
       Large Families/Households .................................................................................................................................. 63
       Low and Extremely Low-Income Households .................................................................................................. 64
       Farmworker Households....................................................................................................................................... 65
       Persons with Disabilities ........................................................................................................................................ 66
                                                                                   4

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                                                             2014-2019 Housing Element
         Developmentally Disabled.................................................................................................................................. 67
         Homeless ................................................................................................................................................................ 69
         Attainable Housing ............................................................................................................................................... 70
   3.6 AT RISK HOUSING UNITS ........................................................................................................................ 71
CHAPTER 4 - HOUSING RESOURCES ............................................................................................................................... 72
   4.1 REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS DETERMINATIONS .......................................................................................... 72
   4.2 2014-2019 REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION ............................................................................. 73
   4.3 LAND AVAILABILITY ............................................................................................................................... 76
         Vacant Land.......................................................................................................................................................... 78
         Second Units .......................................................................................................................................................... 78
         Underutilized Sites ................................................................................................................................................. 78
   ................................................................................................................................................................ 87
   4.4 INFRASTRUCTURE RESOURCES .................................................................................................................. 88
   4.5 FINANCIAL RESOURCES .......................................................................................................................... 90
CHAPTER 5 HOUSING CONSTRAINTS .............................................................................................................................. 95
   5.1 GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS .............................................................................................................. 95
   5.2 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS AND ENERGY CONSERVATION ................................................................. 115
         Energy Conservation .......................................................................................................................................... 117
   5.3 NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS.................................................................................................... 120
CHAPTER 6 REVIEW OF THE PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT ....................................................................................... 123
   6.1 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAMS................................................................... 123
APPENDIX A ...................................................................................................................................................................... 137
BIBLIOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................................................................. 137
                                                                                     5
City of Arroyo Grande                                                                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 2-1 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES BY INCOME GROUP ............................................................................................ 44
TABLE 3-1 TRENDS IN POPULATION GROWTH ................................................................................................................ 48
TABLE 3-2 TRENDS IN POPULATION AGE......................................................................................................................... 49
TABLE 3-3 TENURE BY AGE OF HOUSEHOLDER .............................................................................................................. 50
TABLE 3-4 TRENDS IN HOUSEHOLDS ................................................................................................................................ 51
TABLE 3-5 TRENDS IN HOUSEHOLD INCOME .................................................................................................................. 52
TABLE 3-6 TRENDS IN EMPLOYED PERSONS 16 YEARS AND OLDER ............................................................................ 53
TABLE 3-7 INDUSTRY PROFILE ............................................................................................................................................ 53
TABLE 3-8 TRENDS IN HOUSING TYPE ............................................................................................................................... 54
TABLE 3-9 VACANT UNITS BY TYPE, 2010 ......................................................................................................................... 55
TABLE 3-10 VACANCY RATES ........................................................................................................................................... 55
TABLE 3-11 OVERCROWDING BY TENURE ...................................................................................................................... 56
TABLE 3-12 YEAR STRUCTURE BUILT .................................................................................................................................. 57
TABLE 3-13 MARKET RENTAL RATES BY UNIT TYPE .......................................................................................................... 59
TABLE 3-14 SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY HOUSING AFFORDABILITY ............................................................................. 60
TABLE 3-15 HOUSEHOLDS OVERPAYING FOR HOUSING.............................................................................................. 61
TABLE 3-16 SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS ................................................................................................................................... 63
TABLE 3-17 HOUSING PROBLEMS FOR FEMALE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLDS ................................................................... 63
TABLE 3-18 TENURE BY HOUSEHOLD SIZE ........................................................................................................................ 64
TABLE 3-19 HOUSING PROBLEMS FOR LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLDS..................................................................... 64
TABLE 3-20 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BY AGE ............................................................................................................ 66
TABLE 3-21 DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSONS ................................................................................................... 68
TABLE 4-1 INCOME GROUP .............................................................................................................................................. 73
TABLE 4-2 HOUSING NEED ALLOCATION BY INCOME CATEGORY ............................................................................ 73
TABLE 4-3 INCOME LIMITS, COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO .......................................................................................... 74
TABLE 4-4 APPROVED PROJECTS JANUARY 2014-JUNE 2014 ..................................................................................... 75
TABLE 4-5 CITY SHARE OF REGIONAL HOUSING NEED 2014-2019 .............................................................................. 76
TABLE 4-6 REMAINING RHNA, 2014-2019 ....................................................................................................................... 76
TABLE 4-7 VACANT SITES INVENTORY.............................................................................................................................. 80
TABLE 4-8 OPPORTUNITY SITES INVENTORY .................................................................................................................... 82
TABLE 4-9 APPROVED PROJECTS 2007-2014.................................................................................................................. 86
TABLE 4-10 CURRENT AND PROJECTED WATER SUPPLY – ACRE FEET PER YEAR (AFY) ............................................ 88
TABLE 5-1 URBAN LAND USE ELEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT CODE ........................................................................... 97
TABLE 5-2 HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT – RESIDENTIAL ZONES……………………….…………98
TABLE 5-3 HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT – MIXED USE ZONES……………………………………99
TABLE 5-4 RESIDENTIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SINGLE-FAMILY ZONES .................................................. 100
                                                                         6

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
TABLE 5-5 RESIDENTIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS MULTIPLE FAMILY AND OTHER ZONES ......................... 101
TABLE 5-6 RESIDENTIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS MIXED USE ZONES .......................................................... 101
TABLE 5-7 SECOND RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ............................................................ 107
TABLE 5-8 SCHEDULE OF TYPICAL FEES FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT .............................................................. 108
TABLE 5-9 PROPORTION OF FEE FOR A TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ....................................................... 110
TABLE 5-10 PERMIT PROCESSING TIMELINE................................................................................................................... 111
TABLE 5-11 RESIDENTIAL PARKING STANDARDS .......................................................................................................... 112
TABLE 5-12 CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ............................................................. 113
TABLE 5-13 APPLICATIONS FOR LOANS ........................................................................................................................ 121
TABLE 6-1 PROGRESS TOWARD MEETING GOALS 2007-2014.................................................................................... 123
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3-1 Regional Location Map ................................................................................................................................ 46
Figure 3-2 South County Location Map ........................................................................................................................ 47
Figure 3-3 Change in Population Age, 2000 to 2010 .................................................................................................. 50
Figure 3-4 Median Home Prices Trend, Arroyo Grande ............................................................................................. 59
Figure 4-1 Housing Opportunity Sites Inventory Map .................................................................................................. 87
                                                                   7

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                               CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION
1.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Housing Element is to identify and provide: a) An analysis of existing and
projected housing needs; b) an evaluation of housing constraints, c) a statement of goals,
policies, quantified objectives and financial resources; and d) scheduled programs for the
preservation, improvement, and development of housing. The State Legislature, in its adoption
of planning law, has set forth the following policies toward the provision of housing:
       The availability of housing is of vital importance, and the early attainment of decent
        housing and a suitable living environment for every Californian, including farm workers, is
        a priority of the highest order.
       The early attainment of this goal requires the cooperative participation of government
        and the private sector in an effort to expand housing opportunities and accommodate
        the needs of Californians of all economic levels.
       The provision of housing affordable to low and moderate-income households requires
        the cooperation of all levels of government.
       Local and State governments have a responsibility to use the powers vested in them to
        facilitate the improvement and development of housing to make adequate provision for
        the housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
       The Legislature recognizes that in carrying out this responsibility, each local government
        also has the responsibility to consider economic, environmental, and fiscal factors and
        community goals set forth in the general plan and to cooperate with other local
        governments and the State in addressing regional housing needs.
This document is intended to comply with Article 10.6 (as amended) of State Planning Law and
to meet the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) guidelines for the
implementation of Article 10.6. This document replaces the Housing Element adopted by the
City of Arroyo Grande on October 22, 2013, deemed in compliance with state law by the
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) on December 5, 2013. The current
planning period began June 30, 2014 and will last through June 30, 2019.
                                              9

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
This Housing Element includes all of the following information as required by State law:
       Specific goals, policies, and measurable programs.
       Information about the existing housing stock, covering such items as the amount, type,
        cost, tenure, and structural conditions of the units. Other areas of concern include
        overcrowding and the needs of special subgroups of the population.
       An analysis of potential barriers to housing production, including both governmental and
        non-governmental constraints.
       Information about energy conservation opportunities for housing.
       A summary of the past housing efforts and an analysis of their success or failure.
1.2 Relationship to City General Plan
Housing elements are one of seven elements of the General Plan that every California city and
county is required by State law to prepare. Under State law, a General Plan must function as an
integrated, internally consistent and compatible statement of values. The housing, land use and
circulation elements form the heart of a community strategy to promote orderly growth and
provide housing for all economic segments.
State law is more specific about the content of housing elements than any other portion of the
general plan. The housing element is also the only part of the general plan that is subject to
mandatory deadlines for periodic updates and is the only element that is legally subject to
review and “certification” by the State.
General Plan Consistency
The City’s Land Use Element of the 2001 General Plan designates the sites noted in this Housing
Element for residential purposes at densities consistent with the goals of providing housing
affordable to a wide range of incomes. The Housing Element has been reviewed for consistency
with the City’s General Plan and is consistent with the policy direction the in the Plan. As portions
of the General Plan are amended in the future, the Housing Element will be reviewed to ensure
internal consistency. Due to the passage of AB 162 relating to flood protection, the City may be
required to amend the Safety and Conservation Elements of the General Plan. If amendments
are needed the Housing Element will be amended to be consistent with the Safety and
Conservation Elements.
                                              10

City of Arroyo Grande                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
1.3 Organization of Housing Element
As noted above, the intent of this Housing Element update is to meet the statutory requirements
of State housing law. Chapter 1 provides a brief overview of the laws and its relationship to the
General Plan. Chapter 2 is the heart of the document, setting forth all the goals, policies,
programs and objectives for housing in Arroyo Grande. Chapter 3 describes relevant
demographics concerning housing needs and issues in the City, while Chapter 4 discusses the
regional housing needs and provides an overview of the City’s land availability and public
services. Chapter 5 analyzes the constraints to housing development, and Chapter 6 reviews the
past housing efforts as proposed in the 2013 Housing Element.
1.4 Public Participation
Housing issues affect the entire community, including residents, employers, and the public and
private sectors. The public participation requirement of the housing element law presents an
opportunity to engage constituents in a discussion, defining overall housing needs and
constraints, as well as problems and the creation of solutions. The inclusion of community
stakeholders in the housing element public participation process helps ensure appropriate
housing strategies are more efficiently and effectively developed, implemented and evaluated.
The City held several public review sessions on the Housing Element during the update process
and encouraged public participation through various outreach efforts. On September 2, 2014
the City held a public workshop during a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to
receive public input and provide an overview of the Housing Element process. The workshop
was noticed in the newspaper, posted on the bulletin board at City Hall and on the City’s
website. Individuals that previously expressed interest in the document and/or housing issues in
general were emailed directly. The video of the meeting was also made available on the City’s
website. During the workshop, City staff discussed the progress on updating the Housing Element
and the data gathered. The Planning Commission provided several comments and suggested
changes to the document, but no public comments were received.
On September 23, 2014 the City Council held a duly noticed public hearing (same efforts as
described above) to consider the Draft Housing Element. Public comments included providing
a definition of “adequate” as it relates to offering an adequate number of housing units;
clarification regarding the purpose of the Housing Element; and the need to provide affordable
                                             11

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
workforce housing in the community. The Council did not make any changes to the document
and no formal action was taken.
Staff submitted a revised draft document to HCD for review that included Planning Commission
changes. HCD responded with additional City actions that must occur prior to certification.
These changes were incorporated into to the Housing Element, and staff drafted an Ordinance
to allow emergency shelters in the Industrial Mixed Use (IMU) and Highway Mixed Use (HMU)
zoning districts without discretionary action for Planning Commission and City Council
consideration.
On January 19, 2016 and March 1, 2016 the Planning Commission held public hearings to review
and receive public comment on the Draft Housing Element and consider the emergency shelter
Ordinance. The above-referenced public noticing effort was expanded to include fifty (50)
special interest, government, and non-profit organizations within San Luis Obispo County, with a
focus on entities located in the South County area.         No written comments were received.
Verbal comments were limited and did not result in any changes to the document.                 The
Planning Commission adopted Resolutions Nos. 16-2245 and 16-2246 recommending the City
Council adopt the Housing Element Update and emergency shelter Ordinance without any
revisions.
After holding a noticed public hearing on March 22, 2016 through the same efforts as described
above and receiving public comment, the City Council adopted Resolution No. 4715 approving
the Housing Element Update with a minor revision to Policy A-14.1 regarding incentives for
attainable housing. The Council also adopted Ordinance No. 677 amending the Municipal
Code to allow emergency shelters in the IMU and HMU zoning districts without requiring
discretionary review.    Public comments focused on issues of illegal garage conversions, the
overall housing crisis in California, the need for more attainable housing in the community,
exiting of construction jobs from the State, and barriers to providing affordable housing including
unfavorable market conditions impacting housing developments and constrained project
financing. There were also comments specifically in favor of the proposed attainable housing
program and in general about the good opportunities the City has for infill development.
                                              12
City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
CHAPTER 2 – GOALS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND QUANTIFIED
OBJECTIVES
2.1 Housing Element Goals, Policies and Programs
State law requires that the Housing Element contain a “statement of the community’s goals,
policies, programs and quantified objectives relative to the maintenance, improvement, and
development of housing”. This Chapter describes the proposed goals, policies, and programs of
the Housing Element for the City of Arroyo Grande.
Goals refer to general statements of purpose, and indicate a direction the City will take with
respect to the identified housing problems. Policies are statements of the City’s intent regarding
the various housing issues identified, and provide a link between the goals and the programs.
Programs are steps to be taken to implement the policies and achieve the quantified
objectives. Quantified Objectives refer to the number of units that are expected or estimated to
be constructed, conserved or rehabilitated during the time frame of the Housing Element, June
2014 to June 2019 (not all programs have quantified objectives).
Goal A – Housing for All Income Groups within the Community.
Provide a continuing supply of affordable housing to meet the needs of existing and
future Arroyo Grande residents in all income categories.
Policies:
        A.1.   The City shall adopt policies, programs, and procedures to attempt to meet the
               present and future needs of residents of the City, and to aim at providing their fair
               share regional housing need allocated for each income classification, within
               identified governmental, market, economic and natural constraints.
        A.2.   The City shall continue to utilize the following incentives for the production of
               affordable housing: a) allowing secondary dwelling units under specified criteria;
               b) allowing manufactured housing on legal parcels in all residential zones; c)
               allowing density bonuses for very low and low-income housing, and senior
               housing projects.
                                             13

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
        A.3.   The City shall give priority to processing housing projects that provide for
               affordable housing, and lower development impact fees shall be charged as an
               incentive for low, very low, and extremely low-income housing.
        A.4    The City shall establish minimum residential densities that are no lower than 75
               percent of the maximum densities allowed in each multi-family residential zone,
               with exceptions made for properties with significant environmental constraints.
        A.5.   The City shall encourage housing compatible with commercial and office uses
               and promote “mixed use” and “village core” zoning districts to facilitate
               integration of residential uses into such areas.
        A.6    Where circumstances warrant, the City will work with mobile home owners to
               relocate mobile homes if the City seeks to modify a portion or all of a mobile
               home park for economic development purposes.
        A.7.   The City will continue to maintain a zoning district for mobile home and
               manufactured home park uses.
        A.8.   The City may annex land on the urban edge to promote orderly growth and the
               preservation of open space.
        A.9.   The City shall continue to enable and encourage multiple-family, rental
               apartments, senior, mobile home, and special needs housing in appropriate
               locations and densities. These multiple family residential alternative housing types
               tend to be more affordable than prevailing single-family residential low and
               medium density developments.
        A.10.  The City shall review and revise its development regulations, standards, and
               procedures to encourage increased housing supply as needed.
        A.11.  The City shall continue to utilize and expand the Density Bonus program to
               encourage affordable housing supply.
        A.12.  The City shall establish a system to inventory vacant and underutilized land.
                                               14

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
        A.13.  The City shall pursue adequate water sources and conservation programs to
               accommodate projected residential development.
        A.14.  The City shall promote infill housing opportunities through an attainable housing
               program.
        A.15.  The City shall pursue program assistance for first-time home buyers.
Programs:
        A.1-1.    The City shall establish a five-year schedule of actions to implement the goals
                  and policies of the Housing Element.
                  Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                                                             Department
                  Timeframe:                                 Ongoing – implemented over the life
                                                             of the Housing Element
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Timeline for implementing Housing
                                                             Element programs
                  Quantified Objective:                      n/a
        A.1-2.    The City shall report annually on its progress in meeting its fair share housing
                  targets, and provide the collected information to the Department of Housing
                  and Community Development (HCD), development community, and non-
                  profit housing developers. HCD provides specific instructions and a template
                  for the annual report.
                  Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                 Annually – due to HCD in April
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Annual assessment and reporting on
                                                             progress meeting Housing Element
                                                             housing targets and implementation
                                                             of programs
                  Quantified Objective:                      n/a
                                             15

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
        A.1-3.    The City shall amend the Development Code to revise the requirements for
                  the Traffic Way Mixed Use District to remove the limitation of only live-work
                  residential uses. A mix of residential use types shall be allowed consistent with
                  all of the mixed use zoning districts (except the Industrial Mixed Use District).
                  The Development Code shall also be amended to allow residential projects
                  at densities up to 20 units per acre in the Traffic Way Mixed Use District.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                              adoption
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Development Code amendment
                  Quantified Objective:                       10 moderate-income units, 10 above
                                                              moderate-income units
        A.2-1.    The City shall continue to encourage and publicize on the City’s website the
                  secondary dwelling program to increase public awareness.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Expected outcome is continued
                                                              consistent production of secondary
                                                              units as an affordable housing
                                                              alternative
                  Quantified Objective:                       5 units/year during the planning
                                                              period. Total of 30 low-income units
                                                              for the planning period.
        A.3-1.    The City shall amend the Municipal Code to provide incentives for the
                  development of affordable housing projects, including expedited permitting,
                  providing financial assistance through the City’s In-Lieu Affordable Housing
                  Fund, requiring     lot consolidation, and       providing   greater   flexibility in
                  development standards.
                                             16

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
                  Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                 Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                             Adoption
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Additional affordable units
                  Quantified Objective:                      5 very low-income and 5 low-income
                                                             units
        A.3-2.    The City shall amend the Development Code to include the definition of
                  “Extremely Low-Income” as defined by Section 50093 of the California Health
                  and Safety Code.
                  Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                 Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                             adoption
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Development Code amendment
                  Quantified Objective:                      n/a
        A.3-3.    The City shall amend the Development Code to provide additional incentives
                  specific for extremely low-income housing projects. Incentives may include
                  flexible standards for on- and off-site improvements such as reduced parking
                  requirements, reduced curb, gutter, and sidewalk requirements; reduced or
                  deferred water and/or sewer connection fees; development review and
                  permit streamlining procedures; or financial incentives and assistance.
                  Responsible agency/department:             City Manager/Administration and
                                                             Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                 Ongoing
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Draft program or ordinance to
                                                             incentivize and/or streamline
                                                             permitting and procedures for
                                            17

City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
                                                               extremely low-income housing
                                                               developments
                  Quantified Objective:                        2 extremely low-income units
        A.10-1.   To facilitate affordable housing, the City shall comply with State Density Bonus
                  Law. The City shall update Development Code Chapter 16.82 to comply with
                  AB 2280. The City will continue to update Chapter 16.82 on an ongoing basis
                  to comply with any future updates to State Density Bonus law (Government
                  Code Section 65915) as well as evaluate proposed Development Code
                  amendments to assess whether they pose any constraints to developer
                  utilization of density bonuses.
                  Responsible agency/department:               Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                   Amend Development Code
                                                               Chapter 16.82 to comply with AB
                                                               2280 – Within 1 year of Housing
                                                               Element adoption; Assess
                                                               Development Code Amendments -
                                                               Ongoing
                  Funding:                                     General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                            City-initiated Development Code
                                                               Amendments
                  Quantified Objective:                        n/a
        A.10-2.   The City shall evaluate and amend the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
                  Permit procedures in Development Code Section 16.16.060 to provide more
                  predictable options for small lot infill projects in the City’s Residential land use
                  designations.
                  Responsible agency/department:               Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                   Within 2 year of Housing Element
                                                               adoption
                  Funding:                                     General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                            Improve the requirements and
                                                               standards for the PUD process
                                             18

City of Arroyo Grande                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
                  Quantified Objective:                    10 moderate and 10 above
                                                           moderate-income units
        A.10-3.   To encourage higher densities and reduce constraints to multi-family housing
                  production, the City shall amend the Development Code to allow densities
                  up to 20 du/ac in the Office Mixed Use (OMU) District for 100% multi-family
                  housing projects with a Minor Use Permit (MUP) subject to design review
                  through the Architectural Review Committee.           Mixed-use projects will
                  continue to have a maximum allowed density of 20 du/ac.
                  Responsible agency/department:           Community Development
                  Timeframe:                               Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                           adoption
                  Funding:                                 General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                        Remove barrier to construct
                                                           affordable housing
                  Quantified Objective:                    n/a
        A.12-1.   The City shall continue to maintain its Geographical Information System (GIS)
                  mapping and planning database inventory of vacant and underutilized
                  “opportunity sites”.
                  Responsible agency/department:           Community Development
                  Timeframe:                               On going
                  Funding:                                 General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                        Maintain land availability inventory
                  Quantified Objective:                    n/a
        A.14-1.   The City shall amend the Development Code to define and provide
                  incentives for “attainable housing”.
                  Responsible agency/department:           Community Development
                  Timeframe:                               Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                           adoption
                  Funding:                                 General Fund
                                            19

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
                     Expected Outcome:                           Development Code amendment
                     Quantified Objective:                       n/a
        A.15-1.      The City shall establish a program to provide assistance to first-time home
                     buyers.
                     Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                     Timeframe:                                  Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                                 adoption
                     Funding:                                    General Fund; HCD Home
                                                                 Investments Partnerships Program
                                                                 (HOME)
                     Expected Outcome:                           Development of a first-time home
                                                                 buyers program
                     Quantified Objective:                       n/a
Goal B – Affordable Housing.
Ensure that housing constructed in the City is affordable to all income levels.
Policies:
        B.1.    All residential projects that receive additional densities or other City incentives to
                include affordable housing shall be placed into a City-approved program to
                maintain the affordability for at least 45(owner-occupied) or 55 years (rental
                units).Any sale or change of ownership of these affordable units prior to satisfying
                the year restriction shall be “rolled over” for same amount of years to protect “at
                risk” units. For rental housing, affordability shall be maintained through recorded
                agreements between a property owner and the City, its Housing Authority, or
                another housing provider approved by the City. For owner-occupied units, long-
                term affordability can be maintained through property owner agreements to
                maintain the designated unit as affordable for the specified period, utilizing a
                promissory note and deed of trust recorded on the property.
        B.2.    The City shall continue monitoring affordable units to ensure ongoing compliance
                with the sales limits or rental rates established by agreement between the City
                                               20

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
               and the developer. The City shall continue to take the necessary steps to assure
               compliance        with  the   regulatory  agreement,     including   consideration   of
               contracting with a housing authority or joining a regional monitoring agency if
               one is developed.
        B.4.   The City may establish parking districts, or off-site shared parking, and use of in-
               lieu fees where appropriate to enable additional density.
        B.5.   Affordable housing shall not be concentrated into a condensed, identifiable
               portion of a development or subdivision but rather dispersed throughout and
               integrated into the development as determined acceptable considering site
               constraints, size and design.
        B.6.   The City shall continue to regulate the use of existing residences on residentially
               zoned properties for vacation rentals.
Programs:
        B.1-1.      The City shall continue tracking all residential projects that include affordable
                    housing to ensure that the affordability is maintained for at least 45 years for
                    owner-occupied units and 55 years for rental units, and that any sale or
                    change of ownership of these affordable units prior to satisfying the 45 or 55-
                    year restriction shall be “rolled over” for another 45 or 55 years to protect “at-
                    risk” units.
                    Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                    Timeframe:                                  Ongoing – at time of change of
                                                                ownership
                    Funding:                                    General Fund
                    Expected Outcome:                           Program to monitor affordable
                                                                units
                    Quantified Objective:                       n/a
        B.2-1.      The City may contract with the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO),
                    local non-profit organizations, or a regional monitoring agency for the
                    monitoring of affordable units to ensure compliance with terms of the
                    development agreement.
                                               21

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
                   Responsible agency/department:              City Manager/Administration and
                                                               Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                   Funding:                                    Fees for service
                   Expected Outcome:                           Expected outcome is consistent
                                                               monitoring of affordable units.
                   Quantified Objective:                       n/a
        B.6-1.     The City shall monitor the loss of permanent workforce housing from vacation
                   rentals and consider modifying the Development Code to adjust for this loss.
                   Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                   Funding:                                    General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                           Program to monitor vacation rentals
                   Quantified Objective:                       n/a
Goal C – Identify Funding for Extremely Low, Very Low, and Low-Income Housing.
Research and identify various additional financial and other resources to provide
extremely low, very low, and low-income housing for current and future residents of the
City.
Policies:
        C.1.   The City shall establish criterion for allocating financial resources from its In-Lieu
               Affordable Housing Fund to augment extremely, very low, and low-income
               housing development.
        C.2.   The City shall consider issuance of bonds to finance extremely, very low, and low-
               income housing.
        C.3.   The City shall pursue State and federal funds to finance extremely, very low, and
               low-income housing.
                                              22

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
        C.4.   The City shall consider cooperation with non-profit organizations and other
               developers for loan and/or grant applications to provide extremely, very-low,
               and low-income housing.
Programs:
        C.1-1. The City shall continue to allocate financial resources to augment extremely low,
               very low, and low-income housing development based on the financial
               projection of the In-Lieu Affordable Housing Fund.
                   Responsible agency/department:            City Manager/Community
                                                             Development
                   Timeframe:                                Ongoing
                   Funding:                                  Inclusionary Affordable Housing Trust
                                                             Fund/Other sources, as identified
                   Expected Outcome:                         Funding to finance affordable
                                                             housing
                   Quantified Objective:                     3 extremely low, 3 very low, and 20
                                                             low-income units
        C.4-1. The City shall continue to meet with local non-profit and private developers semi-
               annually or more frequently if opportunities arise, to promote the extremely low,
               very low, and low-income housing programs outlined in the Housing Element. The
               City shall direct private housing developers to funding sources(such as federal
               and State housing grant fund programs and local housing trust funds) to promote
               affordable housing as outlined in the policies of Goal C.
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Semi-annually
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                         Increased awareness of the City’s
                                                             desire to provide affordable housing
                                                             and to accommodate affordable
                                                             housing
                   Quantified Objective:                     n/a
                                             23

City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
        C.4-2. The City shall continue to participate in financial incentive programs established
               by the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund, such as a revolving loan
               program.
                   Responsible agency/department:              City staff person
                   Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                   Funding:                                    General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                           Leverage of financial resources to
                                                               augment development of
                                                               affordable housing
                   Quantified Objective:                       Loan(s) provided for 5 very low-
                                                               income units
Goal D – Encourage Diverse Housing Stock.
In order to provide affordable housing, especially for extremely, very-low and low-
income households, encourage apartment construction.
Policies:
        D.1.   The City shall relax parking standards for apartments containing extremely, very
               low, low, and/or senior housing.
        D.2.   For the purposes of calculating density, fees and other development standards,
               an apartment is defined as follows:
                          A dwelling unit equivalent equals two bedrooms, or more;
                          A one-bedroom equals 0.75 of unit and is defined as 850 square feet
                           or less;
                          A studio equals 0.5 of a unit and is defined as 600 square feet or less.
Programs:
        D.1-1.     The City shall encourage specific plans for land within its Sphere of Influence
                   that include increased residential capacity for multiple-family development.
                   Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                  On-going, as specific plans are
                                                               approved
                   Funding:                                    General Fund
                                              24

City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
                   Expected Outcome:                            Possible increased land inventory to
                                                                support affordable housing
Goal E – Regulate Condominium Conversions.
Regulate residential condominium conversions to protect the City’s supply of
apartments and to allow more moderately priced for-sale homes.
Policies:
        E.1.   Apartments can only be converted and sold as residential condominiums to
               families earning State-defined very low, low or moderate-income levels, to the
               extent allowed by law.
        E.2.   The City shall set a limit on how many rental units can be converted annually.
        E.3.   To the extent provided by law, the property owner shall give the current residents
               the first right of refusal to buy the units being converted, provided they meet the
               income guidelines.
        E.4.   Residential condo conversion units shall remain affordable through a 45-year
               deed restriction.
Programs:
        E.4-1.     When necessary, the City shall continue to work with property owners of deed
                   restricted affordable units who need to sell within 45 years of initial sale. When
                   the seller is unable to sell to an eligible buyer within a specified time period,
                   equity sharing provisions are established (as per the affordable housing
                   agreement for the property) whereby the difference between the affordable
                   and market value is paid to the City to eliminate any incentive to sell the
                   converted unit at market rate. Funds generated would then be used to
                   develop additional affordable housing within the City.
                   Responsible agency/department:               Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                   Ongoing
                   Funding:                                     General Fund
                                               25

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
                   Expected Outcome:                         Maintaining affordability of deed
                                                             restricted affordable units
                   Quantified Objective:                     n/a
Goal F – Inclusionary Housing.
Strengthen the City’s inclusionary housing ordinance to require more affordable units in
both residential and commercial development projects.
Policies:
        F.1.   The City shall require housing projects greater than six units to meet inclusionary
               housing requirements by 1) payment of in-lieu fee, 2) on-site construction of
               affordable units, or 3) dedication of land. The City may require payment of an in-
               lieu fee for housing projects containing up to six units. An inclusionary unit is
               defined as one that will meet the State’s standards for affordable housing.
        F.2.   An “affordable housing agreement” shall be required for projects subject to the
               Inclusionary Affordable Housing Ordinance.
Programs:
        F.1-1.     The City shall evaluate and consider amending the inclusionary affordable
                   housing requirements in the Development Code (Chapter 16.80) based on
                   experience using the requirements in producing affordable units.
                   Potential changes to the requirements include: 1) consider contracting with a
                   housing management organization to manage deed-restricted affordable
                   units in the City; 2) consider adding incentives to encourage construction of
                   rental units; and 3) investigate extending the income categories served by
                   the inclusionary requirements to extremely low-income households. The City
                   will engage the development community during the evaluation process.
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Within 4 years of Housing Element
                                                             adoption
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                                              26

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                   Expected Outcome:                         Amendments to the inclusionary
                                                             affordable housing requirements
                   Quantified Objective:                     2 extremely low, 5 very low, 10 low,
                                                             and 15 moderate-income units
        F.1-2.     The City shall amend the inclusionary affordable housing requirements in the
                   Development Code (Chapter 16.80)to eliminate inclusion of moderate-
                   income units in the requirements.
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                             adoption
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                         Amendments to the inclusionary
                                                             affordable housing requirements
                   Quantified Objective:                     n/a
        F.1-3.     The City shall amend the in-lieu fee as called for in the inclusionary affordable
                   housing requirements in the Development Code (Chapter 16.80).
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                             adoption
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                         Inclusionary In-lieu Fee
                   Quantified Objective:                     n/a
Goal G – Mitigate Governmental Constraints.
Create clearer regulations and streamline the approval process for affordable housing
projects.
Policies:
        G.1.   The City shall review and periodically amend its Development Code and design
               review regulations and procedures to streamline permit processing for affordable
               housing projects and minimize application and development review costs.
                                             27

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
        G.2.   The City shall consider preparing a master plan or design guidelines for the East
               Grand Avenue Corridor with the goals of streamlining the development review
               process and encouraging economic development.
Programs:
        G.1-1.    The City shall work with non-profit organizations to maintain a mailing list of
                  persons interested in development projects containing affordable housing.
                  Agendas for all City meetings related to these projects shall be mailed to
                  persons on the mailing list. The City shall also continue to post the agendas on
                  the City’s website.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Increased public awareness of
                                                              affordable housing projects.
                  Quantified Objective:                       n/a
        G.1-2.    The City shall encourage construction and/or rehabilitation of housing units for
                  low, very-low, and extremely low income households by developing and
                  implementing incentive-based programs such as fee reductions, fee waivers,
                  flexible development standards, updating the City’s second unit ordinance to
                  reduce barriers to second units development in residential zones, and similar
                  programs.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Ongoing
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Increased provision of affordable
                                                              housing
                  Quantified Objective:                       2 extremely low, 2 very low, and 2
                                                              low-income units
                                            28

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
        G.1-3.     The City shall amend the Development Code to allow development of up to
                   15 multiple-family attached units in the MF and MFA zoning districts with a
                   Minor Use Permit (MUP) subject to design review through the Architectural
                   Review Committee. Development of over 15 multiple-family attached units in
                   the MF and MFA zoning districts shall require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).
                   Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                 Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                              adoption
                   Funding:                                   General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                          Remove barrier to construct
                                                              affordable housing
                   Quantified Objective:                      n/a
Goal H – Housing Conservation and Rehabilitation.
Conserve and rehabilitate the City’s older stock, particularly to provide affordable
housing.
Policies:
        H.1.   The City shall encourage private and public financing of affordable housing
               rehabilitation.
        H.2.   The City shall ensure zoning compatibility when integrating public affordable
               housing projects into existing residential neighborhoods. All impacts relating to
               neighborhood stability and quality of life issues shall also be considered.
Programs:
        H.1-1.     The City shall continue to coordinate with the San Luis Obispo Housing
                   Authority to maintain and expand Section 8 rental housing assistance to
                   qualified households.
                   Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                 Ongoing, when eligible
                   Funding:                                   General Fund
                                            29

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
                  Expected Outcome:                         Continued affordable housing.
                  Quantified Objective:                     n/a
        H.1-2.    The City shall develop a program to offer housing developers an alternative
                  to meet affordable housing requirements by contributing some “sweat
                  equity” on projects where existing housing units will be rehabilitated or
                  conserved as affordable as per the City’s Affordable Housing Program.
                  Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                Within 2 years of Housing Element
                                                            adoption
                  Funding:                                  General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                         Conservation and rehabilitation of
                                                            existing housing stock
                  Quantified Objective:                     5 low-income housing units
        H.2-1.    The City shall continue to consider abatement of unsafe or unsanitary
                  structures, including buildings or rooms inappropriately used for housing,
                  contrary to adopted health and safety codes. Where feasible, the City will
                  encourage rehabilitation and allow reasonable notice and time to correct
                  deficiencies. Where necessary and feasible, extremely low, very low and low-
                  income residents displaced by abatement action shall be eligible for
                  relocation assistance, subject to Council approval.
                  Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                Ongoing
                  Funding:                                  General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                         Conservation of existing housing
                                                            stock
                  Quantified Objective:                     n/a
Goal I – At Risk Unit Preservation.
Preservation of at-risk units in Arroyo Grande.
                                           30

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
Policies:
        I.1.   The City shall establish a notification procedure to occupants of affordable
               housing units of conversion to market rate units.
        I.2.   The City shall assist in the preservation of affordable units at risk of conversion to
               market rate.
Programs:
        I.1-1.    Written notice shall be required prior to the conversion of any units for low-
                  income households to market rate units in any of the following circumstances:
                          The units were constructed with the aid of government funding
                          The units were required by an inclusionary zoning ordinance
                          The project was granted a density bonus
                          The project received other incentives
                  The property owner should work with the City and affordable housing
                  developers, such as HASLO, to identify qualified buyers and/or funding prior to
                  conversion. In cases where conversions occur, notice shall at a minimum be
                  given to the following:
                          The City of Arroyo Grande
                          State Department of Housing and Community Development
                          San Luis Obispo Housing Authority
                          Residents of at-risk units
                  Responsible agency/department:               Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                   Ongoing
                  Funding:                                     General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                            Preservation of existing affordable
                                                               units
                  Quantified Objective:                        n/a
        I.2-1.    The City shall annually monitor the status of affordable housing developments.
                  If any property owners indicate plans to convert affordable units to market
                  rate pricing, or if the City identifies market conditions indicating potential for
                  “at risk” unit conversion, the City will contact qualified non-profit organizations
                                              31

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                   or other agencies and explore opportunities to assist and facilitate the transfer
                   ownership of “at risk” units.
                   Responsible agency/department:             Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                 Ongoing
                   Funding:                                   General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                          Preservation of existing affordable
                                                              units
                   Quantified Objective:                      n/a
Special Needs
Goal J – Special Needs Housing.
Meet the housing needs of special groups of Arroyo Grande residents, including seniors,
persons with disabilities, persons with developmental disabilities, single parents, large
families, and farmworkers.
Policies:
        J.1.   The City shall encourage and shall seek funding to assist in the development of
               low and moderate-income senior rentals.
        J.2.   The City shall permit larger group housing for seniors in appropriate multiple-family
               or mixed-use locations, subject to discretionary review.
        J.3.   The City shall continue to allow small-scale group housing (less than seven
               persons) in multiple-family residential districts, in accordance with applicable
               State laws.
        J.4.   The City shall encourage multiple-family housing projects that include a portion of
               the units with three or more bedrooms to accommodate larger families.
        J.5.   The development of housing for farmworkers shall be encouraged.
                                              32

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
        J.6.   Co-housing    and   similar unconventional     housing    arrangements    shall be
               considered in appropriate locations subject to review and approval on a case-
               by-case basis.
Programs:
        J.1-1.    The City shall continue to promote housing opportunities for seniors and other
                  special needs groups by identifying sites suitable for senior and transitional
                  housing and considering other incentives to promote senior and transitional
                  housing. Single-room occupancy units (SROs) shall be added to the use tables
                  in the Development Code as allowed in all Mixed-Use zones with a
                  conditional use permit. SROs shall be allowed in the MFVH zone district with a
                  minor use permit.
                  Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                Identifying sites - Ongoing;
                                                            Development Code Amendments –
                                                            Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                            adoption
                  Funding:                                  General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                         Increased housing opportunities for
                                                            seniors and other special needs
                                                            groups
                  Quantified Objective:                     5 extremely low and 10 very low-
                                                            income units
        J.5-1.    To encourage farmworker housing, the City will amend the zoning ordinance
                  to identify farmworker housing as a residential use in the use tables. The City
                  Zoning Ordinance will be amended to ensure that permit processing
                  procedures for farmworker housing do not conflict with Health and Safety
                  Code Sections 17021.5, which states that farmworker housing for six or fewer
                  employees should be “deemed a single-family structure with a residential
                  land use designation”, and 17021.6 which states that for "employee housing
                  consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12 units or spaces
                  designed for use by a single family or household...no conditional use permit,
                  zoning variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of employee
                                            33

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
                   housing of this employee housing that is not required of any other agricultural
                   activity in the same zone”.
                   Responsible agency/department:           Community Development
                   Timeframe:                               Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                            adoption
                   Funding:                                 General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                        Increased housing opportunities for
                                                            farmworkers
                   Quantified Objective:                    5 very low-income units
The Homeless
Goal K– Housing for the Homeless.
Reduce or minimize the incidence of homeless in the community.
Policies:
        K.1.   The City shall consider joint powers development and cooperation agreements
               to develop homeless shelters and related services, or participate in the operations
               and maintenance of countywide or south county regional homeless shelter
               facilities.
        K.2.   The City shall allow emergency shelters for overnight lodging in appropriate
               zoning districts as part of the Development Code Update in compliance with
               State law.
Programs:
        K.1-1.     The City shall continue to participate in the South San Luis Obispo County
                   working group cooperating with other cities, the county and other agencies
                   in the development of programs aimed at providing homeless shelters and
                   related services.
                                             34

City of Arroyo Grande                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
                  Responsible agency/department:            Community Development/City
                                                            Manager
                  Timeframe:                                Ongoing
                  Funding:                                  General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                         Continued cooperation in providing
                                                            homeless shelter and services
                  Quantified Objective:                     n/a
        K.2-1.    The City shall amend the Development Code to allow emergency shelters
                  without a conditional use permit or other discretionary permits in appropriate
                  locations in compliance with SB 2, the “Fair Share Zoning” law. The
                  Development Code amendment shall include a definition for “emergency
                  shelter.” Emergency shelters are currently not allowed in commercial mixed
                  use districts, and are allowed through the Conditional Use Permit process in
                  the Condominium/Townhouse (MF), Apartments (MFA) and Multifamily Very
                  High Density (MFVH) residential districts. The Development Code shall be
                  updated to permit emergency shelters by right in at least one zone or site.
                  Potential zones include the Industrial Mixed-Use (IMU) and Highway Mixed-Use
                  (HMU) districts. These commercial districts have sufficient capacity to house
                  emergency shelters with approximately 18 acres of vacant or underutilized
                  land available. The IMU district has several large parcels totaling almost 13.5
                  acres with ten (10) acres that are currently used as storage and/or
                  construction yards with small or no permanent structures. The HMU district has
                  less potential, although there are about four acres with a couple of large
                  vacant parcels totaling 1.64 acres.
                  The Development Code can include locational and operational criteria for
                  emergency shelters such as:
                      •   Proximity of public transit, supportive services, and commercial
                          services;
                      •   Hours of operation;
                      •   External lighting and noise;
                      •   Provision of security measures for the        proper operation and
                          management of a proposed facility;
                      •   Measures to avoid queues of individuals outside proposed facility; and
                                             35

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                       •   Compliance with county and State health and safety requirements for
                           food, medical, another supportive services provided onsite.
                  Such criteria can act to encourage and facilitate emergency shelters and
                  transitional housing through clear and unambiguous guidelines for the
                  application review process, the basis for approval, and the terms and
                  conditions of approval.
                  The City will solicit input from local service providers and the South San Luis
                  Obispo County working group in the preparation and adoption of the
                  amendment to the Development Code to ensure that development
                  standards and permit processing will not impede the approval and/or
                  development of emergency shelters.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Concurrently with Housing Element
                                                              adoption (per Government
                                                              Code Section 65583(a)(4))
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Expected outcome is compliance
                                                              with SB 2 regarding emergency
                                                              shelters.
                  Quantified Objective:                       n/a
K.2-2.  The City shall amend the Development Code to define transitional and supportive
        housing as residential uses per Section 65582 of the Government Code subject to the
        same standards that apply to other housing in the same zone.
                  Responsible agency/department:              Community Development
                  Timeframe:                                  Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                              adoption
                  Funding:                                    General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                           Expected outcome is compliance
                                                              with Housing Element law regarding
                                                              transitional and supportive housing.
                  Quantified Objective:                       n/a
                                              36

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
K.2-3.  The City may consider implementing an overnight parking program, or a similar program,
        for the homeless in appropriate zoning districts.
                    Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                    Timeframe:                                Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                              adoption
                    Funding:                                  General Fund
                    Expected Outcome:                         Provide approved parking locations
                                                              for the homeless to sleep
                    Quantified Objective:                     n/a
Disabled Persons
Goal L – Housing for Persons with Disabilities.
Ensure that those residents with handicaps or disabilities have adequate access to
housing.
Policies:
        L.1.    The City shall encourage housing development that meets the special needs of
                disabled persons, including developmentally disabled individuals, and ensure
                that all new multiple family developments comply with the handicapped
                provisions of the California Building Code and ADA.
        L.2.    The City shall ensure, through the design review process for multiple housing
                projects, that project design, parking locations, pedestrian walkways, and direct
                access to the housing units accommodates handicapped or disabled access.
Programs:
        L.1-1   The City shall explore models to encourage the creation of housing for persons
                with disabilities, including developmental disabilities. Such models could include
                coordinating with the Tri-County Regional Center and other local agencies in
                encouraging affordable housing projects to dedicate a percent of housing for
                disabled individuals; assisting in housing development; providing housing services
                that educate, advocate, inform, and assist people to locate and maintain
                                               37

City of Arroyo Grande                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
               housing; and models to assist in the maintenance and repair of housing for
               persons with developmental disabilities.
                  Responsible agency/department:           Building Department/Community
                                                           Development
                  Timeframe:                               Establish a model program within 2
                                                           years of Housing Element adoption
                  Funding:                                 General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                        Increased access to housing and
                                                           housing resources for disabled
                                                           persons; including information and
                                                           services available for
                                                           developmentally disabled persons
                  Quantified Objective:                    5 low income units
        L.2-1.    The City shall create a policy or amend the Development Code to provide
                  persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing an opportunity to
                  request reasonable accommodation in the application of City building and
                  zoning laws.
                  Responsible agency/department:           Building Department/Community
                                                           Development
                  Timeframe:                               Within 1 year of Housing Element
                                                           adoption
                  Funding:                                 General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                        Greater accessibility for disabled
                                                           persons accommodated through
                                                           the design review process for
                                                           discretionary residential projects
                  Quantified Objective:                    n/a
        L.2-2.    The City will have brochures on universal design available at the Community
                  Development Department front counter. The City will also consider updating
                  the building code to encourage use of universal design in home design.
                  Universal design is based on the precept that throughout life, all people
                                            38
City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
                   experience changes in their abilities. The goal of universal design is to provide
                   environments that are usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible,
                   without the need for specialization in design and construction and /or
                   facilitate change in occupancy over time.
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Develop brochure(s) - within 1 year
                                                             of Housing Element adoption
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                         Greater accessibility for disabled
                                                             persons accommodated through
                                                             project design
                   Quantified Objective:                     n/a
Energy Conservation
Goal M – Energy Conservation.
Increase the efficiency of energy use in new and existing homes, with a concurrent
reduction in housing costs to Arroyo Grande residents.
Policies:
        M.1.   All new dwelling units shall be required to meet current State and local
               requirements for energy efficiency. The retrofitting of existing units shall be
               encouraged.
        M.2.   New land use patterns shall encourage energy efficiency.
        M.3.   When feasible, buildings shall be sited on a north-south axis and designed to take
               advantage of passive solar heating and cooling.
Programs:
        M.1-1.     The City shall continue working to implement a water and electrical retrofit
                   program for existing housing units. A plumbing retrofit program was
                   established in 2004, and water conservation rebate programs were
                                            39

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
                  established in 2009. The City will continue to work with PG&E and other
                  agencies to establish an electrical retrofit program.
                  Responsible agency/department:                 Building Department
                  Timeframe:                                     Ongoing
                  Funding:                                       General Fund/PG&E
                  Expected Outcome:                              Reduce usage of water and
                                                                 electrical resources
                  Quantified Objective:                          n/a
        M.1-2.    Consistent with Measure E-4 of the City’s Climate Action Plan, the City shall
                  establish a program to allow residential projects to receive minor exceptions if
                  they meet 25% of items on the Tier 1 list of the California Green Building Code
                  (Title 24) or 15% of items on the Tier 2 list of that code.
                  Responsible agency/department:                 Building Department
                  Timeframe:                                     Establish program within 1 year of
                                                                 Housing Element adoption
                  Funding:                                       General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                              Encourage energy efficiency in new
                                                                 residential buildings
                  Quantified Objective:                          n/a
Equal Opportunity
Goal N – Equal Opportunity and Fair Housing.
Assure access to sound, affordable housing for all persons, regardless of race, religion,
age or sex.
Policies:
        N.1.   The City declares that all persons, regardless of race, religion, age, or sex, shall
               have equal access to sound and affordable housing.
                                              40

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Programs:
        N.1-1.    The City will continue to promote the enforcement of policies of the State Fair
                  Employment      and    Housing   Commission,       and   shall   resolve  housing
                  discrimination complaints through assistance from HUD, and/or local, regional
                  private fair housing organizations. The City will develop a fair housing program
                  to implement San Luis Obispo County’s Urban County Team’s fair housing
                  program, “Fair Housing Analysis of Impediments” and prepare a brochure
                  that promotes equal housing opportunities and addresses discrimination. The
                  brochure will be available at the Community Development Department and
                  a link to download the brochure will be placed on the City’s website. In
                  addition the City shall disseminate information in one or more of the following
                  ways to ensure the public is aware of Fair Housing Law:
                     Distribute materials to property owners and apartment managers twice a
                      year.
                     Make public service announcements through multiple media outlets
                      including newspaper, radio, television, and social media to run on a
                      regular basis.
                     Conduct public presentations with different community groups once or
                      twice a year.
                  Responsible agency/department:             All City Departments
                  Timeframe:                                 Ongoing
                                                             Brochure available within one year
                                                             of    housing    element      adoption,
                                                             strategy to implement Urban County
                                                             Team fair housing program within
                                                             one year of County Fair Housing Plan
                                                             adoption.
                  Funding:                                   General Fund
                  Expected Outcome:                          Dissemination of information at the
                                                             front counter of all City Departments.
                  Quantified Objective:                      n/a
                                             41

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Housing Element Implementation
Goal O – Public Participation.
Ensure participation of all economic segments of the community in the development of
housing policy for Arroyo Grande.
Policies:
        O.1.   The City shall encourage the participation of all residents of Arroyo Grande in the
               development of housing policies for the City.
        O.2.   The City shall provide a brief summary of key information about housing-related
               issues to help ensure widespread notice to all residents.
Programs:
        O.1-1.     Prior to any public hearing where the City is considering amending or
                   updating its Housing Element or housing policies, the City will notify all local
                   housing organizations, as well as social service agencies, and post notices at
                   significant locations.
                   Responsible agency/department:            Community Development
                   Timeframe:                                Ongoing
                   Funding:                                  General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                         Provide information about housing
                                                             programs
                   Quantified Objectives:                    n/a
Goal P - Housing Element Consistency.
Reduce governmental and infrastructure constraints to the improvement and
development of housing for people of all income levels.
Policy:
        P.1.   Update the Development Code and General Plan to maintain consistency and
               compatibility between the documents.
                                            42

City of Arroyo Grande                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
Program:
        P.1-1. Following amendment of the General Plan Conservation and Safety Elements to
               comply with AB 162 related to floodplain mapping, the City will amend the
               Housing Element if needed for consistency.
                   Responsible agency/department:         Community Development
                   Timeframe:                             Within 1 year of updates of the
                                                          General    Plan    Conservation   and
                                                          Safety Elements
                   Funding:                               General Fund
                   Expected Outcome:                      Consistency between General Plan
                                                          elements     related   to   floodplain
                                                          mapping          and      associated
                                                          constraints.
                   Quantified Objectives:                 n/a
                                           43
City of Arroyo Grande                                                                2014-2019 Housing Element
2.2 Summary of Quantified Objectives
Quantified objectives estimate the number of units that are planned to be constructed,
rehabilitated, and conserved over the planning period. This information is presented in Table 2-1
below.
                                     Table 2-1 Quantified Objectives by Income Group
                                                  Quantified Objectives by Income Group
                             Extremely                                                        Above
  Housing Program                               Very Low-           Low-    Moderate-                      Total
                                 Low-                                                      Moderate-
                                                 Income           Income      Income
                               Income                                                        Income
                                                         Housing Production
   Program A.1-3.                  0                   0              0          10             10           20
   Program A.2-1.                  0                   0             30           0             0            30
   Program A.3-1.                  0                   5              5           0             0            10
   Program A.3-3.                  2                   0              0           0             0            2
   Program A.10-2.                 0                   0              0          10             10           20
   Program C.1-1.                  3                   3             20           0             0            26
   Program C.4-2.                  0                   5              0           0             0            5
    Program F.1-1.                 2                   5             10          10             0            27
   Program G.1-2.                  2                   2              2           0             0            6
    Program H.1-2.                 0                   5              0           0             0            5
    Program J.1-1.                 5                  10              0           0             0            15
    Program J.5-1.                 0                   5              0           0             0            5
    Program L.1-1.                 0                   5              0           0             0            5
         Totals                   14                  45             67          30             20          176
 Source: City of Arroyo Grande and Lisa Wise Consulting
                                                           44
City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
                    CHAPTER 3 – BACKGROUND INFORMATION
3.1 Introduction
The City of Arroyo Grande occupies 5.45 square miles (3,388 acres) of land along Highway 101 in
southwestern San Luis Obispo County, as shown on Figure 3-1. It is immediately adjacent to the
west, southwest and south to urban development within the cities of Pismo Beach and Grover
Beach, and the unincorporated community of Oceano, as shown on Figure 3-2. Unincorporated
lands adjoin the City to the north, east and south. Residential rural and suburban developments
characterize unincorporated areas to the north and southeast of the City, while agricultural uses
dominate the Arroyo Grande Valley to the northeast and the Cienega Valley south of the City.
Arroyo Grande Creek runs in a generally north-south direction through the eastern portion of the
City. This chapter presents and analyzes demographic, population, and housing characteristics
that are crucial to understanding the local housing market to accommodate for different
housing types for all income levels.
                                            45

City of Arroyo Grande               2014-2019 Housing Element
Figure 3-1 Regional Location Map
                                 46
City of Arroyo Grande                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Figure 3-2 South County Location Map
                                     47
City of Arroyo Grande                                                          2014-2019 Housing Element
3.2 Demographic Overview
This Section provides information on population trends (population growth, ethnicity, age, and
sex), household data (size, tenure, and type of household), income, and employment.
Population Trends
Population Growth. The City of Arroyo Grande’s population has grown from 3,291 in 1960 to
17,252 in 20101. Population growth during the 1960’s occurred rapidly, some years exceeding 12
percent. In the 1970’s, growth slowed to an average of seven percent over the decade, falling
still further in the 1980’s to less than two percent from 1980 to 1990. According to the Census,
Arroyo Grande grew 10.2 percent between 1990 and 2000 and 8.8 percent between 2000 and
2010. Current estimates by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) in their 2040
Regional Growth Forecast (2011) project the City’s population to be approximately 20,234
residents by 2040, based upon a compound annual growth rate of 0.57 percent.
Table 3-1 compares population growth in Arroyo Grande from 2000 to 2010 to Pismo Beach,
Grover Beach, the County of San Luis Obispo, and the State of California. This table indicates
that the growth that occurred in Arroyo Grande from 2000 to 2010 was higher than the
surrounding communities, but less than the State and County growth.
                       Table 3-1 Trends in Population Growth
                                    2000                       2010
                          Number          Change       Number        Change
                                         from 1990                  from 2000
Arroyo Grande                 15,851          10.2%       17,252          8.8%
Grover Beach                  13,067          12.1%       13,156          0.7%
Pismo Beach                     8,551         11.5%        7,655        -10.5%
SLO County                   246,681          13.6%      269,637          9.3%
California                33,871,648          13.8%   37,253,956         10.0%
Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Ethnic Composition. According to the 2010 Census, Arroyo Grande’s population is 15.7 percent
Hispanic and 84.3 percent non-Hispanic. Of the non-Hispanic portion, white alone makes up 76.9
percent, with the remaining population being African American, American Indian, and Asian, or
Pacific Islander.
                                                     48

City of Arroyo Grande                                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
Age and Sex Distribution. Table 3-2 shows that in 2010,28 percent of the population of Arroyo
Grande was age 24 years and under, 36 percent of the population between 25 and 54 years,
and 35 percent was 55 years or older. The highest percentage in one age category, 20 percent,
is in the 65 and older age range, followed by the under 15 age range (17 %).The median age in
years is 45. These statistics reflect an older population than the State as a whole, with a higher
percentage of those considered seniors (55 or over). However, this is similar to trends in San Luis
Obispo County, with the senior population increasing more rapidly than other age groups. The
ratio of male to female in the total population for Arroyo Grande is 48 percent male to 52
percent female.
                                           Table 3-2 Trends in Population Age
                                            2000                            2010
                                Number of        Percent of      Number of       Percent of    Percent
         Age Group                Persons           Total         Persons          Total       Change
         <15                        3,067           19%             2,933           17%          -4%
         15-24                      1,685           11%             1,893           11%          12%
         25-34                      1,513            9%             1,755           10%          16%
         35-44                      2,468           16%             1,949           11%         -21%
         45-54                      2,370           15%             2,657           16%          12%
         55-64                      1,526           10%             2,572           15%          69%
         65+                        3,222           20%             3,493           20%           8%
         Total                     15,851          100%            17,252          100%           ---
         Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Between 2000 and 2010 there was a significant increase in the 55 to 64 age range and a large
decrease in the 35 to 44 age range, while all other age ranges remained similar. These trends
can be seen in Figure 3-3.
                                                       49
City of Arroyo Grande                                                              2014-2019 Housing Element
                                   Figure 3-3 Change in Population Age, 2000 to 2010
                       25%
                       20%
                       15%
                                                                                        2000
                       10%                                                              2010
                        5%
                        0%
                                 <15     15-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64        65+
                    Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Household Data
Household Size. According to the 2010 Census the average household size in Arroyo Grande is
2.41, with owner-occupied units averaging 2.42 persons per household and renter-occupied
units averaging 2.39 persons per household. The City’s average household size did not change
from 2000 to 2010. For comparison purposes, the City’s average household size in 1990 was 2.48.
As of 2010, the State of California has a larger household size of 2.90 persons per household, as
do the unincorporated areas of the County, which have an average household size of 2.48
persons per household.
Tenure by Age of Householder. Table 3-3 shows the occupancy of housing units by age of the
householder. Overall, two-thirds of households are owner-occupied, and one-third rent. The 35
to 65 age range is the largest category in both rental and owner-occupied housing units. For
householders less than 35 years old, more householders rent than own. The opposite is true for
householders over 65 years old.
                                          Table 3-3 Tenure By Age of Householder
                                         Owner-Occupied           Renter-Occupied              Totals
                                       Number         Percent    Number      Percent    Number      Percent
   Householders <35                            226          5%          658      27%         884        12%
   Householders 35-65                        2,664        57%         1,250      52%       3,914        55%
   Householders 65+ yrs.                     1,796        38%           493      21%       2,289        33%
   Totals                                    4,686        66%         2,401      34%       7,087       100%
   Source: U.S. Census 2010
                                                         50

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
Households by Type. According to the 2010 Census, 66 percent of Arroyo Grande’s population
lived in family households, a 7.33 percent increase from the year 2000. The remaining 34 percent
of households in 2010 were classified as non-family households, 81 percent of which were single
persons living alone. Single parent family households, including both male and female head of
households, also significantly increased between 2000 and 2010 by 17.62 percent.
                                       Table 3-4 Trends in Households
                                                  2000                        2010
                                                                                                Percent
                                        Number         Percent        Number        Percent    Change in
Average Household Size                            2.41                        2.41             Households
Household Types
Family Households                           4,350            67%           4,669          66%       7.33%
         Married                            3,561            82%           3,741          80%       5.05%
              Married w/children            1,423            40%           1,355          36%      -4.78%
        Single Parent household               789            18%             928          20%      17.62%
Non-Family Households                       2,128            33%           2,418          34%      13.63%
        Single Households                   1,766            83%           1,968          81%      11.44%
Total                                       6,478           100%           7,087        100%        9.40%
Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Incomes
According to 2010 Census data, the median income for Arroyo Grande households was $58,725.
This is compared to the 2000 median household income ($48,237) in Table 3-5. The median
income for the households for the State as a whole in 2010 was $60,883. The per capita income
for Arroyo Grande in 2010 was $32,617, compared to $24,311 in 2000. The per capita income for
2010 for the State as a whole was $29,188. Table 3-5 shows income ranges and the number of
households in each range. The largest category in Arroyo Grande in 2000 was the $50,000 to
$74,999 range (22%).The largest category in 2010 was the $100,000 or more range (25%).
                                              51

City of Arroyo Grande                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
                                     Table 3-5 Trends in Household Income
                                             2000                        2010
                                                                                        Percent Change
                                    Households     Percent     Households     Percent        in # of
                                                                                          Households
  Less than $10,000                    507            8%            258          4%         -49.1%
  $10,000 to $14,999                   338            5%            407          6%          20.4%
  $15,000 to $24,999                   693           11%            570          8%         -17.7%
  $25,000 to $34,999                   798           12%            713         10%         -10.7%
  $35,000 to $49,999                  1,030          16%           1026         15%           -0.4%
  $50,000 to $74,999                  1,464          22%           1334         19%           -8.9%
  $75,000 to $99,999                   698           11%            996         14%          42.7%
  $100,000 or more                     950           15%           1747         25%          83.9%
  Total Households                    6,478         100%           7051        100%             --
  Median Income (All
  Households)                        $48,236           --        $58,725         --             --
  Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Another method to evaluate income is to determine levels of poverty in a community.
According to the 2000 Census, 191 families or 4.3 percent in Arroyo Grande were considered
below the poverty level. According to 2010 Census data, 212 families or 4.6 percent were
considered to be below the poverty level.
Employment
Table 3-6 provides a breakdown of the employed population 16 years and older by occupation
for Census years 2000 and 2010. In 2010, the largest percentage category is that of
management, professional, and related occupations (43%), which showed the largest increase
since 2000. The second largest category in 2010 is that of sales and office occupations (26%),
although there was a decrease in overall number of jobs during the same period. Between 2000
and 2010 there was also a decrease in farming, fishing, and forestry occupations and production
and moving categories.
                                                   52
  City of Arroyo Grande                                                              2014-2019 Housing Element
                                    Table 3-6 Trends in Employed persons 16 years and older
                                                                                2000                    2010
                                   Occupation                           Number      Percent     Number      Percent
     Management, professional, and related occupations                      2,691       38%         3,460        43%
     Sales and office occupations                                           2,130       30%         2,089        26%
     Service Occupations                                                    1,115       16%         1,603        20%
     Construction, extraction, and maintenance occupations                    612        9%           475         6%
     Production, transportation, and material moving
     occupations                                                              599        8%           424         5%
     Farming, fishing, and forestry occupations                                34        1%             0           0
     Total                                                                  7,181      100%         8,051      100%
     Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
  Using U.S. Census 2010 data, Table 3-7 shows the number of jobs within the City by industry
  category. The City’s largest industry is the educational services and health care sector consisting
  of 1,970 jobs, or 24 percent. Following that is the retail sector supplying 19 percent of the jobs in
  the City.
                                         Table 3-7 Industry Profile
                                                                                            Jobs         Percent
Educational services, and health care and social assistance                                   1,970           24.5%
Retail trade                                                                                    956           11.9%
Professional, scientific, and management, and administrative and waste                                        11.5%
management services                                                                             928
                                                                                                                9.5%
Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and accommodation and food services                        763
Public administration                                                                           673             8.4%
Construction                                                                                    537             6.7%
Finance and insurance, and real estate and rental and leasing                                   510             6.3%
Other services, except public administration                                                    444             5.5%
Manufacturing                                                                                   361             4.5%
Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                                                   351             4.4%
Wholesale trade                                                                                 218             2.7%
Information                                                                                     176             2.2%
Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting, and mining                                         164             2.0%
Total                                                                                         8,051                --
Source: U.S. Census 2010
  Another issue related to employment and residency is the matter of commuting to work. Census
  data indicates that of the 8,051 employed persons 16 years and over, 6,837 or 85 percent drove
  to work. Only 37 or 0.4 percent utilized public transportation. The mean travel time to work was
                                                          53

City of Arroyo Grande                                                             2014-2019 Housing Element
18.2 minutes. This would indicate that a majority of the City’s working residents are commuting to
jobs outside of Arroyo Grande.
3.3 Housing Characteristics
This Section provides information on types of housing, vacancy rates, overcrowding, age of units,
and housing conditions.
Types of Housing
Table 3-8 provides a breakdown of the total housing units by type of structure for 2000 and 2010.
In 2010, it was estimated that there were 7,769 housing units in the City, an increase of 963
housing units from 2000, which was a 29% increase in the number of housing units added from
1990 to 2000 (747 unit increase). As indicated, the vast majority of the units (76%) in Arroyo
Grande are single-family units. From 2007 to 2011, 268 dwelling units have been constructed or
approved.
                                           Table 3-8 Trends in Housing Type
                                                             2000                 2010
                                                     Number      Percent   Number    Percent
                  Total Housing Units                   6,806       100%      7,769     100%
                  Units in Structure
                  1-unit, detached                      4,516         66%     5,296       68%
                  1-unit, attached                        590          9%       639        8%
                  Multiple-Family 2-4 Units               493          7%       367        5%
                  Multiple-Family 5 + Units               654         10%       861       11%
                  Mobile home                             544          8%       597        8%
                  Boat, RV, van, etc.                        9       0.1%         9      0.1%
                  Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
Vacancy Rates
The Census reported 541 vacant units, which is seven percent of the total housing units in the
City. The number of vacant units in the City nearly doubled from the 272 vacant units reported in
2000. As shown in Table 3-9, slightly less than half of the vacant units are for seasonal,
recreational or occasional use. Table 3-9 shows that 18 percent of the vacant units are for rent.
                                                      54

City of Arroyo Grande                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
                                        Table 3-9 Vacant Units by Type, 2010
                                                                             Number   Percent
                 For rent                                                        100        18%
                 For sale only                                                    90        17%
                 Rented, not occupied                                             14          3%
                 Sold, not occupied                                               21          4%
                 For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use                   226        42%
                 Other vacant                                                     90        17%
                 Total Vacant Units                                              541      100%
              Source: U.S. Census 2010
Vacancy rates are commonly used as an indicator of housing market activity in a given area.
The individual vacancy rate for a community theoretically measures the health of the local
housing market. The vacancy rate is a percentage of the total housing stock that is vacant
and/or available for sale or rent at any one time. Generally, a two percent vacancy rate in units
available for owner-occupancy and a six percent rate for rental units are considered desirable
to keep prices down and to ensure that units are available to new and relocating residents.
Vacancy rates for 2000 and 2010 are shown in Table 3-10. For Arroyo Grande, it was reported
that there was a 1.9 percent vacancy rate for owner-occupied units and a 4.0 percent vacancy
rate for rental units. In 2000 the vacancy rate was 0.8 percent for owner-occupied units and 2.9
percent vacancy rate for rental units. The 2010 vacancy rate for owner-occupied units is close to
the optimal rate described above. However, the vacancy rate for rental units is less than the
optimal rate and indicates a shortage of rental housing units in the City. However, this is not an
uncommon statistic in the south San Luis Obispo County area. Grover Beach has an overall total
unit vacancy rate of 11 percent and San Luis Obispo, seven percent, while Pismo Beach has an
extremely high overall vacancy rate of 31 percent.
                                                 Table 3-10 Vacancy Rates
                                                        2000          2010      Optimal Vacancy Rates
             Owner-occupied                             0.8%          1.9%               2.0%
             Rental Units                               2.9%          4.0%               6.0%
             Overall Total Unit Vacancy                 4.0%          7.0%                 --
             Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010
                                                     55
City of Arroyo Grande                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
Overcrowded Units
A common method of measuring overcrowding is to compare the number of persons to the
number of rooms in the unit. The Census defines an overcrowded household as one that has
more than 1.01 persons per room (not including kitchens and bathrooms), while units with more
than 1.5 persons per room are considered severely overcrowded. In Arroyo Grande, the data
collected from the 2010 Census shows that 2.1 percent of all occupied units were overcrowded.
As shown in Table 3-11 Census data indicates 41 units or 0.5 percent of the total occupied
housing units had been between 1.01 and 1.50 occupants per room, and 23 units or 0.3 percent
of all units were severely overcrowded at 1.51 occupants or more per room.
                                         Table 3-11 Overcrowding by Tenure
                                 Owner-Occupied            Renter Occupied             Total
          Occupants
                              Number of     Percent     Number   of            Number of
           Per Room                                                   Percent                Percent
                              Households                Households             Households
        1.00 or less             4,901        99.4%        2,086       98.5%     6,987        99.1%
        1.01 – 1.50                20          0.4%          21         1.0%       41          0.6%
        1.51 or more               12          0.2%          11         0.5%       23          0.3%
        Total                    4,933       100.0%        2,118      100.0%     7,051        100%
        Source: U.S. Census 2010
The rate of overcrowding in the City is lower than San Luis Obispo County as a whole, which has
a 3.1 percent overcrowding rate (more than 1.01 persons per room), and less than half that of
the overcrowding rate for the State of California at 8.0 percent.
While the rate may in comparison be lower than many other communities, the incidence of
overcrowding should still be considered (64 units).The problem of overcrowding for large families
can be addressed by the construction of more affordable larger units. However, overcrowding
goes beyond family size to affordability issues. Even single individuals and small families may be
affected by overcrowding. Due to limited incomes and high housing costs and rents, they may
be forced to double up with extended family members or non-relatives in similar circumstances.
Overcrowding will be addressed by promotion and production of more affordable units in the
City and regional cooperation on housing issues.
Age of Housing Units
The age of housing is an important characteristic of its relative condition as older units tend to be
in greater need of repair. Many federal and State programs use age of housing to determine
potential housing rehabilitation needs. Typically, the useful life of major components of an
                                                     56

City of Arroyo Grande                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
average quality housing structure ranges from 20 to 30 years for items such as roofing, plumbing,
landscaping, paving and electrical. When a housing unit is over 30 years old, the replacement
or refurbishing of major components is an important factor in the ability of a community to
provide safe, decent and sanitary housing.
Table 3-12 provides a breakdown of the age of housing units in Arroyo Grande as of the year
2010. In reviewing this table, the largest percentage of the housing units was constructed
between 1970 and 1979 (25.4%), followed by units built from 1980 to 1989 (18.8%). This suggests
that 74 percent of the housing stock is 20 years or older, while 51 percent is 30 years or older. The
table indicates that 293 units were built prior to 1940. However, according to a survey of the
housing stock most of the City’s housing is in sound condition (see next section).
                                          Table 3-12 Year Structure Built
                                Year Structure Built         Number       Percent
                           2005 or later                       358          4.6%
                           2000 to 2004                        776         10.0%
                           1990 to 1999                        886         11.4%
                           1980 to 1989                       1,457        18.8%
                           1970 to 1979                       1,974        25.4%
                           1960 to 1969                        843         10.9%
                           1950 to 1959                        898         11.6%
                           1940 to 1949                        284          3.7%
                           1939 or earlier                     293          3.8%
                           Source: U.S. Census 2010
Condition of Units
One of the issues required by State housing element law for discussion and analysis is the
condition of the community’s housing stock. The purpose for this is to provide a basis for
determining which units are in need of rehabilitation and which units may be beyond feasible
repair and determined to be in need of demolition and replacement. One of the guidelines set
by the State is that units constructed before 1960 may be eligible for repair and/or rehabilitation
to keep those units in the existing housing stock. In order to maintain the historical nature of the
community, many older communities like Arroyo Grande have already repaired and/or
rehabilitated many of their older units.
Based upon the review of Table 3-12, 1,475 or 19 percent of the total housing units in the City
were built prior to 1960. While these numbers could represent an estimate of the number of
housing units that could be analyzed for rehabilitation need, the 1993 Housing Element survey
                                                    57

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
was conducted to determine the structural condition of housing in Arroyo Grande. The structural
condition of housing units was reported as “sound”, in need of “minor rehabilitation”, “moderate
rehabilitation”, “substantial rehabilitation”, or “dilapidated”. The survey utilized a point system to
evaluate the housing units in the City. The results of this survey was that 99.3 percent of the 1993
housing units were in “sound” condition, 0.4 percent or 26 units were in need of “minor
rehabilitation”, 0.3 percent or 13 units were in need of “moderate rehabilitation” and one unit
was in need of “substantial rehabilitation”. No units were determined to be dilapidated. The
survey concluded that virtually all housing units were in sound condition and the overall
appearance of the City is of well-maintained homes. To update the findings of the 1993 housing
survey, City staff conducted a windshield survey of housing units in the older neighborhoods
where housing conditions may be an issue. The survey located less than ten units that appear in
need of substantial rehabilitation or removal. 16 units that were deemed to be in dilapidated
condition were demolished during the period of June 30, 2003 and June 30, 2007. The City has
not identified any additional units in need of demolition.
3.4 Housing Affordability
One of the key issues facing the provision of housing in the state is affordability. Even with the
downturn in the housing market, the ability to acquire safe and sound housing is a major social
and economic issue. It is affecting decisions regarding business retention and expansion,
commuting distances for employees, as well as the overall quality of life. The housing
affordability issue is further complicated by the lack of financial and other resources available to
mitigate the current housing situation.
The primary issue of housing affordability on the Central Coast is the relationship between
household income and the cost of housing. This Section covers housing prices, rental rates,
affordability thresholds, overpayment, and long-term affordability issues.
Housing Prices
According to the 2010 Census, the median value of a home in San Luis Obispo County was
$513,900 and $541,100 for Arroyo Grande. Median means a point where 50 percent of housing
prices, are below the listed number and 50 percent are above.
While these statistics reflect housing prices in 2010, housing prices in San Luis Obispo County and
Arroyo Grande have decreased since 2009 (see Figure 3-4). A review of housing prices was
                                               58

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                        2014-2019 Housing Element
conducted for the City and County using median home values through 2012 from the California
Association of Realtors (CAR) and the U.S Census. Figure 3-4 shows that between 2003 and 2006
median home prices for Arroyo Grande increased by a little over 50 percent, but by 2008
decreased nearly to 2003 prices. In 2009 a small increase in prices occurred and since then there
has been a slow decline in price trend.
                                   Figure 3-4 Median Home Prices Trend, Arroyo Grande
       $700,000
       $600,000
       $500,000
       $400,000
       $300,000
       $200,000
       $100,000
               $0
                       2003        2004         2005        2006    2007     2008    2009    2010    2011    2012
                                               San Luis Obispo County         Arroyo Grande
Source: U.S. Census and California Association of Realtors (CAR), 2009
Rental Unit Rates
According to the 2008-2012 US Census ACD estimates, the median rent in Arroyo Grande was
$1,178 per month.
Market rental rates were gathered using Craigslist, an online classifieds website, from June 25 to
June 25, 2014. Table 3-13 shows the average market rental rates for each type of unit.
                                            Table 3-13 Market Rental Rates by Unit Type
                                                       Average         Median        Lowest       Highest
                   Studio                                  $ 1,191       $ 1,300        $ 675        $ 1,600
                   1 BR - Apartment                         $ 1,051      $ 1,012         $ 895      $ 1,200
                   2 BR - Apartment                         $ 1,481      $ 1,450       $ 1,200       $ 1,895
                   Single Family
                   1-2 Bedrooms                            $ 1,200       $ 1,200       $ 1,200       $ 1,200
                   3-5 Bedrooms                             $ 2,199      $ 2,122       $ 1,650       $ 3,150
                   Source: Craigslist, retrieved July 27, 2011
                                                                 59
City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
While the above rental analysis involves a limited number of housing units that are available for
rent (the number of units listed in each category ranges from two to eight), the data does give a
perspective on rents being asked in Arroyo Grande. Market rental rates varied for apartments
and single-family residences. The lowest rent found for an apartment was $675, while the highest
was $1,895. For apartments, the average asking rent for a studio (including lofts and artist space)
was $1,191, for a one-bedroom $1,051, and $1,481 for a two-bedroom. For homes being rented,
the average asking rent for a one to two-bedroom unit was $1,200. For a three to five-bedroom
unit, the average was $2,199.
Affordability Thresholds
Affordable rental and sales prices for housing were calculated by the County of San Luis Obispo
Planning and Building Department using HCD’s 2014 income limits and are summarized in Table
3-14.
The median home price in Arroyo Grande in 2010 was reported as $541,100. As can be seen in
Table 3-14, not even a moderate-income household could afford this price. Even though
median home prices have declined significantly over the last several years, they still are not
affordable for the households who are in the moderate or below moderate-income categories.
While they may be able to afford some rental housing, large households, low-income
households, and extremely low-income households may still have a difficult time finding decent
housing.
                        Table 3-14 San Luis Obispo County Housing Affordability
                        Studio         1 Bedroom        2 Bedroom        3 Bedroom      4 Bedroom
 Maximum Affordable Rent*:
 Extremely Low-                $404              $462           $520               $578         $624
 MIIncomeInInco
 Very  Low-                    $674              $770           $866               $963       $1,039
 me
 Income
 Low-Income                    $809              $924         $1,040             $1,155       $1,247
 Moderate                    $1,482            $1,694         $1,906             $2,118       $2,287
 Maximum Affordable Sales Price**:
 Extremely Low             $38,000            $47,000        $56,000            $64,000      $71,000
 Very Low                  $79,000            $93,000       $108,000          $122,000      $134,000
 Low                      $119,000           $140,000       $160,000          $180,000      $196,000
 Moderate                 $238,000           $275,000       $312,000          $349,000      $379,000
                                              60

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
  *Notes on Maximum Rent Figures:
      1. These rent limits include allowances for utilities as determined by the Housing Authority of the City of San Luis
        Obispo
      2. Rent limits are updated when the State issues its annual update to median incomes, generally in April of each
        year.
  ** Notes on Maximum Sales Prices:
     1. Homeowner association (HOA) dues are assumed at $150/month
     2. Mortgage financing assumed at a fixed rate for 30 years (per HSH Associates) is 4.35%
     3. Prices shown are preliminary estimates and may be revised. Round to the nearest 1000th.
     4. Actual sales price limits will be determined by the County on a case-by-case basis.
  Source: County of San Luis Obispo Planning and Building, 2014
Overpayment
Another measure of housing affordability is the percentage of income paid for housing. State
housing guidelines consider 30 percent of gross income paid for housing including utilities as the
standard affordable level and those households paying 30 percent or more as overpayment.
According to the 2010 Census, 1,321 households or 27 percent of the owner-occupied units were
paying monthly housing costs of 30 percent or more of their income as shown in Table 3-15. For
renter-occupied housing units, 1,038 households or 46 percent paid 30 percent or more for rent
compared to household income.
                                        Table 3-15 Households Overpaying for Housing
       Household                        Owners                           Renters                            Total
    Income (under             Households                        Households                    Households
                                                Percent                          Percent                            Percent
          $75,000)            Overpaying                        Overpaying                    Overpaying
 Less than $20,000                277              21%              328            32%              605               26%
 $20,000 - $34,999                240              18%              367            35%              607               26%
 $35,000 - $49,999                382              29%              115            11%              497               21%
 $50,000 - $74,999                422              32%              228            22%              650               28%
 Total                           1,321            100%             1,038          100%             2,359             100%
 Source: U.S. Census 2010
Long-Term Affordability
Affordable housing provided by City incentives is required to be maintained as affordable for at
least a period of 45 (owner-occupied) or 55 years (rental units).This issue of long-term
affordability is a subject of a number of existing programs that ensure that affordable units
maintain their status.
Affordability terms are secured by a promissory note and deed of trust, recorded on the
property prior to or concurrent with the initial occupancy (for rental units) or sale of property. The
promissory note is based on the monetary difference between the initial purchase and the initial
                                                              61
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
appraised value as an “affordability loan” or “silent second” payable to the City. The loan
accrues interest at a rate set by the City when the note is executed, amortized over 45 years.
Monthly payments (principal plus interest) on the affordability loan are typically waived as long
as eligible residents continue to own and reside in the property. The City of Arroyo Grande does
not have an equity-sharing program established. The City’s established priority has been to
maintain units as affordable. Therefore, they are only allowed to be sold at market value if the
seller is unable to sell to an eligible buyer within a specified time period. In such cases, equity
sharing provisions are established within the affordable housing agreement whereby the
difference between the affordable and market value is paid to the City to eliminate incentives
for conversion to market rate units.
It is apparent, based on this data regarding the supply of housing units, including the lack of
supply of rental units, and with the projected needs, that the households that appear to be in
the greatest need of housing assistance are those of low and very low-income.
3.5 Special Housing Needs Groups
This Section reviews the characteristics of households with special housing needs, including
elderly or senior households, families with female heads of households, large family households,
farmworker households, disabled persons/households, homeless people, and attainable housing.
Elderly/Senior Households
An analysis of the needs of elderly or senior households or persons is important for four reasons: 1)
many elderly have fixed, limited incomes; 2) many elderly persons are “over-housed” (living
alone or with two people in a three or four bedroom house); 3) some elderly have mobility and
health problems that can create special housing needs; and 4) recent projections indicate an
increase in the elderly population in the planning period, both those currently living in the area
or those that will be relocating to the area (in addition to data showing an increase in seniors
during the previous planning period).
According to the 2010 Census, there are a total of 4,686 owner-occupied housing units and
2,401 renter-occupied housing units of which 2,289 are senior households. Table 3-16 represents
householders by tenure and age in the City of Arroyo Grande.
                                              62

City of Arroyo Grande                                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
                                              Table 3-16 Senior Households
                                              Owner                 Renter                 Total
                                      Number      Percent    Number       Percent   Number     Percent
          Total 65 and older               1,796       38%         493        21%      2,289       32%
          Total 64 and under               2,890       62%       1,908        79%      4,798       68%
          Total (all ages)                 4,686      100%       2,401       100%      7,087      100%
          Source: U.S. Census 2010
Families with Female Heads of Households
The 2010 Census reported that of the total 7,087 households in the City, there were 653 female-
headed households with children and no husband present. This represents 9.2 percent of the
total households. Of these households, 388, or 51.8 percent had children less than 18 years of
age. Based upon the Census data for incomes in 2010, 101 families with a female householder,
no husband present and with related children less than 18 years were reported to be under the
poverty level.
                           Table 3-17 Housing Problems for Female head of Households
                                                                               2010
                                                                     Number           Percent
                  Total households                                     7087            100%
                  Total female householders                            1930             27%
                        Female non-family householder                  1277             18%
                        Female family householder, no
                                 husband present                        653             9%
                                   w/ children under 18                 330             5%
                  Source: U.S. Census 2010
Large Families/Households
Large families can have special housing needs if they cannot find affordable, large housing units
then and living conditions may become overcrowded. Table 3-17 shows the total occupied
housing units by the number of persons living within each unit. This information is shown for
owner-occupied and rental housing.
For owner-occupied units, the highest percentage is for a two-person unit (42%).Less than five
percent of the owner-occupied households are occupied by five or more persons. For renter-
occupied units, the highest percentage is a one-person household (36%).Less than seven
                                                       63
City of Arroyo Grande                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
percent of the renter-occupied units are occupied by five or more persons. These numbers are
generally low compared to the State as a whole, as well as many cities and counties.
                                       Table 3-18 Tenure by Household Size
                                        Owner-Occupied Housing Units         Renter-Occupied Housing Units
                                            Number            Percent          Number             Percent
  1-person household                               1,097              23%               871               36%
  2-person household                               1,989              42%               626               26%
  3-person household                                 643              14%               358               15%
  4-person household                                 621              13%               311               13%
  5-person household                                 223               5%               161                7%
  6-person household                                  66               1%                52                2%
  7-or-more person household                          47               1%                22                1%
  Total                                            4,686            100%              2,401             100%
  Source: U.S. Census 2010
Low and Extremely Low-Income Households
Lower income households (earning 80 percent or less of median household income) generally
have higher incidence of housing problems and overpayment (paying 30 percent or more of
income for housing costs). Table 3-18 below shows the percentage of low-, very low-, and
extremely low-income households with housing problems including overpayment for housing.
Extremely low-income households earn 30 percent or less of the median household income. As
of 2010, approximately 18 percent of Arroyo Grande households (775 households) had extremely
low incomes. Fifty-seven percent of extremely low-income households had housing problems
and were overpaying for housing. Of these households, the number of renter and owners was
nearly equivalent, at 28 percent and 29 percent respectively.
                            Table 3-19 Housing Problems for Lower Income Households
                                                Renters              Owners               Total
                                           Total    Percent     Total    Percent    Total    Percent
           Household Income <= 30 %
           HAMFI (Extremely Low-
           Income)                          405       29%        370       13%       775        18%
                                            220       54%        225       61%       445        10%
                   Any Housing Problems
                   Cost Burden > 30%        215       53%        210       57%       425        10%
                   Cost Burden > 50%        190       47%        160       43%       350         8%
           Household Income > 30% to
           <= 50% HAMFI (Very Low-
           Income)                          420       30%        195       7%        615        14%
                                                    64
City of Arroyo Grande                                                          2014-2019 Housing Element
                           Table 3-19 Housing Problems for Lower Income Households
                                                    Renters         Owners              Total
                                               Total   Percent Total   Percent    Total    Percent
                                                390       93%   130      67%       520        12%
                 Any Housing Problems
                 Cost Burden > 30%              265       63%   120      62%       385         9%
                 Cost Burden > 50%              155       37%    75      38%       230         5%
          Household Income > 50% to
          <= 80% HAMFI (Low-
          Income)                               360       25%   730      25%      1090        25%
                 Any Housing Problems          330        92%   275      38%       605        14%
                 Cost Burden > 30%              300       83%   435      60%       735        17%
                 Cost Burden > 50%               60       17%   295      40%       355         8%
          Household Income > 80% to
          <= 100% HAMFI (Moderate
          Income)                               200       14%   375      13%       575        13%
                 Cost Burden > 30%              200      100%   250      67%       450        10%
                 Cost Burden > 50%               0        0%    125      33%       125         3%
          Household Income > 100%
          HAMFI (Above Moderate
          Income)                                30       2%   1,290     44%      1,320       30%
                 Cost Burden > 30%               30      100%  1,075     83%      1,105       25%
                 Cost Burden > 50%               0        0%    215      17%       215         5%
                 TOTAL                         1415      100%  2,960    100%      4,375      100%
          Source: CHAS Databook, 2006 – 2010 ACS
Between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2019 the RHNA estimate for very low-income housing
need in Arroyo Grande is 60 housing units. Based on HCD standards, 50 percent of these should
be planned for extremely low-income households. Therefore, it is projected that an additional 30
extremely low-income households will be added to the City.
Farmworker Households
According to the 2010 Census, ACS estimates, there are 164 residents of Arroyo Grande
employed in farming, forestry, fishing and hunting or mining operations. Given the location and
environment of Arroyo Grande, it is assumed that a majority of those employed in these
professions are in the agricultural community.
Several studies that have been completed over the past 10 years found that most farmworkers
live in seriously substandard conditions. A majority of current farmworkers have families and thus
are residents versus migrant workers who reside or work for a period of time in the City but live
elsewhere. The actual percent of resident versus migrant workers in this area is unknown. The
major issue for resident farmworkers is that they are generally low-income and thus have to
                                                       65

City of Arroyo Grande                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
compete for housing with other lower income residents. The issue for many migrant workers is
that farm employers are not required to provide housing, so the migrants may have to find their
own housing, which sometimes is living in their car or in illegal units. The greatest need for migrant
workers is temporary seasonal housing. This could be in the form of bunk houses on the property
where the workers are employed. In summary, farmworkers generally earn low-incomes, live in
overcrowded units, and pay a disproportionate share of income for housing. The City is in
compliance with Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6.
Persons with Disabilities
The 2012 Census recorded the disability status of the civilian non-institutional population of City
residents. Approximately 12 percent of these residents in the City reported as having a disability.
The age breakdown can be seen in Table 3-19, showing that the largest percentage (57 %) of
the disabled population are 65 years of age or older. Only 3 percent of persons with disabilities
reported being under the age of 18.
                                  Table 3-20 Persons With Disabilities by Age
                                                                                  Number   Percent
              Under 18 years                                                           70      3%
              18 to 64 years                                                        1,340     64%
              65 years and over                                                     1,184     57%
              Total Civilian Non-institutionalized Population with disabilities     2,082    100%
         Source: U.S. Census 2012
There are two major problems facing persons with a disability: the need for housing that meets
particular physical needs (wheelchair accessible, etc.) and monetary needs. Because of limited
job opportunities, many persons with disabilities have incomes below the median.
Persons with disabilities living in Arroyo Grande may have varying housing needs depending on
the nature and severity of their disability. Persons with physical disabilities generally require
modifications to housing units such as wheelchair ramps, elevators, wide doorways, accessible
cabinetry, modified fixtures and appliances. If the disability prevents the person from operating
a vehicle, then proximity to services and access to public transportation are important.
If the physical disability prevents the person from working or limits their income, then the cost of
housing and needed modifications can be significant. Because physical handicaps vary, this
group rarely gravitates toward a single service organization. This makes estimating the number of
persons and specific needs difficult. The physical modification of housing is not necessary to
                                                   66
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
accommodate persons with mental disabilities, but they will generally require special services
and monetary support. Since jobs and income are often limited, affordable housing is important.
Issues related to those with a mental disability would suggest that there is a need for apartment
or other housing complexes that are reserved or designed to accommodate persons requiring
extra assistance. If the person is unable to drive, access to public transportation is very
important.
Although the City has not adopted a reasonable accommodation policy or ordinance for
persons with disabilities, the City has mechanisms, which allow for the modification of standards
and retrofitting to increase the suitability of homes to accommodate persons living with special
needs, including those with disabilities. In addition, the City proposes Program L.2-1 to create a
reasonable accommodation policy for the City.
Developmentally Disabled
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a "developmental disability" is
defined as a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can
be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual
which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term also includes
disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment
similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but does not include other
handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment; however, more severely disabled individuals require a group living
environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require
an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided.
Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for
the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an
appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) provided community-based
services to about 279,000 persons in 2014 with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The Tri-County Regional Center (TCRC) is one of 21 regional centers
in California that provides point of entry to services for people with developmental disabilities in
                                               67

City of Arroyo Grande                                                              2014-2019 Housing Element
Ventura, Santa Barbara, and San Luis Obispo Counties. The center is a private, non-profit
community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to
individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. In 2012, TCRC provided services to
approximately 11,600 persons in the Tri-County area. Table 3-20 shows the number of individuals
served by TCRC in the 93420 zip code. While this is the primary zip code for the City, the 93420 zip
code includes unincorporated areas within the County.
                                       Table 3-21 Developmentally Disabled Persons
Location                    0-14 years      15-22 years   23-54 years     55-65 years    65+ years     Total
93420                     44                41            82             24             3            194
Arroyo Grande             44                41            82             24             3            194
Source: Tri-County Regional Center, 2014
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, and HUD housing. Similar to the needs
of disabled residents and households mentioned above, the design of housing-accessibility
modifications, the proximity to services and transit, the availability of group living opportunities,
and consideration of the affordability of housing for people with disabilities living on a fixed
income represent some of the types of considerations that are important in serving this need
group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily housing (as required by State
and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the widest range of choices for
disabled residents.
There are local and county programs and services which provide housing and living assistance
for disabled residents. Locally the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo administers the Housing
Choice Voucher program, commonly known as Section 8, which provides long-term rental
assistance for families with children, elderly and disabled individuals, as well as families with
members who are disabled. Additionally, Transitions-Mental Health Association (TMHA), a
nonprofit organization serving San Luis Obispo County, provides housing assistance to disabled
individuals. HASLO and TMHA have partnered over the years to provide case management
services to homeless/disabled individuals.
In order to assist in the housing needs for persons with disabilities the City will continue to
implement program L.1-1 to encourage creation of housing for persons with disabilities.
Suggested models include coordinating housing activities and outreach with the Tri-County
                                                       68

City of Arroyo Grande                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
Regional Center and other local agencies, encouraging housing providers to designate a
portion of new affordable housing developments for persons with disabilities, especially persons
with developmental disabilities, and assisting individuals in locating and maintaining suitable
housing.
Homeless
The 2013 San Luis Obispo County Homeless Census and Survey provided a “point-in-time” survey
of the homeless population in South San Luis Obispo County, which includes the cities and
communities of Pismo Beach, Grover Beach, Oceano, Arroyo Grande, and Nipomo. The
homeless population in South County represents 38 percent of the total homeless population in
the County, which was reported at 2,186 people. Of the total homeless population in San Luis
Obispo County, 88 percent were over the age of 18. Past studies have indicated that the
majority of homeless persons are found within the City of San Luis Obispo, probably as a result of
the fact that most services for the homeless are centered there. Observations from service
providers and law enforcement indicate that a large share of the homeless in South County
reside in the beach towns.
Since 1989, the Community Action Partnership of San Luis Obispo County’s (CAPSLO) Homeless
Services program has been working to meet the needs of the homeless in the County, offering
emergency housing, on-site information, referral services and assistance in finding permanent
housing. This organization operates the Maxine Lewis Memorial shelter in San Luis Obispo, which
provides 50 beds nightly year-round. An additional 25 to 35 beds are added through the
Interfaith Coalition for the Homeless, bringing the overflow total to more than 25,000 shelter
nights provided per year. There are several other organizations in the County that provide
services and housing for the homeless, including several churches.
The City provides many services for the homeless that includes mental health services, drug and
alcohol services and student services. These resources are provided by the City as well as by the
support of the Homeless Services Oversight Council of San Luis Obispo County. San Luis Obispo
County has also incorporated a 10-year Plan to End Homelessness that was completed in 2008.
This plan includes goals in housing attainability, ongoing services for the homeless and
prevention action to divert individuals from becoming part of the cycle of homelessness.
                                             69

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Attainable Housing
Housing has become out of reach for most workers in San Luis Obispo County and the City of
Arroyo Grande. This has made it very difficult for the employers of many industries to recruit and
retain employees. It has also caused the situation that many employees must commute from
varying locations, causing traffic congestion and related air quality impacts. Additionally,
housing is out of reach for many others in lower income categories including seniors, single
mothers, those with special needs and others as discussed earlier in this chapter.
The City of Arroyo Grande has identified the provision of housing to those unable to afford
market-rate housing prices as a priority and a policy and program are included in this Housing
Element to establish an “Attainable Housing” program in the City. Defining “Attainable Housing”
will be part of this effort. The City envisions assessing whether proposed projects include
“Attainable Housing” as applications are submitted.
Elements considered part of “Attainable Housing” are anticipated to include but will not be
limited to:
       Projects with a high percentage of rental units
       Projects including single-room occupancy units (see also Program J.1-1)
       Projects in mixed-use districts
       Projects that include universal design elements (see also Program L.2-2)
       Infill projects, and
       Projects that include elements that exceed the mandatory California Green Building
        Code Standards in Title 24
Incentives available for “Attainable Housing” projects are anticipated to include but will not be
limited to:
       Reduced parking standards
       Setback reductions
       Impact fee reductions or waivers
                                             70

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
3.6 At Risk Housing Units
Existing affordable housing units in the City, including those available to low and very low-
income families that were created through government subsidies, may be eligible to convert to
market rate units. Such conversions may jeopardize a significant amount of the existing
affordable housing stock. Housing elements are required to:
        1) identify those low-income units that may convert to market rate units within 10 years;
        2) analyze the costs of preservation of these “at-risk” units versus replacing them;
        3) identify resources for preservation; 4) set objectives for preserving at risk-risk units; and
        5) incorporate programs to try to preserve the units as affordable housing.
During this reporting period, three of the twenty-nine units restricted to the moderate-income
level and two of the six units restricted to the low income level through the City’s inclusionary
housing program have also been lost. This loss is largely due to the formula used to determine
the maximum allowable sales price. Under the program, when interest rates go down, the
maximum affordable sales price goes up. Hence, in recent years, the decrease in the interest
rate has created a maximum affordable sales price that exceeds the market rate. Other losses
have been due to foreclosures. However, this situation is expected to stabilize as the housing
market recovers and interest rates are normalized. To the extent that subsidized housing units are
established in the City in the future, policies and programs shall be identified to ensure that these
affordable units may remain available for lower income families. Programs I.1-1 and I.1-2 address
situations where affordable units are at risk of converting to market rate.
                                                71

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
                               CHAPTER 4 - Housing Resources
This Chapter evaluates the availability of land and public services in Arroyo Grande to support
future residential development. The Chapter also summarizes financial resources available for
affordable housing and energy conservation opportunities.
4.1 Regional Housing Needs Determinations
State law requires councils of government to prepare Regional Housing Needs Plans (RHNP) for
all cities and counties within their jurisdiction. The RHNP for San Luis Obispo County, including the
City of Arroyo Grande was prepared by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments
(SLOCOG).The RHNP was adopted by SLOCOG in August 2013 and was subsequently accepted
by HCD. The RHNP is intended to assure that adequate sites and zoning exist to address
anticipated housing demand during the planning period (June 30, 2014 through June 30, 2019).
The RHNP sets targets to ensure the availability of sites to accommodate the housing needs of a
wide range of socioeconomic segments of a community.
To develop estimates of future housing needs by jurisdiction, SLOCOG evaluated past
construction trends, the relationship between job and housing opportunities, public service
availability, as well as housing needs provided by the State. SLOCOG, in its preparation of the
RHNP, considered the following factors in its distribution of the housing needs to the individual
jurisdictions:
         SLOCOG goal to increase the housing supply and the mix of housing types, tenure, and
          affordability in all jurisdictions within the region in an equitable manner in accordance
          with SLOCOGs Regional Transportation Plan and as envision under SB375.
         Concentration of new growth in each jurisdiction’s Target Development Areas.
         Each jurisdiction’s employment base and population growth in relation to regional
          employment and population growth;
         The extent to which a jurisdiction’s current income distribution differs from that of the
          regional average;
         The HCD determined regional housing needs: and
         The capacity of the presently zoned land in the unincorporated County for residential
          development in the above moderate-income category.
                                                  72

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                          2014-2019 Housing Element
State law requires that RHNP’s divide the specified housing allocation into four income groups.
The groups are defined as percentages of County median income. Table 4-1 displays the criteria
for the four income groups.
                                                  Table 4-1 Income Group
 Very Low                   Household income is less than 50% of the county median income.
 Low                        Household income is between 50% and 80% of the county median income.
 Moderate                   Household income is between 80% and 120% of the county median income.
 Above Moderate             Household income is greater than 120% of the county median income.
 Source: HCD Income Definitions
4.2 2014-2019 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
The total number of dwelling units that needs to be accommodated during the planning period
for Arroyo Grande is 242 housing units, as outlined in Table 4-2. The very low and low-income
categories make up 40 percent of the housing allocation.
                                Table 4-2 Housing Need Allocation by Income Category
                                                            Number                 Percent Share
                          Very Low                              60                     24.9%
                          Low                                   38                     15.6%
                          Moderate                              43                     17.6%
                          Above Moderate                       101                     41.8%
                          Total                                242                      100%
                          Source: Regional Housing Needs Plan 2013, San Luis Obispo Council of
                          Governments
According to HCD, based upon federal income standards, in 2014 the median household
income for a family of four in San Luis Obispo County was $77,000. Table 4-3 indicates the
income levels for 2014.
                                                          73

City of Arroyo Grande                                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
                                    Table 4-3 Income Limits, County of San Luis Obispo
    Number of
                          1               2           3            4      5           6        7         8
  Persons in HH
  Extremely
  low-income         $15,850        $18,100       $20,350     $22,600  $24,450    $26,250  $28,050   $29,850
  Very low-
  income             $26,400        $30,200       $33,950     $37,700  $40,750    $43,750  $46,750   $49,800
  Low-income         $42,250        $48,250       $54,300     $60,300  $65,150    $69,950  $74,800   $79,600
  Median
  Income             $53,900        $61,600       $69,300     $77,000  $83,150    $89,300  $9,500    $101,650
  Moderate
  Income             $64.700        $73,900       $83,150     $92,400  $99,800    $107,200 $114,600  $121,950
  Source: State Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014
Over the period from January 2014 to June 2014, 20 primary units, 1 secondary unit, and a 69 unit
assisted living facility were constructed or permitted in Arroyo Grande. Table 4-4, below, details
the income categories of the approved projects. A total of eight single family residences and
one second unit were constructed. The single-family residences are assumed above moderate.
The 1 secondary unit was assumed to be low-income based on affordability in the City, current
rents, and second unit regulations (See also Tables 3-13 and 3-14).The average market rate for
apartments ranges from about $1,051 per month for a one-bedroom apartment to $1,481 per
month for a two-bedroom with the lowest priced units ranging from $895 per month to about
$1,200 per month. The monthly rent that low-income households can afford ranges from $924 to
$1,040, placing many market-rate one-bedroom, two-bedroom and second units in the
affordable range for low-income households. In addition, pursuant to Arroyo Grande Municipal
Code Section 16.52.150, size limits are placed on second units depending on the zoning district
they are in. Given that the 1 constructed secondary unit is a one bedroom and less than 850
square feet in size, it is likely rented for less than $1,000 or provided to family members for no rent.
The 81 units approved during the planning period included one assisted living project, a new 69-
unit assisted living facility (see Table 4-4). These units are not income-restricted and provide food
and care; therefore, they are classified as “above moderate”. In addition to the 69-unit assisted
living facility, the remaining approved units have been in the above moderate-income
category.
                                                         74

City of Arroyo Grande                                                             2014-2019 Housing Element
                                  Table 4-4 Approved Projects January 2014-June 2014
                                                                                 Above        Total (added
  ID#                 Address             Very Low     Low       Moderate
                                                                               Moderate          across)
           880 Oak Park Blvd.                0           0           0             77               77
           228 Le Point Street               0           0           0              1                1
           308 Stillwell Drive               0           0           0              1                1
           324 Stillwell Drive               0           0           0              1                1
           328 Stillwell Drive               0           0           0              1                1
 Totals                                      0           0           0             81               81
 Source: City of Arroyo Grande, 2014
Due to the elimination of redevelopment agencies by the State as of December 2011, the City
will use funds from the City’s Affordable Housing in-Lieu Fee Program when feasible to finance
future affordable housing projects. The City strives to make funding available to local affordable
housing non-profit organizations to assist with housing projects when possible. However, the level
of funding the City can provide is not sufficient to address direct and associated costs of
providing this level of housing without increased State financial assistance.
After accounting for permit and construction activity in the period from January 2014 to June
2014, the City has a remaining RHNA of 152 units, 97 of those are very low and low-income (see
Table 4-5).
Table 4-6 shows the remaining RHNA for the planning period and the vacant land and
opportunity sites available for residential development. It is important to note that the City is not
responsible for the actual construction of these units. The City is, however, responsible for
creating a regulatory environment in which the private market can build units affordable to very
low, low, moderate, and above moderate households to meet the City’s allocation. This
includes the creation, adoption, and implementation of General Plan policies, development
standards, and/or economic incentives to encourage the construction of various types of units.
                                                      75

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
                            Table 4-5 City Share of Regional Housing Need 2014-2019
                                                                                                                      Total
                                                                                                    Above
                                           Very Low              Low           Moderate                             (added
                                                                                                  Moderate
                                                                                                                    across)
2014-2019 RHNA                                  60                38               43                101               242
Units Constructed/Approved                       0                 0                 0                89                89
Second Units                                     0                 1                 0                 0                1
Constructed/Approved
Remaining 2014-2019 RHNA                        60                37               43                 12               152
Source: Regional Housing Needs Plan 2013, San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, City of Arroyo Grande
                                        Table 4-6 Remaining RHNA, 2014-2019
                                                                                              Above           Total (added
                                          Very Low          Low         Moderate
                                                                                           Moderate               across)
Subtotal remaining RHNA                        60            37             43                  12                 152
Vacant Land Inventory1                              129                                90                          219
Total Remaining RHNA                                  0                                0                             0
Additional Sites
Second Unit Potential                          0             12             12                   0                   24
Opportunity Sites2                            139           127             0                   51                 317
Total Additional Sites                        139           139             12                  51                 341
Notes:
  1: Details about these sites are found in Table 4-7
  2: Details about these sites are found in Table 4-8
Source: Regional Housing Needs Plan 2013, San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, City of Arroyo Grande
As Table 4-6 shows, the City can meet all of its remaining RHNA with available vacant sites. The
City has vacant land available to accommodate 219 units. Of these, 129 units are located on
higher density sites and can be developed to accommodate the very low and low-income
allocation. Additionally, the City has identified opportunity sites and second unit development
potential,      which      provide      alternative        options      and     development           flexibility   and     could
accommodate over 300 units. Vacant land, underutilized land opportunities, and second unit
potential are discussed in Section 4.3 below.
4.3 Land Availability
State housing law requires that the housing element provide an inventory of land suitable and
available for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for
intensification and/or redevelopment. The purpose of this requirement is to identify sites that
could accommodate residential development as set forth by the RHNP. This analysis is not a
construction quota or an anticipated list of projects that will be constructed, given that the law
                                                            76
City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
recognizes that there may be limitations that would affect residential development, as well as
the fact that private development and market forces affect the level of housing construction.
Following are two tables (Tables 4-7 and 4-8) that provide listings of vacant and opportunity
(underutilized) sites available for housing construction, as well as Table 4-9 providing the sites
where projects have received entitlements. Figure 4-1 presents a housing opportunity inventory
map with locations for the sites discussed in Tables 4-7 through 4-9.
The City’s Land Use Element includes a “Mixed Use” land use category that encompasses
approximately 85 percent (254 acres) of all the commercially zoned land within the City. The
Development Code was updated in 2007 to implement the changes in the Land Use Element.
New development standards for the Village Core Downtown (VCD) and Village Mixed Use
(VMU) districts have been established including allowable densities of up to 15 dwelling units per
acre (densities were not previously established in the superseded Village Commercial district).
The City also rezoned properties within the General Commercial (GC) district to Gateway Mixed-
Use (GMU), Fair Oaks Mixed-Use (FOMU), and Traffic Way Mixed-Use (TMU) depending on
location. Properties in the Office, Industrial and Highway zoning districts have been rezoned to
Office Mixed-Use (OMU), Industrial Mixed-Use (IMU), and Highway Mixed-Use (HMU), respectively.
New development standards for these mixed-use districts have been established with maximum
densities ranging from 15 to 25 dwelling units per acre, and minimum densities set at 75 percent
of maximum for certain districts.
Consequently, most of the land (the exception is the Regional Commercial zoning district) within
the City is zoned for some level of residential development with minimum densities. This is a
significant change from what was allowed and analyzed in the City’s 2003 Housing Element.
The City recognizes that the State requires land zoned at a minimum of 20 units per acre to meet
the very low and low income housing allocation. With the flexible density for mixed-use zoned
areas the City is able to exceed the 20 units per acre, and in some areas only 10 percent of the
site is required to be commercial, allowing the remaining site to be developed as residential.
Recent high-density residential projects in the mixed-use zone include the Pike and Elm project
(22 du/ac) which was considered mixed-use due to its location adjacent to a commercial use
although the site is fully residential, and a People Self Help Housing (PSHH) project currently
under construction on East Grand Avenue built to 22 units per acre providing 36 low and very
                                               77

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
low-income units and is located in the Gateway Mixed-Use Zone. The City has demonstrated
that it is flexible in approving higher density residential projects. With the increase of allowable
densities as well as the increase of land suitable for residential development, the City has
expanded its capacity to develop affordable housing.
Vacant Land
The vacant land inventory identifies the realistic potential for 219 units. While many of the vacant
parcels are expected to accommodate moderate- and above moderate-income households,
there are several sites that are appropriate for high-density housing units for very low- and low-
income households, accommodating approximately 129 very low- and low-income units. The
number of very low- and low-income units is based on conservative estimates and allocating a
portion of the site for non-residential development. For sites located in a PED zone, residential
uses are not permitted on the ground floor facing the street and, therefore, it is assumed a
minimum of 10 percent of the site would be dedicated to commercial and retail uses. Site
number 10 (discussed in Table 4-7) can accommodate all but three of the very low and low-
income housing need. This site is subject to PED regulation and therefore must be developed as
a mixed-use property. As this site is located adjacent to very-high density multifamily residential
land use and a multifamily apartment zone, it is anticipated this site will be built to maximum
density capacity as compatible with surrounding residential uses. The remaining three units can
be accommodated by the other vacant high density sites, which are not subject to the PED
regulation.
Second Units
A review of City planning permit records indicated that five second units are constructed, on
average, every year. Using this historic average, it is assumed that 25 second units will be
permitted between now and June 2019, with one already constructed. Based on affordability
calculations (See Table 3-14) and current rental rates it is expected that the second units will be
affordable to low-income and moderate income households. However, the vacant land
inventory and opportunity sites have sufficient capacity to meet the RHNA target without relying
on second units.
Underutilized Sites
While the vacant sites identified in Table 4-7 are able to accommodate the remaining RHNA, the
City has also identified opportunity sites with some existing development that are zoned for
residential development (see Table 4-8). These sites are suitable for infill and redevelopment to
                                              78
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
provide alternate opportunities for new housing development and affordable units. The
opportunity sites provide the possibility for an additional 317 units total including 139 very low-
income and 127 low-income units. The City’s General Plan Land Use Element identifies numerous
polices to promote a variety of housing types and affordability diversification.
In addition to the sites in Tables 4-7 and 4-8, the City recently annexed a 48.74-acre site located
south of the City limits at the southeast terminus of Castillo Del Mar. The property was approved
for a 16 lot subdivision (VTTM 1789) by the San Luis Obispo County Planning Commission in 2008.
The applicant revised the project to include six additional lots (VTTM 3048, “Heights at Vista Del
Mar”), which the County approved in December 2013. A Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) for the project established a strategy to provide water to Tract 3048 by utilizing a portion
of water conservation offsets paid by the developer.            Water availability is therefore from
conservation rather than a new water supply. The applicant is in the process of installing required
public improvements for the project. The 22 units are above the moderate-income level.
                                              79

      City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                                         Table 4-7 Vacant Sites Inventory
                                                                          *Number
                                       Site      GP
                           Address                                           of                         Site
 ID #        APN                      Size      Land   Zoning     Density                 Notes
                                                                          Dwelling                   Constraints
                                     (acres)     Use
                                                                            Units
Low Density Sites
   1    007-011-048,   100 Rodeo       2.9       CF     PD 1.3     4.5/ac    13      Grace
        047            Dr.                                                Mod/AM     Church
                                                                                     Property
   2    007-011-040    Rodeo Dr.       6.9     MFR &    MF/RS       9/ac     20      County
                                                 SFR                (MF)  Mod/AM     Property
                                                                   2.5/ac            (mixed
                                                                     (RS)            zoning)
   3    Portion of     PF & SF         5.0      CF &    PF/SF      4.5/ac     4      City Property
        007-011-044    Old Ranch                 SFR                      Mod/AM     (South
                       Rd.                                                           County
                                                                                     Regional
                                                                                     Center;
                                                                                     mixed
                                                                                     zoning)
   4    077-051-052,   Hillcrest Dr.  1.88       MU       MF        9/ac     14      Mankins/ City
        053; portion                                                      Mod/AM     Project
        of 077-061-                                                                  Pending
        016
   5    Portion of     Hillcrest Dr.  1.12       MU       MF        9/ac     10      Mankins
        077-055-061                                                       Mod/AM
   6    007-031-038;   251 Corbett    5.08     C/OS     PF/RS      2.5/ac     8                     creek
        007-791-034    Canyon                  & SFR                      Mod/AM                    setback
                                                                                                    area
   7    007-011-041    Grace Lane     7.43       SFR    PD 1.3     2.5/ac    11                     steep
                       and Rodeo                                          Mod/AM                    slopes
                       Dr.
   8    077-163-001    Cedar &         0.6       SFR      SF       4.5/ac     3      SF Infill
                       Aspen                                              Mod/AM
                       Streets
   9    006-095-024    Castillo Del   11.0     SFR LD     RH       .67/ac     7
                       Mar                                                Mod/AM
High Density Sites
  10    077-111-072    143 & 147       4.2       MU     GMU/       15/ac              RV Storage
                       Brisco Rd.                       **PED     (25/ac             10%
                                                                      for    94      commercial
                                                                   mixed   VL/Low
                                                                     use)            90%
                                                                                     residential
  11    077-011-010    700 Oak        0.73       MU     OMU        15/ac  7 VL/Low   50% of site
                       Park Blvd.                                 (20/ac             due to
                                                                      for            mixed-use
                                                                   mixed             zoning
                                                                     use)
  12    077-012- 013   1650 Chilton   1.88       MU     OMU        15/ac     18      50% of site
                       St.                                        (20/ac   VL/Low    due to
                                                                      for            mixed-use
                                                                   mixed             zoning
                                                                     use)
                                                       80
       City of Arroyo Grande                                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
                                                  Table 4-7 Vacant Sites Inventory
                                                                                          *Number
                                                Site       GP
                                  Address                                                      of                            Site
 ID #            APN                           Size      Land      Zoning      Density                      Notes
                                                                                           Dwelling                      Constraints
                                              (acres)     Use
                                                                                            Units
  13     077-223-064           142 S.           0.8       MU         OMU       15/ac          10                        One parcel
                               Halcyon Rd.                                     (20-ac      VL/Low                       is
                                                                                 for                                    completely
                                                                               mixed                                    surrounded
                                                                                use)                                    by the
         077-223-068                                      MU        FOMU       15/ac                                    other
                                                                               (25/ac                                   parcel.
                                                                                 for                                    Two
                                                                               mixed                                    separate
                                                                                use)                                    owners
                                                                                              90           219 total
                                                                                          Mod/AM             units
Totals
                                                                                             129
                                                                                           VL/Low
Legend:
AM – Above-Moderate Income
Mod – Moderate Income
Low – Low Income
VL – Very Low Income
Notes:
*The estimated number of dwelling units for high density zones is conservative. Sites zoned FOMU or GMU can yield up to 25 du/ac.
Sites zoned OMU are assumed to include 50% commercial development, which is not a requirement.
**PED = Residential not permitted in pedestrian oriented storefront locations on ground floor facing E. Grand Avenue, East/West
Branch Street or prime real estate space within shopping centers.
Source: City of Arroyo Grande, 2014
                                                                   81

      City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
                                      Table 4-8 Opportunity Sites Inventory
ID #    APN         Address    Site  GP Land    Existing  Density      Existing    Addt’l          Existing Uses,
                              Size     Use       Zoning                  (no.       (no.   Surrounding Uses, Other
                             (acres)                                  dwelling    dwelling          Information
                                                                        units)     units)
High Density Sites
 14   007-531-     980 &      1.86      AG        AG         n/a          2       14 (VL)  Possible Farm Worker
      002, 005     1010                                     (AG)                           Housing: Farm worker
                   Huasna                                                                  housing is allowed on
                   Rd.                                      9/ac                           this site. Density of farm
                                                            (MF)                           worker housing is
                                                                                           determined through
                                                                                           discretionary review.
                                                                                           Another option is to
                                                                                           rezone to MF (9 du/ac).
                                                                                           Surrounding uses
                                                                                           include a mobile home
                                                                                           park and agricultural
                                                                                           uses. Owners are Dunn
                                                                                           Douglass Family Trust
                                                                                           and Charles Cabassi.
 15   077-204-     370 - 382   1.8      MU        OMU      15/ac          5       11 (VL)  Existing use is single
      014, 026,    So.                                     (20/ac                11 (Low)  family residential
      031, 036,    Halcyon                                 mixed                           development (older,
      037          Rd.                                      use)                           small homes), site is
                                                                                           underutilized.
                                                                                           Surrounding uses
                                                                                           include Arroyo Grande
                                                                                           Hospital, Harloe
                                                                                           Elementary School,
                                                                                           and multi-family
                                                                                           development. Owners
                                                                                           are Barbara Finn and
                                                                                           Jones Family Trust.
 16   077-201-     910         0.7      MU        OMU      15/ac          3        3 (VL)  Existing use is single
      012          Dodson                                  (20/ac                 4 (Low)  family residential
                   Way,                                    mixed                           development (older,
                   224 & 230                                use)                           small homes), site is
                   Halcyon                                                                 underutilized.
                   Rd.                                                                     Surrounding uses
                                                                                           include commercial
                                                                                           and residential
                                                                                           development. Owner
                                                                                           is Tierra Pacific
                                                                                           Development, LLC.
                                                       82

     City of Arroyo Grande                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
                                        Table 4-8 Opportunity Sites Inventory
ID #   APN       Address       Site    GP Land    Existing  Density      Existing     Addt’l          Existing Uses,
                               Size       Use      Zoning                   (no.       (no.   Surrounding Uses, Other
                            (acres)                                      dwelling    dwelling          Information
                                                                           units)     units)
 17  077-111-   1070-1150     Total       MU       FOMU      15/ac        Existing   30 (VL)  Assume back lot and
     009, 011,  E. Grand    area =                           (25/ac        com-     30 (Low)  infill development.
     012, 014,  Ave.,        11.92                           mixed       mercial              Multiple parcels along
     057;                   acres.                            use)      buildings,            Grand Avenue. Existing
     077-112-   1013-1167                                                parking,             use is strip mall
     001 to     E. Grand   Assume                                       couple of             development.
     006;       Ave.           1/3                                       residen-             Surrounding uses are
     077-113-                avail.                                         ces.              primarily other similar
     015, 016              for infill,                                                        commercial uses. The
     077-211-                   or                                                            subject properties are
     010, 015,             about 4                                                            under multiple
     018, 022               acres.                                                            ownerships.
     to 024,
     035 to
     037,
     077-221-
     002, 003,
     026, 027,
     028, 031,
     036, 037
 18  077-203-   265 & 279      0.4        VHD        SF1     25/ac            2      13 (VL)  Existing use is single-
     009, 019   Alder                    (Very                                      13 (Low)  family residential. The
                                          High                                                two parcels are
                                       Density)                                               adjacent to and
                                                                                              owned by Tose Family
                                                                                              Trust, which operates a
                                                                                              senior assisted living
                                                                                              facility (Alder House).
                                                                                              Surrounding uses
                                                                                              include single- and
                                                                                              multi-family residential
                                                                                              and office
                                                                                              development.
 19  077-241-   406 S.        9.84     MFR/CF/    MFA/PF     15-25/        1 SFR,    30 (VL)  Special needs or high
     013, 035,  Elm; 1210,    (Esti-      MU       /OMU        ac       Church &    30 (Low)  density. Current uses
     062        1212 &     mated                                           care               include single family
                1220        25% of                                        facility            residence, residential
                Farroll      prop-                                                            care facility (Arroyo
                Ave.           erty                                                           Grande Care Center
                            devel-                                                            owned by Compass
                             oped                                                             Health, Inc.) and
                           at max-                                                            Coastal Christian
                             imum                                                             School (grades K-12).
                           density)                                                           Property owners are
                                                                                              Mathias Family Trust,
                                                                                              McMullen Juanita
                                                                                              Living Trust, and
                                                                                              Landmark Missionary
                                                                                              Baptist Church.
                                                         83

     City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
                                      Table 4-8 Opportunity Sites Inventory
ID #     APN       Address     Site  GP Land    Existing  Density      Existing    Addt’l         Existing Uses,
                               Size    Use       Zoning                  (no.       (no.   Surrounding Uses, Other
                             (acres)                                  dwelling    dwelling         Information
                                                                        units)     units)
 20  077-204-     280          0.8      MU        OMU      15/ac          1        5 (VL)  MF Infill. The property is
     028          Halcyon                                  (20/ac                 6 (Low)  developed with a small
                  Road                                     mixed                           single-family residence
                                                            use)                           and therefore
                                                                                           underutilized.
                                                                                           Surrounding uses
                                                                                           include commercial
                                                                                           and high density
                                                                                           residential
                                                                                           development. Owner
                                                                                           is George Gay.
 21  077-141-     1203-1243    7.5      MU       GMU/      15/ac          0       28 (VL)  Existing commercial
     018, 027,    E. Grand                         MF     (50% of                28 (Low)  buildings. Tri-W/ RDA
     028          Ave.                                       site)                         (identified
                                                           (25/ac                          redevelopment area of
                                                           mixed                           existing shopping
                                                            use)                           center)
 22  077-011-     1587 El      1.11     MU        OMU      15/ac          0        5 (VL)  Existing office building.
     011          Camino                                  (50% of                 5 (Low)  Surrounding uses
                  Real                                       site)                         include, office,
                                                           (20/ac                          residential and vacant.
                                                           mixed                           Owner is Dechance
                                                            use)                           Living Trust. Constraints
                                                                                           include mature oak
                                                                                           trees.
Low Density Sites
 23  007-571-     Lierly Ln.  12.77     SFR        RR      4.5/ac         12     25 (AM)   This site is subject to
     all          & E.                 Med.                                                Neighborhood Plan
     except       Cherry             Density                                               requirements to
     606          Ave.               with NP                                               coordinate
                                     Overlay                                               infrastructure
                                                                                           improvements and
                                                                                           circulation. Existing use
                                                                                           is low density single-
                                                                                           family development
                                                                                           under multiple
                                                                                           ownerships.
                                                                                           Surrounding uses
                                                                                           include single-family
                                                                                           residences and active
                                                                                           agricultural land. Site
                                                                                           constraints include
                                                                                           creek setback and
                                                                                           agricultural buffer.
                                                       84

        City of Arroyo Grande                                                              2014-2019 Housing Element
                                               Table 4-8 Opportunity Sites Inventory
ID #       APN          Address       Site    GP Land     Existing   Density     Existing     Addt’l           Existing Uses,
                                     Size        Use       Zoning                  (no.         (no.    Surrounding Uses, Other
                                    (acres)                                      dwelling    dwelling            Information
                                                                                  units)       units)
 24     007-861-       1041          6.62        SFR          RS     2.5/ac         3        13 (AM)    Existing are 3 single-
        018, 070;      Huasna                    Low                                                    family residences on 2
        007-751-       Rd. &                  Medium                                                    parcels. One of the
        004            1075                    Density                                                  properties is vacant.
                       Huasna                                                                           Owners include Beck
                       Rd.                                                                              Family Trust and Nancy
                                                                                                        Kelley. Surrounding
                                                                                                        land uses include low
                                                                                                        density single family
                                                                                                        residential
                                                                                                        development and
                                                                                                        agriculture. The
                                                                                                        properties are
                                                                                                        somewhat constrained
                                                                                                        by slope.
 25     077-192-       1029 Ash       1.3       CF/SF         SF     4.5/ac         2        4 (AM)     SF Infill. Existing use is
        026, 031       Street                                                                           low-density single-
                                                                                                        family residential.
                                                                                                        Surrounding the
                                                                                                        property is single-family
                                                                                                        residential
                                                                                                        development. Owner
                                                                                                        of the property is
                                                                                                        Edmondson Living Trust.
                                                                                                        The land use
                                                                                                        designation of CF
                                                                                                        should be changed to
                                                                                                        SFR consistent with the
                                                                                                        zoning.
 26     007-501-       513 Ide       1.63       C/OS        PF/SF    4.5/ac         1        5 (AM)     SFR Infill. Existing use is
        012            Street                    SFR                                                    one single-family
                                                                                                        residence.
                                                                                                        Surrounding the site is
                                                                                                        single-family residential
                                                                                                        development.
                                                                                                        Property owner is Wilks
                                                                                                        Trust. Site constraint is
                                                                                                        creek setback.
 27     006-095-       Valley        7.32      SFR LD        RH      .67/ac         1        4 (AM)     Owned by Judith
        025            Road                                                                             Haddox
                                                                                              51 AM           317 total units
                                                                                              0 Mod
Totals
                                                                                            127 Low
                                                                                              139 VL
Legend:
AM – Above-Moderate Income
Mod – Moderate Income
Low – Low Income
VL – Very Low Income
Note 1: Current zoning is not in compliance with the land use. A proposal to expand Alder House was recently submitted. The zoning
will be brought into compliance through this project proposal.
Source: City of Arroyo Grande, 2014
                                                                  85

   City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
                                       Table 4-9 Approved Projects 2007-2014
                                                                                         Total      Status
                                               Very                           Above
 ID#                      Address                        Low      Moderate             (added
                                               Low                           Moderate
                                                                                       across)
  28      Rancho Grande                                                                             0 units
          (VTTM 01-001)                          0        0           0         15         15   constructed
  29      451 Hidden Oak Rd.                                                                        0 units
                                                 0        0           0         10         10
          (Nester)                                                                              constructed
  30      415 E. Branch St.                                                                         0 units
                                                 0        0           2         22         24
          (Creekside)                                                                           constructed
  31      Southwest corner of E. Grand          18        18          0         0          36      36 units
          Ave. and S. Courtland St. (PSHH)                                                      constructed
                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                 occupied
                                                                                                 (October
                                                                                                    2014)
  32      The Pike and S. Elm St.                                                                   Under
                                                 0        0           0         28         28
                                                                                                construction
  33      Myrtle St. & E. Cherry Ave.                                                              19 units
                                                 0        0           0         28         28
          (Cherry Creek)                                                                        constructed
  34      Grace Lane                                                                               17 units
                                                 0        0           4         15         19
                                                                                                constructed
  35      Pearwood Ave.                                                                             0 units
                                                 0        0           0         2          2
          (Zogata)                                                                              constructed
  36      Pearwood Ave.                                                                             0 units
                                                 0        0           0         4          4
          (City)                                                                                constructed
 n/a      Heights at Vista Del Mar                                                                  0 units
                                                 0        0           0         22         22
                                                                                                constructed
Totals                                                                                             72 units
                                                18        18          6        146        188
                                                                                                constructed
Source: City of Arroyo Grande, 2011
                                                        86
City of Arroyo Grande                              2014-2019 Housing Element
Figure 4-1 Housing Opportunity Sites Inventory Map
                                       87
City of Arroyo Grande                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
4.4 Infrastructure Resources
This section examines the availability and capacity of public facilities and services within the City
that are essential to residential development. These include water, sewer, public safety, and
schools.
Water
The City receives water from both groundwater and treated surface water. Groundwater is
extracted from two separate basins: the Santa Maria Groundwater Basin and the Pismo
Formation. The Santa Maria Basin is adjudicated, and the City currently has a right to 1,323 acre
feet per year (AFY). The Pismo Formation is not adjudicated and the City has established 160 AFY
of appropriative rights. The most significant portion of the City’s water supply is from Lopez Lake.
The City is in contract with the San Luis Obispo County Water Conservation and Flood Control
District Zone III for an entitlement of 2,290 AFY of treated surface water. The current total supply
available to the City is 3,873 AFY.
In calendar year 2013 the City used 3,111 acre feet of water, which calculates to a per capita
rate of 164 gallons per day. If the per capita water consumption remains the same, the City’s
buildout population of 20,000 would require an annual supply of 3,674 acre feet, which can be
met with the current water supply. Table 4-10 shows the current and projected water supply
through 2030.
                 Table 4-10 Current and Projected Water Supply – Acre feet per year (AFY)
 Water Supply Sources                 2010           2015           2020         2025           2030
 Groundwater – Santa
                                      1,323         1,323          1,323        1,323           1,323
 Maria Groundwater Basin
 Groundwater – Pismo
                                        80            200           200          200             200
 Formation1
 County of San Luis Obispo
                                      2,290         2,290          2,290        2,290           2,290
 Lopez Reservoir Project
 Oceano Community
                                       100
 Services District 2
                        TOTAL         3,793         3,813          3,813        3,813           3,813
 Notes:
 1. Assumes 80 AFY of groundwater from Well No. 9, 80 AFY from Well No. 10, and 40 AFY from Well No.
 11 will be available as a reliable source of supply from 2015 through 2030.
 2. Assumes that the remaining three years of the five year contract of 100 AFY with OCSD will be
 utilized   in 2012,2013 and 2014.
                                                        88

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
The projected water supply in 2015 is 3,813 AFY when considering the loss of 100 AFY from the
OCSD and the addition of 40 AFY with Well No. 11, a net loss of 60 AFY. Additional water supply
opportunities include options of purchasing State Water or recycled water.
The 2010 Urban Water Management Plan Update proposes that water use be reduced to 149
gallons per capita per day (gpcd) to be in compliance with the California Water Code and
Senate Bill X7-7 (SB7). SB7 requires urban water suppliers using more than 3,000 acre feet per
year or serving more than 3,000 connections to reduce per capita water use by 20% by the year
2020. Strategies from the City’s Water Conservation Plan and mandatory water conservation
measures will be utilized to achieve the required reduction.
Sewer
The City maintains a sewer collection system of approximately 65 miles of sewer main and five
sewer lift stations. The collection system is managed under the guidance of the Sewer System
Management Plan and discharge permit from the State Water Resources Control Board.
The system capacity is currently being modeled with the preparation of the Wastewater System
Master Plan Update. The Master Plan will detail all system requirements including main
replacements and upgrades. The collection system conveys the sewage to the South San Luis
Obispo County Sanitation District. The District provides collection, treatment and disposal
services for the City. The treatment plant is located in Oceano and also treats sewage from the
Oceano Community Services District and the City of Grover Beach. The plant is designed to treat
an average daily flow of 4.2 million gallons per day. The current average flow is 2.9 million gallons
per day. The plant has been estimated to provide ample service until at least 2025.
Public Safety
The City of Arroyo Grande Police Department is responsible for law enforcement, investigations
and crime prevention programs with the City limits. The Five Cities Fire Authority was established
in July 2010 by a joint Powers Agreement between the Cities of Arroyo Grande, Grover Beach
and Oceano Community Services District and is responsible for providing fire protection and
medical response. The City historically has low levels of major crime or fire loss despite below
average police and fire department staffing. There are no uniform standards regarding
appropriate or adequate numbers of officers per number of residents. Average response time
with the City limits is between 4 to 6 minutes, which for some of the areas of the City is consistent
with a recognized standard of 5 minutes.
                                                 89

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
It is generally expected that police and fire resources will improve with additional development
that generates increased tax revenues. However, with the recent shifts of local tax revenues to
the State, and decreasing State revenues being provided to local governments, additional
development may cause a decrease in public safety for the community.
Schools
School facilities for Arroyo Grande are provided by the Lucia Mar Unified School District, which
provides educational services in the South County Area, which includes Grover beach, Pismo
Beach, Oceano, Nipomo and the remaining unincorporated county. The District operates and
maintains 11 elementary schools, three middle schools, and three high schools. With the
exception of Nipomo High, recent studies have indicated that most of the schools, with the
exception of Nipomo High, were built in the 1950’s and 1960’s and thus may be subject to
needed renovation. Information provided in the Arroyo Grande General Plan EIR adopted in
1991 indicated that many of the schools were operating at an over capacity level. With the
opening of Nipomo High in 2002, the high school level capacity has been resolved.
According to the 2014 San Luis Obispo County Annual Education Report, enrollment is projected
to slightly decline due to the number of graduating seniors exceeding the amount of students
entering kindergarten. This can be attributed to a recent studies report in the San Luis Obispo
Tribune newspaper indicate that the population in the area will be shifting from families to a
more senior population, mainly because of the cost of housing. Recent State budget cuts are
also affecting the operation ability of the school district to provide education services.
4.5 Financial Resources
Many State programs exist to provide cities, communities, and counties financial assistance in
the development, preservation, and rehabilitation of units for workforce housing. The
Department of Housing and Community Development identifies and provides detailed
information on the grants and loans available for affordable and workforce housing, which are
listed below. A couple of Federal programs are included as well.
Affordable Housing Innovation Program: This program provides grants or loans to fund the
development or preservation of workforce housing.
         Golden State Acquisition Fund (GSAF) Affordable Housing Innovation Program: This
         program provides quick acquisition financing for the development or preservation of
         workforce housing. Provides loans for developers through a nonprofit fund manager.
                                                 90

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
        http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ahif/ahip-l.html
        Local Housing Trust Fund Program: Matching grants (dollar-for-dollar) to local housing
        trust funds dedicated to the creation or preservation of affordable housing that are
        funded on an ongoing basis from private contributions or public sources that are not
        otherwise restricted in use for housing programs.
        http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ahif/lhtf.html
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act – CDBG Recovery Program (CDBG-R): This is an
economic development grant program and includes goals of modernizing infrastructure,
improving energy efficiency, expanding educational activities, and access to healthcare. The
program disburses housing-related grants for single- and multi-family housing to rehabilitate
housing, acquire rental units, homeownership assistance, and activities complementing new
construction.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ahif/cdbgr.html
CalHome Program: Provides grants to local agencies and nonprofit developers to assist very-low
income homeowners through deferred payment loans as well as direct, forgivable loans to assist
development projects.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/calhome
Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG): Provides grants to fund projects that serve homeless
individuals and families with supportive services, emergency shelter/transitional housing, assisting
persons at risk of becoming homeless with homelessness prevention assistance, and providing
permanent housing to the homeless population.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/esg/index.html
Enterprise Zone Program: Provides incentives such as sales tax credits and operation deductions
for business investment.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ez/EZoverview.html
Governor’s Homeless Initiative: Provides loans and grants for the development of permanent
supportive housing for chronically homeless residents who suffer from severe mental illness.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ghi
                                                  91

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
HOME Investment Partnerships Program: Provides cities, counties, and nonprofit organizations
with grants and low-interest loans to create and retain affordable housing.
www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/
Infill Infrastructure Grant Program: Provides grants to assist in the creation and rehabilitation of
infrastructure that supports higher-density affordable and mixed-income housing in places
designated for infill.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/iig/
Mobilehome Park Resident Ownership Program (MPROP): Provides loans to finance the
preservation of affordable mobilehome parks by conversion to ownership or control by resident
organizations, nonprofit housing sponsors, or local public agencies.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mprop/
Multifamily Housing Program (MHP): Provide deferred payment loans to fund the construction,
rehabilitation, and preservation of permanent and transitional rental units for supportive housing.
This includes housing for low-income residents with disabilities, or those who are at risk of
homelessness.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp
Office of Migrant Services: Provides grants to local government agencies that contract with HCD
to operate OMS centers in California. OMS centers provide safe and affordable seasonal rental
housing and support services for migrant farmworker families.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/oms
Predevelopment Loan Program: Provides short-term loans for financing low-income housing
projects.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/pdlp
State CDBG Program Economic Development Allocation: Provides grants for planning and
technical assistance and the creation or maintenance of jobs for rural low-income workers.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/EconDevelopment.html
State CDBG Program Community Development Allocation: Provides grants to fund housing,
public improvement, community facilities, public services, and planning and technical
assistance that benefit lower-income residents in rural communities.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/CommunityDevelopment.html
                                                 92
City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Local Housing Funds
The City has an inclusionary housing ordinance. Fees collected under the ordinance are kept in
the In-Lieu Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Funding from this source can be directed to affordable
housing projects in the City and/or used to leverage State and federal housing funds.
As of June 30, 2014, the In-Lieu Affordable Housing Trust Fund had funds in the amount of $81,000
devoted to affordable housing. To date, the City has allocated funds from this source for two
affordable senior housing projects. This fund will increase during the housing period as additional
projects are developed. The City has also another fund used for affordable housing, the
Successor RDA Housing Function. The Successor RDA fund currently has a negative balance, as
the City recently paid HASLO for an affordable housing project at 224 S. Halcyon in June, 2014.
Another source of local housing funding is through the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust
Fund (SLOCHTF), which is a private nonprofit corporation created to increase the supply of
affordable housing in San Luis Obispo County for very low, low and moderate income
households. SLOCHTF provides financing and technical assistance to help private developers,
nonprofit corporations and government agencies produce and preserve homes that working
families, seniors on fixed incomes and persons with disabilities can afford to rent or buy. More
information on SLOCHTF can be found at www.slochtf.org.
                                                  93

City of Arroyo Grande                                                2014-2019 Housing Element
                             Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
The price of a home is based upon several basic costs: land, materials, labor, financing rates
and insurance, government requirements and fees, as well as environmental constraints. The first
two sections of this Chapter discuss governmental constraints and environmental and public
service constraints.
The cost of land, materials, and labor are determined by the free market economy. Financing
rates and insurance costs are set by the capital markets and State and federal regulations.
These items are discussed in the last Section under nongovernmental requirements.
5.1 Governmental Constraints
The intent of this sub-section is to analyze governmental constraints that affect housing
development, as well as to identify those that may be modified to reduce barriers to the
maintenance, improvement or development of housing for all income levels.
The California Legislature has delegated to local governments specific responsibilities and a
certain amount of discretionary control over the development and use of land. Through land
use controls, development review procedures, and fees, cities influence the location, density,
type, size, quality and appearance of housing. These requirements significantly affect the cost
and availability of housing.
Many of these controls are required by local government in response to State and federal
mandates to protect public health and safety, and others are adopted to achieve the desired
quality of life and objectives of the local community.
Land Use and Development Controls
The primary policy tool for promoting a balanced use of land and resources is through the City’s
General Plan. The 2001 General Plan establishes an overall framework for development and
conservation of land in the City, primarily through the Land Use Element. State law divides the
required content of a general plan into seven distinct elements, and requires that the General
Plan be designed as a balanced, integrated document that is internally consistent. Housing is
one of seven elements and has a number of issues the City must address.
                                                95

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
The primary means to implement the General Plan is the Development Code, which establishes
development standards, intensity of development, and minimum site standards. Various
residential and mixed-use zones are established which are intended to implement the densities
set by the General Plan. Other requirements in the Development Code are setbacks, lot
coverage, parking, open space and other related property development standards. Table 5-1
provides a comparison of the land use designations from the General Plan Land Use Element
(including 2003 amendments) to the zones implemented by the Development Code. Table 5-1
also shows the maximum density per land use designation.
The Development Code was recently updated to include regulations that increased the
allowable height to enable higher densities. This issue was addressed through implementation of
Program B-4.1 in the 2003 Housing Element and resulting Development Code amendments.
Mixed use districts located along the East Grand Avenue corridor and South Halcyon Road allow
building heights up to 35 feet and three stories with the ability to go up to 40 feet in some districts
depending on the building size and proximity to residential development. The Industrial Mixed
Use (IMU) district along El Camino Real allows heights to 30 feet and three stories. All Multiple-
Family zoning districts remain at 30 feet or two stories. Minor Exceptions can allow up to 33 feet in
these districts. Housing types permitted by residential and mixed use zoning districts are provided
in Tables 5-2 and 5-3. Residential zone development standards are shown in Table 5-4, Multi-
family and other zones development standards are shown in Table 5-5, and Mixed-Use
development standards are shown in Table 5-6.
Multi-family projects of 2 to 4 units are permitted subject to a Minor Use Permit (MUP), which is an
administrative process. With these projects, the Architectural Review Committee (ARC) makes a
recommendation to the Community Development Director. Multi-family projects greater than 4
units require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP), which is a discretionary review process. The ARC
considers all CUPs associated with development projects and makes a recommendation to the
City Council, Planning Commission and/or Community Development Director. Design Review
(DR) permits are limited to residential subdivisions approved with specific design guidelines. The
ARC reviews DR applications for consistency with the approved design guidelines and makes a
recommendation to the Community Development Director. Chapter 2.19 of the Municipal Code
outlines the functions, duties, procedures, and guiding purposes in reviewing projects for the
ARC. The function of the ARC is to make recommendations to decision makers regarding the
administration of the provisions of Title 16 (Development Code), whenever applicable, in a
manner that will:
                                                  96
City of Arroyo Grande                                                          2014-2019 Housing Element
     1. Be consistent with the requirements of the General Plan and of Title 16;
     2. Develop and maintain a pleasant and harmonious environment;
     3. Promote and enhance real property values;
     4. Conserve the City’s natural beauty;
     5. Preserve and enhance its distinctive visual character;
     6. Ensure orderly and harmonious development of the City; and
     7. Preserve historic structures and neighborhoods.
     The ARC meets twice per month.
Development applications are subject, in many cases, to the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA).CEQA requires that development applications be subject to an environmental
review of the impacts that would result from implementation of a project.
The City, as part of its 2001 General Plan, prepared a program environmental impact report (EIR)
to address the impacts of development proposed by the Plan. The anticipated residential
development evaluated in the Plan is similar to that required by the Regional Housing Needs
established for the City. The Program EIR concluded that there were several significant
environmental impacts that could not be mitigated to less than significant levels. Required
findings and statements of overriding considerations also required mitigation measures that will
influence future residential development and may require project EIRs that will increase the cost
of the development. These costs are unavoidable given the State mandated requirements of
CEQA.
                           Table 5-1 Urban Land Use Element and Development Code
                                             General Plan        Development Code Consistency
                  Classification                DU Max.
                                                Density      Consistent Zoning         Min Lot Size
                                                           General, Agricultural
                                                           Preserve or            20 ac. (currently 10
       Agriculture (Ag)                      1 du/10 ac.
                                                           Agricultural           ac. In City)
                                                           Preservation Overlay
                                             1 du/20 ac.
       Conservation/                                                              5 ac, 10 ac, & 20
                                             1 du/10 ac.   OS & PF
       Open Space(C/OS)                                                           ac.
                                             1 du/5 ac.
                                                           RR
       County Residential Rural (RR)         1 du/5 ac
                                                           1.0 du/acre
       County Residential Suburban (RS)      1 du/2½ ac.   RS                     12,000 sf
       Single Family Residential
       Very Low Density (VLD)                1 du/2 ½ ac.  RE                     2½ ac.
                                             1 du/1½ ac    RH                     1½ ac. (cluster)
       Low Density (LD)
                                             1 du/1 ac     RR                     1 ac.
       Low Medium Density (LM)               2.5 du/1 ac.  RS                     17,000 sf
                                                       97

    City of Arroyo Grande                                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
                                   Table 5-1 Urban Land Use Element and Development Code
           Medium Density (MD)                          4.5 du/ac        SF/VR                         9,680 sf
           Multi-Family Residential
           Multi-Family Residential (MFR)
           Medium High Density (MHD)                    9.0 du/ac        MF                            10,000 sf
           Townhouse/Condo
           Mobile Home Park (MHP)                       12.0 du/ac       MHP                           5 ac.
           High Density (HD)
                                                        14 du/ac         MFA                           10,000 sf
           Apartments
           Very High Density (VHD)                      25 du/ac         MFVH                          20,000 sf
           Mixed Use (MU)
           Village Core (VC)
                                                        25 du/ac         See Table 5-4
           Office (O)
           PD, SP and CF
           Source: City of Arroyo Grande General Plan and Development Code
                           Table 5-2 Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District – Residential Zones
Residential Uses/Housing Type                                    RE RH     RR      RS      SF    VR     MF     MFA   MFVH MHP
Single-family detached                                           P   P     P       P       P     MUP P         P     NP   NP
Small lot single-family detached                                 NP PUD PUD PUD PUD PUD PUD                    NP    NP   NP
Single-family attached (twin home, triplex, fourplex)            NP PUD NP         NP      PUD NP       PUD    PUD   NP   NP
Condominium (air space)                                          NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
Multiple-family attached (2 - 4 units)                           NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     MUP MUP P         NP
Multiple-family attached (5 or more units)                       NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     MUP  NP
Mobilehome subdivisions                                          C   C     C       C       C     C      C      C     C    C
Mobilehome parks                                                 C   C     C       C       C     C      C      C     C    C
Boarding/rooming houses                                          NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
Senior independent living uses                                   NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
Congregate care, assisted living                                 NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
Convalescent care                                                NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
Residential care facility (6 or fewer persons)                   P   P     P       P       P     P      P      P     P    P
Second residential dwelling unit                                 P   P     P       P       P     P      P      P     P    P
Small family day care (6 or fewer children)                      P   P     P       P       P     P      P      P     P    P
Large family day care (7 or more children)                       P   P     P       P       P     P      NP     NP    NP   NP
Homeless shelters within religious or social                     NP NP     NP      NP      NP    NP     C      C     C    NP
organization buildings
Home occupations                                                 P   P     P       P       P     P      P      P     P    P
Accessory use: guest quarters                                    P   C     C       C       C     C      NP     NP    NP   NP
Legend
P = Permitted                                                           C = Permitted subject to issuance of a Conditional
                                                                        Use Permit
MUP = Minor Use Permit                                                  NP = Not Permitted
PUD = Permitted subject to issuance of a Planned Unit
Development Permit                                                      Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
                                                                   98

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
                      Table 5-3 Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District – Mixed Use Zones
   Residential      IMU   TMU     VCD    VMU D-2.11     GMU     FOMU         HMU      OMU      RC       Specific Use
        Uses               D-     HCO     HCO D-2.4                                  D-2.20              Standards
                          2.11    D-2.4
Assisted Living     NP   NP     CUP      CUP          CUP/      CUP/       NP       CUP       NP
                                                      PED       PED
Home                NP   MUP    P        P            P         P          MUP      P         NP    16.16.090
occupation
Multi-family        NP   NP     NP       CUP          CUP/      CUP/       CUP      CUP       NP    Minimum density
housing not                                           PED       PED        (on lots (on lots        (75% of total density
located within a                                                           >20,000  >20,000         allowed by district)
mixed use                                                                  square   square          required by Housing
project                                                                    feet     feet)           Element is not
                                                                                                    required on lots
                                                                                                    fronting E. Grand
                                                                                                    Ave., E. Branch
                                                                                                    Street or in HMU or
                                                                                                    IMU districts.
Multi-family        NP   NP     MUP/     MUP          CUP/      CUP/       CUP      CUP       NP    Minimum density
housing in a                    PED                   PED       PED                                 (75% of total density
mixed use                                                                                           allowed by district)
project                                                                                             required by Housing
                                                                                                    Element is not
                                                                                                    required on lots
                                                                                                    fronting E. Grand
                                                                                                    Ave., E. Branch
                                                                                                    Street or in HMU or
                                                                                                    IMU districts.
Residential care    NP   NP     MUP/     MUP          MUP/      MUP        NP       MUP       NP
facility, 6 or less             PED                   PED
clients
Residential care NP      NP     CUP/     CUP          CUP/      CUP/       NP       CUP       NP
facility, 7 or more             PED                   PED       PED
clients
Single family       NP   NP     NP       MUP          NP        NP         NP       NP        NP
residential within
a mixed use
project
Legend
IMU = Industrial Mixed Use District (El Camino)           FOMU = Fair Oaks Mixed Use District
TMU = Traffic Way Mixed Use District                      HMU= Highway Mixed Use District
VCD = Village Core Downtown District                      OMU =Office Mixed Use District
VMU = Village Mixed Use District                          RC = Regional Commercial District
GMU = Gateway Mixed Use District                          HCO = Historic Character Overlay District (Design
                                                          Overlay District 2.4)
P = Permitted Use                                         MUP = Minor Use Permit
CUP = Conditional Use Permit                              PED = Residential not permitted in pedestrian
                                                          oriented storefront locations on ground floor facing
                                                          E. Grand Avenue, East/West Branch Street or prime
                                                          real estate space within shopping centers
NP = Not Permitted                                        Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
                                                        99

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                         2014-2019 Housing Element
                        Table 5-4 Residential Site Development Standards Single-Family Zones
                                    RE               RH              RR                   RS             SF        VR
  Maximum density
                                    0.4             0.67            1.0                  2.5            4.5        4.5
  (DU’s per gross acre)
  Minimum building site1                                                    12,000(reduced
  (Net area in sq. ft.)                                                     minimum building site
                                                                            area allowed with
                                                                            provision to
                                                                            permanently preserve
                                  92,5002         49,000         40,000     sensitive habitat         7,200      6,750
                                                                            and/or open space
                                                                            corridors and/or to
                                                                            avoid development of
                                                                            steep slopes and
                                                                            ridgelines)
  Minimum lot width3              200 ft.         130 ft.         120 ft.               80 ft.         70 ft.    50 ft.
  Minimum lot depth                                                                                     100
                                  250 ft.         200 ft.         200 ft.              100 ft.                  100 ft.
                                                                                                         ft.
  Minimum front yard               50 ft.          35 ft.          35 ft.               25 ft.         20 ft.    15 ft.
  Minimum interior side                                                                                 5 ft.
  yard setback                                                                                         one
                                                10% of lot      10% of lot     5 ft. one side, 10 ft. side,
                                   30 ft.                                                                         5 ft.
                                                  width           width              other side        10 ft.
                                                                                                      other
                                                                                                       side
  Minimum street side                           15% of lot      15% of lot
                                   30 ft.                                               15 ft.         15 ft.    10 ft.
  yard setback                                    width           width
  Minimum rear yard                                                                                    10 ft.
  setback                                                                                               (1-    10 ft. (1-
                                                                             20 ft. (For lots <12,000 story)     story)
                                   50 ft.          40 ft.          25 ft.
                                                                                   sq. ft use SF)      15 ft.  15 ft. (2-
                                                                                                        (2-      story)
                                                                                                      story)
  Maximum lot                                                                 30% (For lots < 10,000
                                   35%              35%            35%                                 40%        40%
  coverage4                                                                        sq. ft. use SF)
  Maximum height for
  buildings and                           30 ft. or 2 stories, whichever is less, 14 ft. for accessory buildings
  structures
  Minimum distance
  between buildings
  (including main
                                   20 ft.          20 ft.           6 ft.               10 ft.         10 ft.    10 ft.
  dwellings and
  accessory
  structures)5
  Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
                                                               100

  City of Arroyo Grande                                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
                 Table 5-5 Residential Site Development Standards Multiple Family and Other Zones
                                                   MF                    MFA                    MFVH                 MHP
      Maximum density
                                                   9.0                   14.0¹                   25.0                 12.0
      (DU’s per gross acre)
      Minimum building site
                                                 10,000                 10,000                  20,000              5 acres
      (Net area in sq. ft.)
      Minimum lot width                           80 ft.                 80 ft.                  80 ft.              60 ft.6
      Minimum lot depth                          100 ft.                100 ft.                 100 ft.             100 ft.6
      Minimum front yard
                                                  20 ft.                 20 ft.                  20 ft.              20 ft.
      setback
      Minimum interior side yard
                                                  10 ft.                 10 ft.                  10 ft.               5 ft.
      setback
      Minimum street side yard
                                                  10 ft.                 10 ft.                  10 ft.              15 ft.
      setback
      Minimum rear yard
                                           Average 15 ft.7        Average 15 ft.7        Average 15 ft.7              5 ft.
      setback
      Maximum lot coverage                        40%                    45%                     60%6                 50%
      Maximum height for                                                                                     30 ft. or 2
                                          30 ft. or 2 stories, 30 ft. or 2 stories, 30 ft. or 2 stories,
      buildings and structures                                                                               stories,
                                          whichever is less, whichever is less, whichever is less,
                                                                                                             whichever is
                                          14 ft. for            14 ft. for              14 ft. for
                                                                                                             less, 14 ft. for
                                          accessory             accessory               accessory
                                                                                                             accessory
                                          buildings             buildings               buildings
                                                                                                             buildings
      Minimum distance
      between buildings
                                                  10 ft.                 10 ft.                  10 ft.               5 ft.
      (including main dwellings
      and accessory structures)
      Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
                            Table 5-6 Residential Site Development Standards Mixed Use Zones
                     IMU          TMU             VCD           VMU             GMU          FOMU          HMU                OMU
Maximum
density –
Mixed Use              8             8              15            15            2516           2516         2016              2016
(DU’s per
gross acre)
Maximum
density –
Multi-family
                     n/a           n/a             n/a           n/a             15             15           20                15
housing
(DU’s per
gross acre)
Minimum                                                                       75% of        75% of                           75% of
density17            n/a           n/a             n/a           n/a            max.          max.          n/a               max.
                                                                             density16     density16                        density16
Minimum          18,000 sf      10,000 sf                                    20,000 sf     15,000 sf     20,000 sf
                                                2,500 sf      5,000 sf                                                      20,000 sf
Lot Size           (gross)       (gross)                                      (gross)       (gross)       (gross)
Minimum
                   100 ft.        80 ft.          25 ft.        40 ft.         100 ft.        80 ft.       80 ft.            100 ft.
lot width
Front Yard
                    10 ft.      0-15 ft. 25    0-15 ft. 26     0-15 ft.     0-10 ft.218    0-10 ft.18     0-15 ft.           0-10 ft.
Setback
Rear Yard
                  0-15 ft.9     0-15 ft.10       0-15 ft.     0-15 ft.14      0-15 ft.      0-15 ft.     0-15 ft.10          0-15 ft.
setback
Side yard
                 0-15 ft. 23      0 ft.10          0 ft.        0 ft.15       0-5 ft.19     0-5 ft.19      0 ft. 10          0-5 ft.
setback
Street side
yard
                   20 ft. 24    0-15 ft. 25      0-15 ft.      0-15 ft.       0-15 ft.      0-15 ft.      0-15 ft.           0-15 ft.
setback
                                                                   101

  City of Arroyo Grande                                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
                             Table 5-6 Residential Site Development Standards Mixed Use Zones
Maximum            30 ft. or 2 30 ft. or 3 30 ft. or 3 30 ft. or 3 35 ft. or 3 35 ft. or 3              30 ft. or 3   35 ft. or 3
height               stories     stories11      stories13   stories13      stories20      stories20      stories11     stories21
Maximum
                   102,500 sf 50,000 sf12 20,000 sf         10,000 sf 102,500 sf 50,000 sf              50,000 sf12   50,000 sf22
building size
Site
                      50%          75%            100%        100%            75%           70%            75%           70%
Coverage
Floor Area
                      0.45         0.75            2.0         1.0            1.5            1.0           0.75          100
Ratio
Off-street                     Reference Reference
parking                        Standards Parking          Reference
and                            D-2.11 and and             Parking
loading           Reference Section           Business    VMU and                                                    Reference
                  Section      16.56.020 Improvem HCO in                       28             30            31       Section
                  16.56.020 Exceptions ent District Section                                                          16.56.020
                               allowed        Plan in     16.56.020
                               by Section Section         (C)
                               16.16.120 16.56.020
Site design                                   Reference Reference
and signs                      Reference Standards Standards                                           Reference
                  Reference Standards for Historic for Historic                                        Standards
                  Chapter      D-2.11 and Districts       Districts            27             29       D-2.11 and          32
                  16.60        Chapter        and         and                                          Chapter
                               16.60          Chapter     Chapter                                      16.60
                                              16.60       16.60
Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
  Notes (Tables 5-4, 5-5, and 5-6)
  1. See Table 16.32.050-A for minimum lot sizes for parcels with slope greater than seven percent.
  2. Area shall be increased to five acres for slope conditions exceeding twenty (20) percent.
  3. Width measurements for cul-de-sac or otherwise odd-shaped lots shall be determined on the basis of the average
     horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between
     the front and rear lot lines.
  4. The following floor area ratios shall be adhered to in all zoning districts in addition to lot coverage requirements:
                 Lot Size                                               Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
                 0          —          4000 square feet net             0.35
                 4001       —          7199 square feet net             0.40
                 7200       —          11999 square feet net            0.50
                 12000      —          39999 square feet net            0.45
                                       40000 + square feet net
               The above FAR’s shall not apply to condominium or PUD projects where the proposed lot consists
               of a building footprint.
  5. Within a planned unit development, building separations may be reduced to zero feet, provided that fire walls are
     provided per UBC standards.
  6. The minimum parcel size within the mobile home district may be reduced to three thousand six hundred (3,600) square
     feet with a minimum average width of forty (40) feet and a minimum frontage of not less than thirty (30) feet if
     common open space areas and recreational facilities are provided as part of the subdivision and if the open space
     areas and recreational facilities are reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the subdivision. Standards for the
     provision of common open space required to permit a reduction in lot size are as follows:
          (1)A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of common open space and recreational area shall be provided
             for each residential lot in the subdivision.
          (2)The combined square footage of common open space, recreational area, and residential lot area, not
             including public and private streets and cannon parking areas shall average not less than six thousand (6,000)
             square feet per lot within the subdivision.
                                                                 102

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                          2014-2019 Housing Element
         (3)Open space and recreational areas shall be designated on the subdivision map, and shall be located entirely
            within the subdivision.
7. For two-story buildings average rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. Average includes all buildings along rear
    property line and is subject to city approval.
8. New residential limited to live-work units in conjunction with allowed uses. Density determined by discretionary action.
9. 50 feet if adjacent to a residential district.
10. Wherever a lot in any commercial or mixed use district abuts a residential use or a lot in any residential use district, a
    minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet measured from the property line shall be required for proposed
    commercial use.
11. 30 ft. or three stories whichever is less; a maximum of 36 feet is allowable through the CUP process for visitor serving
    uses.
12. A greater size may be allowed through the CUP process.
13. Maximum height is 30 feet or three stories, whichever is less; a maximum of 36 feet is allowable through the MUP
    process.
14. If project is mixed use and/or abuts a residential district then 10 feet required.
15. If a project is mixed use and/or abuts a residential district, then 5 feet is required for single story structures and 110 feet
    is required, on one side, for a multiple stories.
16. Based on gross project area.
17. Projects that do not front E. Grand Avenue; densities do not include density bonus. See Chapter 16.80.
18. Exceptions for larger setbacks may include entrance courtyards, areas for outdoor dining, or for projects facing a
    residential district as determined through discretionary review.
19. For projects abutting a residential district, corresponding residential setback shall apply.
20. Maximum height is 35 feet or three stories whichever is less; a maximum of up to 40 feet for mixed use projects by
    discretionary action on lots larger than 20,000 square feet and where the building is not adjacent to a residential
    district.
21. Maximum height for mixed residential/commercial use is 35 feet or three stories whichever is less.
22. A greater size may be allowed through the CUP process.
23. Except as otherwise permitted, required rear and interior side building setback areas shall be used only for
    landscaping, pedestrian walkways, driveways, off-street parking or loading, recreational activities or facilities, and
    similar accessory activities.
24. Except as otherwise permitted, a street side building setback area shall be used only for landscaping, pedestrian
    walkways, driveways or off-street parking.
25. Exceptions may include areas for outdoor sales determined through discretionary action.
26. Structures typically built at back of sidewalk. Exceptions include entrance courtyards and areas for outdoor dining
    determined through discretionary review.
27. Commercial and mixed use projects larger than 20,000 sf.: 200 sf. of public accessible open spaces is required for
    every 5,000 sf. of office or commercial spaces exclusive of areas for parking and driveways. See General Commercial
    and Mixed Use Design Guidelines and Standards. General Plan Policies LU5-11. For mixed use projects, refer to Section
    16.48.065. Additional sign standards also in Chapter 16.60.
28. See Design Guidelines and Standards. Parking is to be located behind buildings or to the side. Driveways along E.
    Grande Avenue shall be minimized by combining driveways, using alleys or designing development so that access is
    provided from local streets. See Section 16.56.020.
29. See Design Guidelines and Standards. Please note General Plan Policies LU5-11. For mixed us projects refer to Section
    16.48.065. Additional sign standards are found in Chapter 16.60.
30. See Design Guidelines and Standards. Parking is to be located behind buildings or to the side. Driveways along E.
    Grand Avenue shall be minimized when possible by combining driveways, using alleys or designing development so
    that access is provided from local streets. See Section 16.56.020.
31. See Design Guidelines and Standards D-2.11 Exhibit ‘A’ for shared parking locations. See also Section 16.56.020.
    Exceptions allowed by Section 16.16.120.
32. See OMU-D-2.20. Please note General Plan Policies LU5-11. For mixed use projects, refer to Section 16.48.065.
    Additional sign standards also in Chapter 16.60.
                                                               103

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
Building Code Requirements
The Arroyo Grande building requirements are based upon the latest version of the California
Building Code, which is a version of the International Building Code adopted by the State. The
City adopted Ordinance No. 657 on October 8, 2013 entitled: An Ordinance of the City Council
of the City of Arroyo Grande amending Arroyo Grande Municipal Code Chapter 8.04 and 8.08
related to the adoption of the California Fire Code and International Fire Code; and amending
Chapter 15.04 related to the adoption of the California Building Code, California Residential
Code, California Electrical Code, California Mechanical Code, California Plumbing Code,
California Green Building Code, California existing Building Code, California Energy Code,
California Historical Building Code and the International Property Maintenance Code. No local
amendments to the State Building Code have been adopted. Code enforcement is complaint-
based. If an infraction is found the enforcement officer provides a list of potential resources to
the homeowner. The degree and type of enforcement is described in this Ordinance. The Code
ensures safe housing and is not considered a significant constraint to housing production.
Inclusionary Housing
In 2000 (last amended in 2007), the City adopted an Inclusionary Housing Ordinance
(Development       Code    Chapter     16.80  Inclusionary Affordable   Housing  Requirements).Its
implementation resulted in the construction of 163 affordable housing units during the previous
planning periods.
According to the ordinance, any residential development of two units or more is required to
build a certain percentage of the units as affordable, pay an in-lieu fee, or donate a suitable
amount of land. The required percentages are as follows:
       At least five percent very low-income units; or
       At least 10 percent lower-income units; or
       At least 15 percent moderate-income units where the proposed project is planned for
        rental units or units that are not developed as a common interest development pursuant
        to Civil Code Section 1351; or
       An equivalent combination as determined by the Community Development Director.
The inclusionary units can be owner-occupied or rental units and restrictions must be put in
place to maintain their affordability for at least 45 years for owner-occupied units and 55 years
for rental units. The determination whether an applicant constructs units, pays an in-lieu fee, or
donates land is made by the City Council on a project-by-project basis.
                                                  104

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
Allowances and incentives are available for projects with inclusionary units including density
bonuses, fee waivers or reductions, modification of development standards, and technical
assistance from the City on applying for financial subsidy programs. Establishment of these
regulations has increased the supply of affordable housing in Arroyo Grande. Increased flexibility
during the review process and with project review costs are intended to offset increased costs
and time required to meet the requirements of this inclusionary section of the Development
Code. Program F.3-1 is proposed to evaluate the effectiveness of these regulations to date and
amend Chapter 16.80 Inclusionary Affordable Housing Requirements, as deemed helpful to
increase production of affordable units.
Density Bonus Standards
The City’s density bonus program (Development Code Chapter 16.82) implements the State’s
Density Bonus Law and supports inclusionary housing. The purpose of the density bonus
requirements is to increase the production of affordable housing for very low, low and
moderate-income households as well as senior housing and mobile home developments.
Developer concessions or incentives are granted for a residential project that meets the criteria
for a density bonus projects. Incentives granted by the City include, but are not limited to:
  o    Flexibility in development standards;
  o    Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project; or
  o    Leniency on parking ratios set forth in Government Code Section 65915
  o    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the City or developer.
AB 2280 became effective in September 2008. AB 2280 institutes various changes to the density
bonus law, most notably the bill amends the timing for density bonus requests, clarifies density
bonus requirements for senior housing, and institutes a 10% across the board increase in the
percentage of affordable units that must be included in a housing development project to
qualify for incentives.
The City updated their density bonus program in 2007 to be consistent with SB 1818, however
amendments are required to bring regulations into compliance with the changes made from AB
2280. Therefore, Program A.10-1 is proposed to bring the City into complete compliance with
current State density bonus law.
                                                 105

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing
State legislation SB 2 requires jurisdictions to permit emergency shelters without a Conditional Use
Permit (CUP) or other discretionary permits, and transitional housing and supportive housing must
be considered residential uses and must only be subject to the same restrictions that apply to
the same housing types in the same zone. Programs K.2-1 and K.2-2 are proposed to amend the
Development Code to allow emergency shelters without any discretionary review (by right) in at
least one zone and to define transitional and supportive housing as required per SB2.
Secondary Dwelling Units
To encourage establishment of secondary dwelling units on existing developed lots, State law
requires cities to either adopt an ordinance based on standards set out in the law authorizing
creation of second units in residentially zoned areas, or where no ordinance has been adopted,
to allow second units if they meet standards set out in the State law. State law requires ministerial
consideration of second unit applications in zones where single-family dwellings are permitted.
Local governments are precluded from totally prohibiting second units in residentially zoned
areas unless they make specific findings (Government Code §65852.2). Second units can be an
important source of affordable housing since they are smaller than primary units and they do not
have direct land costs. Second units can also provide supplemental income to the homeowner,
thus allowing the elderly to remain in their homes or moderate-income families to afford housing.
In the City’s Development Code secondary dwelling units are referred to as a “second
residential dwellings”. A second residential dwelling is either a detached or attached dwelling
unit that provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as
the primary residence.
Table 5-5 sets out the primary standards for second residential dwellings in the City. The City’s
standards do not conflict with State law governing second units. However, having a minimum
parcel size requirement for a second residential dwelling can often be a constraint to
developing secondary units.
                                                   106

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
                            Table 5-7 Second Residential Dwellings Development Standards
          Standards                                            Second Residential Dwelling
                                 Shall comply with all zoning regulations and property development standards
                                 of the district in which it is located.
  Development
                                 Any proposed deviation from standards of Development Code Section
  Standards
                                 16.52.150 (Second residential dwellings) shall be processed through a
                                 conditional use permit or minor use permit application as determined by the
                                 Community Development Director.
  Minimum Lot Size               6,750 sf
  Maximum Size                   50% of square footage of primary residence1
                                 Shall be occupied on month-to-month basis or longer. Either primary residence
  Rental of Unit
                                 or second residential dwelling must be occupied by owner of property
                                 Detached second residential dwelling - located a minimum distance equal to
  Building Separation
                                 twice the applicable side yard setback from primary residence.
  Average Slope                  20% max.
  Parking                        1 space/bedroom (max. 2 spaces)
  Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
Development Processing and Development Impact Fees
Like most cities in California, Arroyo Grande charges planning, building, and impact fees for
residential developments. Table 5-6 summarizes the planning fees charged by the Community
Development Department for processing residential applications. These fees are established by
the City Council to cover the staff and other costs associated with processing a housing
development application. These fees are comparable to other area jurisdictions and not
considered excessive.
The fees charged at the time of the issuance of a building permit for residential development
include standard building permit plan check and inspection fees as well as impact fees set by
the City. Building fees are set by the Building Code and represent the costs for plan review and
inspection of the project construction. Given the nature of these fees, they are not considered
excessive in that they are essential to ensure the health and safety of the project construction.
Impact fees cover the costs of infrastructure and public services. Given the current tax structure
the City must operate under, there are not adequate general funds to provide the services and
infrastructure necessary for new residential development, thus development impact fees must
be charged to cover the costs of the services or infrastructure requirements.
                                                               107
City of Arroyo Grande                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
School impact fees that have been imposed by the local school district help cover their costs to
provide additional building construction needed to support additional school population
associated with additional residential development. Development impact fees increase the cost
of housing, and proportionally affordable housing.
As an incentive to produce more affordable housing, the City eliminated or reduced
development impact fees for very low and low-income housing developments, including
second units. Water and sewer fees still apply.
                        Table 5-8 Schedule of Typical Fees for Residential Development
  APPLICATION TYPE                                                                        BASE FEES
  Appeals
       From Community Development Director to Planning Commission                           $ 263
       From Planning Commission decision to City Council                                    $ 263
  Certificate of Compliance                                                                 $ 788
  Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
       Multi Building                                                                      $ 7,352
       Routine (Determined by Director)                                                    $ 3,623
       Amendment                                                                            $ 945
  Design Review                                                                             $ 630
  Development Agreement                                                                    $3,151
  Development Code Amendment
       Major (Determined by Director)                                                      $ 4,201
       Minor (Determined by Director)                                                      $ 2,100
  EIR/Environmental Studies
       5% of EIR or Environmental Doc. Contract and cost of document preparation by consultant or staff
       (time and materials)
  General Plan Amendment
       Major (Determined by Director)                                                      $ 7,352
       Minor (Determined by Director)                                                      $ 1,785
  Minor Use Permit
       Architectural Review                                                                 $ 315
       Minor Exception                                                                      $ 424
       Plot Plan Review                                                                     $ 420
  Specific Plan
       Major (Determined by Director)                                                      $ 7,352
                                                      108
City of Arroyo Grande                                                                             2014-2019 Housing Element
                              Table 5-8 Schedule of Typical Fees for Residential Development
  APPLICATION TYPE                                                                                          BASE FEES
  Planned Unit Development
        Major (Determined by Director)                                                                       $ 7,352
        Minor (Determined by Director)                                                                       $ 3,623
  Pre-Application Review
        Staff Advisory Committee (per meeting)                                                                $ 263
        Architectural Review Committee (per meeting)                                                          $ 263
        Planning Commission (per meeting)                                                                     $ 263
        City Council (per meeting)                                                                            $ 263
  Second Dwelling Unit (see CUP)
  Tentative Parcel Map (<5 lots)
        Base Fee                                                                                             $ 1,349
        Vesting                                                                                               $ 402
        Amendment                                                                                             $756
  Tentative Tract Map (>4 lots)
        Base Fee                                                                                             $ 3,954
        Vesting                                                                                              $ 1,043
        Amendment                                                                                            $1,996
  Source: City of Arroyo Grande. Community Development Department Application Fees, September 2011.
The total fees charged at Building Permit issuance for the average single family is approximately
$25,000 per unit, which includes building fees and impact fees. For condominium projects, the
estimated building and impact fees are estimated at between $18,000 and $20,000 per unit,
while the same fees for an apartment are estimated at $18,000 per unit. These fees are one of
the substantial costs of housing, but as noted above, these fees are either required by the
building code, are needed to finance infrastructure or services, or serve as mitigation for the
project impacts.
Total fees comprise approximately 5.4 percent of the home purchase price (see Table 5-7).
Given the prices of housing in the City and fees in other jurisdictions, fees charged for residential
development are not a significant factor contributing to the high housing costs in the City.
                                                                109
City of Arroyo Grande                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
        Table 5-9 Proportion of Fee in Overall Development Cost for a Typical Residential Development
  Development Cost for a Typical Unit                               Single Family          Multiple Family
  Total estimated fees per unit1                                        $25,000               $20,000
  Median sale price per unit2                                          $460,000              $339,0003
  Estimated proportion of fee cost to overall development
                                                                         5.4%                   5.8%
  cost per unit
  Notes
  1. Source: City of Arroyo Grande, 2014.
  2. Source: SLO County Homes, 20014
  3. Median price for condominium in 2014
Permit Processing Timelines
Permit processing times in Arroyo Grande are comparable to other cities in the county. Most of
the processing times are a result of State mandated reviews and hearings, including the time
required for preparation of the required environmental documents. Projects requiring an EIR can
be processed in a year. Those not requiring an EIR may be processed in six months or less. While
application and permit processing times may seem excessive by some, they are generally
prescribed by law.
It should be noted that timelines can also change depending on if a proposed project is in a
Planned Development Area. Any project within a Planned Development requires City Council
approval. The 2001 General Plan Land Use Map eliminated reference to already developed
Planned Development (PD) areas, but retained vacant areas. The Development Code and
Zoning Map were updated to rezone commercial properties located in Planned Development
areas from PD 1.1 and PD 1.2 to Regional Commercial (RC).This change results in shorter permit
processing timelines for commercial projects in developed PD areas.
The goal of the City of Arroyo Grande Community Development Department is to issue a
decision within the time periods listed in Table 5-8. These time periods begin when a complete
application is submitted and are extended when additional information is requested by the City.
To assist applicants, the City provides the timeframes below for “target issuance date”—when
an applicant can expect a decision on their application, and an “initial comments due” date—
when they can expect to receive initial review comments from us.
                                                      110

City of Arroyo Grande                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
                                        Table 5-10 Permit Processing Timeline
                            Permit Type                      Initial Comments Due:   Target Issuance Date:
  Minor Use Permit (administrative)
  (Formerly Viewshed, Plot Plan, Architectural                        14 days               21 days
  Review, and Minor Exception permits)
  Temporary Use Permit (administrative)                                7 days               14 days
  Administrative Sign Permit (administrative)                          7 days               14 days
  Conditional Use Permit (discretionary)                              30 days              120 days
  Lot Line Adjustment (discretionary)                                 30 days               90 days
  Tentative Parcel Map (discretionary)                                30 days               90 days
  Tentative Tract Map (discretionary)                                 30 days              120 days
  Development Code Amendment (discretionary)                          30 days              120 days
  General Plan Amendment (discretionary)                              30 days              120 days
  Specific Plan (discretionary)                                       30 days              180 days
  Variance (discretionary)                                            30 days               90 days
  Source: City of Arroyo Grande
On and Off-Site Improvement Requirements
Typical on and off-site improvement requirements for residential subdivisions and/or mixed-use
projects are imposed as part of the approval process for a subdivision and/or conditional use
permit application. Current improvement standards include submittal of the following
improvement plans: grading and drainage; erosion control; street improvements; curb, gutter
and sidewalk; public utilities; water and sewer; landscaping and irrigation. These improvement
plan requirements are generally based on health, safety and to a lesser extent, aesthetic issues.
As with land costs, several variables affect the amount of site improvement costs including site
topography and proximity to established roads and utilities.
The City requires that curbs, gutters and sidewalks be placed along the frontage of every lot on
which new construction is done. Many of these improvements, especially sidewalks, generally
are required to provide pedestrian access and access for the handicapped. These costs have
been estimated at $45 per linear foot for curb, gutter, and sidewalk for a standard single-family
housing subdivision. While these costs contribute to the cost of a housing unit, the improvements
required by the City are typical of all cities in the State and do not impose a significant
constraint on the development of housing in the City. City regulations are intended to generally
encourage high-quality private development and new construction.
Improvement requirements also include off-street parking standards. Table 5-9 lists applicable
parking space requirements for residential developments. In certain situations, parking
                                                        111
City of Arroyo Grande                                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
requirements may be reduced or waived. This includes some alternative parking arrangement
options such as common parking facilities and density bonus parking reduction concessions. The
Development Code does not require bicycle parking for residential uses, however the City does
encourage bicycle parking to reduce traffic congestion and air pollution problems.
Off-street disabled/handicapped parking is required in compliance with the California Building
Code and California Code of Regulations Title 24.
                                        Table 5-11 Residential Parking Standards
                    RESIDENTIAL USE                                     PARKING STANDARD
    Single-family homes
                   Conventional size lot           2 spaces per unit within an enclosed garage
                                                   2 spaces per unit within an enclosed garage and 0.5
                   Small lot (PUD)
                                                   space/unit for visitor parking
                                                   2 space per unit within an enclosed garage and 1
    Duplexes
                                                   uncovered space per unit
    Second residential units                       1 uncovered space per unit
    Townhouse and condominiums (Attached ownership units)
       RESIDENT and VISITOR PARKING:
                   Studio                          1 space per unit within an enclosed garage
                                                   1 space per unit within an enclosed garage and .5
                   1 bedroom                       uncovered spaces per unit for developments over four
                                                   units.
                                                   2 spaces per unit within an enclosed garage and 0.5
                   2+ bedrooms                     uncovered space per unit for developments over four
                                                   units.
    Apartments and multifamily dwellings (rental units)
       RESIDENT PARKING:
                   Studio                          1 covered space per unit
                                                   1 covered space per unit and 0.5 uncovered space per
                   1 bedroom                       unit for developments over four units
                                                   2 covered spaces per unit and 0.5 uncovered space per
                   2+ bedrooms
                                                   unit for developments over four units.
    Senior housing - independent living
       RESIDENT PARKING:
                   Studio                          1 covered space per unit
                   1 bedroom                       1 covered space per unit
                                                   1 covered space per unit and 0.5 uncovered space per
                   2+ bedrooms
                                                   unit
                                                   1 uncovered space per 3 beds and 1 space per
    Senior housing - assisted living
                                                   employee on the largest work shift
    Mobile home parks                              2.5 uncovered spaces per unit
                                                   1 uncovered space per staff person other than the
    Large family day care facilities               homeowner in addition to the required parking for the
                                                   residential building
    Source: City of Arroyo Grande Development Code
                                                           112
City of Arroyo Grande                                                               2014-2019 Housing Element
Constraints on Housing for Disabled Persons
As part of the governmental constraints analysis, State law calls for the analysis of potential and
actual constraints to the development, maintenance and improvement of housing for persons
with disabilities. Table 5-10 reviews the Development Code, land use policies, permitting
practices, and building codes to ensure compliance with State and federal fair housing laws.
Where necessary, the City proposes new policies or programs to remove constraints.
Arroyo Grande has not specifically adopted a reasonable accommodation policy or ordinance
to accommodate housing or access considerations for persons with disabilities. However, the
City does follow California’s handicap and accessibility laws through the implementation of the
2013 California Building Code, which includes the 2012 International Building Code. Program
L.2-2 is proposed to provide information about Universal Design to the development community
and to consider updating the building code to include Universal Design criteria.
                          Table 5-12 Constraints on Housing for Persons with Disabilities
  Overarching and General
  Does the City have a process for persons       Arroyo Grande has not adopted a reasonable
  with disabilities to make requests for         accommodation policy or ordinance for persons with
  reasonable accommodation?                      disabilities in the enforcement of development and building
                                                 codes and the issuance of building permits. However, the
                                                 City allows retrofitting to increase suitability of homes for
                                                 people with disabilities. Program L.2-1 is proposed to create
                                                 a reasonable accommodation policy for the City.
  Has the City made efforts to remove            Group homes (residential care facility) of six persons or less
  constraints on housing for persons with        are permitted by right in all residential zones in the City.
  disabilities?                                  Group homes of seven or more are permitted with a CUP in
                                                 the VCD, VMU, GMU, FOMU, and OMU mixed-use zones.
  Does the City assist in meeting identified     Program L.2-2 is proposed to provide information about
  needs?                                         Universal Design to the development community and to
                                                 consider updating the building code to include Universal
                                                 Design criteria.
  Zoning and Land Use
  Has the City reviewed all its zoning laws,     Yes, the City has reviewed the land use regulations and
  policies, and practices for compliance         practices and is in compliance with fair housing laws.
  with fair housing law?
  Are residential parking standards for          Section 16.56.070 of the Development Code (Design and
  persons with disabilities different from       paving standards for off-street parking facilities) mandates
  other parking standards?                       the provision of disabled parking spaces in accordance
  Does the City have a policy or program         with California Building Code (part 2 of Title 24) Chapter 11.
  for the reduction of parking requirements
  for special needs housing if a proponent       In certain situations, parking requirements may be reduced
  can demonstrate a reduced parking              or waived. This includes some alternative parking
  need?                                          arrangement options such as common parking facilities
                                                 and density bonus parking reduction concessions
  Does the locality restrict the siting of       No. Group homes for less than six people are permitted by
  group homes?                                   right in all residential zones.
  What zones allow group homes other             Group homes (referred to as Residential Care Facilities in
  than those allowed by State law? Are           the Development Code) of six or less individuals are
  group home over six persons allowed?           allowed by right in all residential districts. They are allowed
                                                 in the Village Core Downtown (VCD), Village Mixed Use
                                                 (VMU), Historic Character Overlay (HCO), Gateway Mixed
                                                        113

City of Arroyo Grande                                                                 2014-2019 Housing Element
                             Table 5-12 Constraints on Housing for Persons with Disabilities
                                                    Use (GMU), Fair Oaks Mixed Use (FOMU), and Office Mixed
                                                    Use (OMU) districts with a Minor Use Permit. Facilities with
                                                    more than 7 residents are allowed in the VCD, VMU, HCO,
                                                    GMU, FOMU, and OMU districts with a Conditional Use
                                                    Permit.
 Does the City have occupancy standards No
 in the zoning code that apply specifically
 to unrelated adults and not to families?
 Does the land use element regulate the             No. There is no minimum distance required between two or
 siting of special needs housing in                 more special needs housing.
 relationship to one another?
 Permits and Processing
 How does the City process a request to             Arroyo Grande allows residential retrofitting to increase the
 retrofit homes for accessibility?                  suitability of homes for people with disabilities in
                                                    compliance with ADA requirements, as permitted in the
                                                    California Code.
 Does the City allow groups homes with six          Yes
 or fewer persons by right in single-family
 zones?
 Does the City have a set of particular             Group homes with greater than six persons are allowed by
 conditions or use restrictions for group           Conditional Use Permit in the VCD, VMU, HCO, GMU, FOMU,
 homes with greater than six persons?               and OMU districts. They are subject to review by the
                                                    architectural review committee and are required to be
                                                    incompliance with the same parking and site coverage
                                                    requirements as multi-family uses. The City does not have a
                                                    set of conditions of approval for these facilities.
 What kind of community input does the              Group homes (or Residential Care Facilities) of six or less
 City allow for the approval of group               individuals are allowed by right in all residential districts.
 homes?                                             They require no other planning approval other than to
                                                    ensure that the development conforms to the standards of
                                                    the Development Code. The facilities with more than 7
                                                    residents are allowed in VCD, VMU, HCO, GMU, FOMU, and
                                                    OMU districts with a Conditional Use Permit. The Conditional
                                                    Use Permit provides the public with an opportunity to
                                                    review the project and express their concerns in a public
                                                    hearing.
 Does the City have particular conditions           No, the City does not have special standards or conditions
 for group homes that will be providing             of approval for group homes regarding services or
 services on site?                                  operation.
 Building Codes
 Has the locality adopted the Uniform               Arroyo Grande has adopted the 2013 California Building
 Building Code?                                     Code, which incorporated the 2012 International Building
                                                    Code. No amendments have been made that affect the
                                                    ability to accommodate persons with disabilities.
 Has the City adopted any universal                 With the recommendation of Program L.2-2, the City will
 design element into the code?                      encourage the incorporation of universal design in new
                                                    construction.
 Does the City provide reasonable                   Arroyo Grande allows for reasonable accommodation for
 accommodation for persons with                     persons with disabilities in the enforcement of building
 disabilities in the enforcement of building        codes and issuance of building permits. Program L.2-1 is
 codes and the issuance of building                 proposed to create a reasonable accommodation policy
 permits?                                           for the City.
 Source: City of Arroyo Grande
                                                           114
City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
5.2 Environmental Constraints and Energy Conservation
Environmental Constraints
The City adopted a General Plan Update in 2001.As part of the process of adopting the update,
a program EIR was prepared to address the environmental issues attributed to the growth
proposed. It is important to note that the General Plan Update evaluated residential growth that
is very similar to that included in the Regional Housing Needs Assessment adopted for the City of
Arroyo Grande, except that the General Plan assumes a longer planning period than the Needs
Assessment. The General Plan Update EIR concluded that there were three major environmental
impacts that were significant and could not be feasibly mitigated to less than significant: water
availability, traffic, and air quality. Thus findings and statements of over-riding consideration were
adopted. These critical issues are considered constraints on residential development as
discussed below.
Water Availability
According to the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan, the City used approximately 78 percent
of its available average annual water resources in 2010. This equates to 156 gallons per capita
per day. In March 2014, the San Luis Obispo County Board of Supervisors declared a countywide
drought emergency. These water shortfalls highlight the need for continued use of a tiered water
rate structure as well as water conservation measures. The implementation of a citywide Water
Conservation Program consists of plumbing retrofit, irrigation system assessment, enforcement of
City water conservation regulations, washing machine rebates, public information and
education programs, and irrigation system improvements or landscape modifications. If the
City’s water conservation programs continue to be successful, it is anticipated that current water
resources will be sufficient to serve the increased population proposed by the General Plan, and
thus, adequate to serve the projected population proposed by the Regional Housing Needs
Assessment.
Traffic/Circulation
The General Plan Program EIR evaluated traffic impacts, both from proposed City development
as well as regional impacts of growth. The EIR concluded that many local streets and Highway
101 will be significantly impacted. It is difficult to estimate how significant Highway 101 impacts
will be during the timeframe of the General Plan in that the improvements required to serve
much of the undeveloped land in the southeast and south portions of the City are not yet
planned and likely will not be implemented until after the Housing Element planning period.
However, there has been planning progress for Highway 101 interchange improvements in the
                                                     115

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
vicinity of Brisco Road. Despite this, additional development will cumulatively impact area
roadways and thus is another constraint to continued regional residential development,
including within the City.
Air Quality
Like traffic/circulation, air quality has been determined in the General Plan Program EIR to be a
significant impact that cannot be mitigated to less than significant. This is a cumulative impact
attributed to additional growth, thus is considered a significant constraint to continued
residential regional development, including within the City.
Flooding
Arroyo Grande is located in a Mediterranean climate with a rainy season lasting from
approximately November to March. While rain is possible during other times of the year, these
are months where the most substantial rainfall occurs in the City. The waterways with potential
for 0.1 percent (100 year) flood events include Canyon/Meadow Creek, Corbett Canyon, Tally
Ho, Arroyo Grande, and Los Berros creeks. One of the greatest challenges for the City is
managing flood risks that begin upstream and outside City limits. One solution that has been
implemented by the San Luis Obispo County Resource Conservation District (RCD) is the creation
of a special zone. This RCD zone 1/1A provides funding for flood control projects. Severe flooding
events in 2003 indicated that additional flood control measures are required to reduce the long-
term risk.
Earthquakes and Ground-Shaking
There are two faults within the City limits – the Pismo Fault and the Wilmar Avenue Fault. The
Pismo Fault is an inactive fault, and presents a low risk to Arroyo Grande. The Wilmar Avenue
fault is a potentially active fault that runs through the City and follows Highway 101. California
defines potentially active as a fault that has experienced surface rupture within the last 1.6
million years. According to the City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, the Wilmar Avenue Fault
presents a moderate risk to the City.
The greatest risk to Arroyo Grande for ground-shaking is from the San Andreas Fault and the
Hosgri Fault. The San Andreas Fault historically has caused earthquakes greater than 8.0 in
magnitude and will likely cause future earthquakes of this magnitude. In December 2003, a 6.5
magnitude earthquake from the Hosgri Fault struck northern San Luis Obispo County. This
earthquake resulted in two deaths and damage to 40 buildings.
                                                  116

City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
There are 26 buildings identified under the Unreinforced Masonry Building Law in Arroyo Grande.
The existence of these buildings led to the City establishing a mandatory strengthening program
to reduce risk from these buildings. As of 2006, all 26 buildings are in compliance with the local
strengthening program.
Landslides
A majority of Arroyo Grande is at low risk for landslides. The areas at greatest risk are hillsides
where steeper slopes are located. The potential for slope stability hazards in valley areas is low to
very low. The areas at greatest risk for landslide are just north of Highway 101 in the hillsides and
in the eastern sections of Arroyo Grande.
Energy Conservation
Planning and design to maximize energy efficiency and the incorporation of energy
conservation and green building features, contributes to reduced housing costs as well as
reduced greenhouse gas emissions. Energy efficient design community design can reduce
dependence on automobiles.
Residential water heating and heating/cooling are major sources of energy consumption. With
the application of energy efficient design and the use of solar power systems, home heating
and cooling can be operated on a more efficient and sustainable level.
By encouraging solar energy technology for residential
                                                               Active Systems use mechanical
heating/cooling in both retrofits and new construction         equipment to collect and transport
                                                               heat, such as a roof plate collector
the City can play a major role in energy conservation.         system used in solar water and space
There are two distinct approaches to solar heating:            heaters.
active and passive. The best method to encourage use           Passive Systems use certain types of
                                                               building materials to absorb solar
of solar systems for heating and cooling is to not restrict    energy and can transmit that energy
their use in the zoning and building ordinances and to         later, without mechanization.
require subdivision layouts that facilitate solar use.
Residential water heating can be made more energy efficient through the application of solar
water heating technologies. Solar water heating uses the sun to heat water, which is then stored
for later use, a conventional water heater is needed only as a backup. Solar water heating
systems can lower energy bills and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                   117
City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
In response to legislation on global climate change, local governments are required to
implement measures that cut greenhouse gas emissions attributable to land use decisions.
Executive Order S-E-05 initiated the first steps in establishing greenhouse gas emission reduction
targets in California. This was followed by the California Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32),
which required the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to establish reduction measures.
In November 2011, the City adopted a Climate Action Plan (CAP). In conjunction with other SLO
County jurisdictions, the City secured a $102,940 grant through the California Strategic Growth
Council for the “Central Coast Collaborative CAP Implementation and Monitoring Program”.
The collaborative implementation and monitoring program is an innovative strategy which will
help the region achieve significant GHG reductions and allow them to track these reductions
and determine overall progress toward achieving state goals. The program will provide a user-
friendly tool to record data associated with CAPs and other GHG-reducing activities, which will
result in tangible data regarding the effectiveness of GHG reduction strategies. Therefore, if
strategies are not performing as well as initially expected, corrective action can be taken
immediately to focus efforts on achieving the largest GHG reductions at the lowest cost. This
work program will also include best practices for implementation of one of the GHG reduction
strategies; an energy audit and retrofit program. The tools and best practices developed as part
of this work program will provide valuable resources which can be implemented in other local
and regional jurisdictions across the state
In addition to implanting GHG reduction programs as part of the CAP, there are several areas
where programs for energy conservation in new and existing housing units are supported by the
City:
     Through application of State residential building standards that establish energy
      performance criteria for new residential buildings (Title 24 of the California Administrative
      Code and California Energy Commission requirements). These regulations establish
      insulation, window glazing, air conditioning and water heating system requirements.
     Through appropriate land use policies and development standards that reduce energy
      consumption, such as promoting more compact, walkable neighborhoods, with housing
      close to jobs, community facilities and shopping; planning and zoning for mixed-use and
      higher density development; and permitting second units.
                                                  118

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
The following opportunities for energy conservation are available to the City, homeowners, and
developers:
       Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) provides a variety of energy conservation services for
        residents and provides several other energy assistance programs for lower income
        households. These programs include their Energy Watch Partnerships and the Charitable
        Contributions Program.
            o   The Energy Watch Partnerships help residents lower their energy bills and promote
                cleaner energy production. Through this program, PG&E has extended the reach
                of effectiveness of energy efficiency programs, and provided information about
                demand      responses     programs,     renewable     energy     and    self-generations
                opportunities.
            o   The Charitable Contributions Program gives millions of dollars each year to non-
                profit organizations to support environmental and energy sustainability. Projects
                include residential and community solar energy distribution projects, public
                education projects, and energy efficiency programs. The goal is to ensure that 75
                percent of the funding assist underserved communities, which includes low-
                income households, people with disabilities, and seniors.
       PG&E also offers rebates for energy efficient home appliances and remodeling. Rebates
        are available for cooling and heating equipment, lighting, seasonal appliances and
        remodeling (cool roofs, insulation, water heaters). These opportunities are available to all
        income levels and housing types.
       The Solar Water Heating and Efficiency Act of 2007 (AB 1470) created a $250 million, ten-
        year program to provide consumer rebates for solar water heating systems.
       Green Building Executive Order, S-20-04 (CA 2004), the Green Building Initiative set a goal
        of reducing energy use in public and private buildings by 20 percent by the year 2015, as
        compared with 2003 levels. The initiative encourages residential development projects to
        increase energy efficiency percentage beyond Title 24 requirements. In addition projects
        could implement other green building design (i.e., natural day lighting and on-site
        renewable, electricity generation). The City could also consider adopting standards that
        encourage or require specific LEED standards for green building.
       The California Solar Initiative required installation of 1 million solar roofs or an equivalent
        3,000 MW by 2017 on homes and businesses, increased use of solar thermal systems to
                                                  119

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
         offset the increasing demand for natural gas, use of advanced metering in solar
         applications, and creation of a funding source that can provide rebates over 10 years
         through a declining incentive schedule. The City should access the incentives that will be
         made available and provide information to developers, to encourage the installation of
         solar roofs on new residential development.
Program M.1-1 has been included to incorporate newly adopted state energy efficiency
standards and to encourage alternative energy efficient technologies.
5.3 Non-Governmental Constraints
This Section provides information related to constraints to producing housing, specifically
affordable housing, that result not from governmental regulation, but from other forces affecting
the housing market. Primarily, this examines the economic factors that contribute to the price of
housing in Arroyo Grande. Other factors that have an effect on housing costs that are not
addressed are sales and marketing costs, property taxes, and developer profits.
Land Costs
Land costs vary substantially based upon a number of factors. The main influences on land value
are location and zoning, and to a degree available supply of land. Land that is conveniently
located in a desirable area that is zoned for residential uses will likely be more valuable, and thus
more expensive.
Based on local real estate sources it is estimated that the median cost per acre if unimproved
residential zoned land in the City is $332,000, ranging between $48,000 per acre and $1,200,000
per acre. Currently, some of these vacant lots are located in more rural areas and are
encouraged to be subdivided, potentially reducing the cost per acre. Improved lots can be
even more costly. The price varies due to the site zoning, with higher density zoned land being
more expensive per acre (but less per unit). Land costs present a significant constraint to the
production of affordable housing in the City.
Construction Costs
Construction costs are those incurred in actually constructing a dwelling unit. These costs can
vary depending on the location or style of development. Important determinants of construction
costs include the amenities built into the unit, materials used, the prevailing labor rate (a
significant issue with subsidized affordable housing given recent legislation), and the difficulty of
                                                 120
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
building on the site. In Arroyo Grande, expansive soils may necessitate more extensive
foundations for housing units. According to the National Association of Home Builders 2013
Construction Cost Survey, the construction costs for a typical single-family home were estimated
at $246,500, approximately $95 per square foot.
Availability of Financing
The availability of financing affects the ability to purchase or improve homes. In the Arroyo
Grande area, 474 loan applications for home purchase or improvements were received in 2012,
of which 349 were conventional loans. Of the 349 conventional loan applications, 314 were for
home purchase and 35 were for home improvements. Only 4.9 percent of the 349 conventional
loans were denied, 11.7 percent were withdrawn or not accepted by applicant, and 54.2
percent were approved and accepted.
There were 125 applications for government assisted home purchase or improvement loans (VA,
FHA, FSA/RHS) in 2012. Of these, 52, or 41.6 percent of government assisted loans were approved
and accepted by the applicant. Table 5-11 shows the breakdown of loan applications by type,
purpose and outcome.
                                   Table 5-13 Applications for Loans
                                                                 Number  Percent
                    Type of Loan
                    Total                                            474   173.6%
                    Conventional                                     349    73.6%
                    Government assisted                              125    26.4%
                       FHA-insured                                    96    76.8%
                       VA-guaranteed                                  29    23.2%
                    Loan purpose
                    Conventional                                     349   100.0%
                       Home Purchase                                 314    90.0%
                       Home Improvement                               35    10.0%
                    Government assisted                              125   100.0%
                       Home Purchase                                 124    99.2%
                       Home Improvement                                1     0.8%
                    Loan Outcome
                    Conventional                                     349   100.0%
                       Approved and accepted                         189    54.2%
                       Denied                                         17     4.9%
                       Withdrawn or not accepted                      41    11.7%
                       Closed/Incomplete                               7     2.0%
                       Purchased by Institution                       95    27.2%
                                                 121
City of Arroyo Grande                                                           2014-2019 Housing Element
                                          Table 5-13 Applications for Loans
                      Government assisted                                   125   100.0%
                         Approved and accepted                               52    41.6%
                         Denied                                              11     8.8%
                         Withdrawn or not accepted                           14    11.2%
                         Closed/Incomplete                                    1     0.8%
                         Purchased by Institution                            47    37.6%
                      Source: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 2012
Most (85.6 percent) applicants for government assisted loans had an annual income equivalent
to or greater than the County median income of $60,264 in 2012. Similarly, over 85.6 percent of
conventional loan applicants earned greater than the County median income. Of all originated
loans, 16.2 percent were awarded and accepted by applicants with less than median
household income.
Insurance Availability
One of the significant issues identified by the City as reported by local developers is the cost
and/or availability of workers compensation and liability insurance. These types of insurance
have become very costly or are not available at all. This is having a negative effect on the
likelihood of construction of multi-family units such as condominiums and apartments as well as a
substantial cost per unit. This situation has escalated to a point that only single-family residential
development appears profitable. This has and continues to be a constraint to multi-family and
condominium development, which are the types of housing most feasible for affordable
housing. This is a situation that needs to be addressed at the State level in that it is generally out
of the control of the City.
                                                              122
City of Arroyo Grande                                                                            2014-2019 Housing Element
                  Chapter 6 Review of the Previous Housing Element
This Chapter evaluates and reports on the status and implementation of the programs of the
2007-2014 Housing Element. The main purpose is to evaluate which programs were successful
and should be continued, and which programs were ineffective and should be eliminated or
modified.
Table 6-1 summarizes the City’s previous RHNA for the period from January 2007 through
December 2013 and the number of housing units built or approved during that planning period.
The City needed to account for 362 units during the 2007-2014 period. From January 2007
through December 31, 2013, the City constructed or approved 363 units and 19 second units.
The City met the above moderate income housing needs for the 2007-2014 planning period.
                               Table 6-1 Progress Toward Meeting Goals 2007-2014
                                                                                                                 Total
                                                                                                    Above
                                           Very Low              Low          Moderate                         (added
                                                                                                  Moderate
                                                                                                               across)
2007-2014 RHNA                                  84                59               67                152          362
Units Constructed/Approved                      23                25               51                264          363
Second Units                                     0                19                 0                0            19
Constructed/Approved
Remaining 2007-2014 RHNA                        61                15               16                 0           92
Source: Regional Housing Needs Plan 2013, San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, City of Arroyo Grande
6.1 Evaluation of 2007-2014 Housing Element Programs
Below are the programs identified in the 2007-2014 Housing Element followed by a brief
evaluation or status comment.
A.1-1. The City shall establish a five-year schedule of actions to implement the goals and
policies of the Housing Element.
          Response:          An implementation schedule of goals and policies are outlined in the
          Housing Element but many of the programs associated with these goals and policies
          have not yet been implemented.
          This program will continue to be implemented.
                                                               123

City of Arroyo Grande                                                      2014-2019 Housing Element
A.1-2. Report annually on the City’s progress in meeting its fair share housing targets. Provide
the collected information to the Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD),development community, and non-profit housing developers. HCD provides specific
instructions and a template for the annual report.
         Response:       The program is on-going.
         This program will be continued.
A.1-3. The City shall amend the Development Code to revise the requirements for the Traffic
Way Mixed Use District to remove the limitation to only live-work residential uses. A mix of
residential use types shall be allowed as allowed in all of the mixed use zoning districts (except
the Industrial Mixed Use District). The Development Code shall also be amended to allow
residential projects at densities up to 20 units per acre in the Traffic Way Mixed Use District.
         Response:       The City has not amended the Development Code has not yet been
         amended regarding the limitations on uses nor the density in the Traffic Way Mixed Use
         District.
         This program will continue to be implemented.
A.2-1. The City shall continue to encourage and publicize on the City’s website the secondary
dwelling program to increase public awareness.
         Response:       Currently the City provides information about secondary dwelling units on
         the City’s website, including development standards, procedures, and fees.
         This program will be continued.
A.3-1. The City shall amend the Municipal Code to provide incentives for the development of
affordable housing projects, including expedited permitting, providing financial assistance
through the City’s Inclusionary Housing Trust Fund, requiring lot consolidation, and providing
greater flexibility in development standards.
                                                  124

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
          Response:       The Municipal Code has not yet been amended to include these
          incentives for affordable housing projects. However, impact fees have been reduced for
          affordable housing projects.
          This program has not successfully been implemented and will be continued.
A.3-2. The City shall amend the Development Code to include the definition of “Extremely Low-
Income” as defined by Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.
          Response:       The definition of “Extremely Low-income” has not yet been included in the
          Development Code. Extremely low-income households earn 30 percent or less of the
          median household income.
          This program will be continued.
A.3-3. The City shall amend the Development Code to provide additional incentives specific for
extremely low-income housing projects. Incentives may include flexible standards for on- and
off-site improvements such as reduced parking requirements, reduced curb, gutter, and
sidewalk requirements; reduced or deferred water and/or sewer connection fees; permit
streamlining procedures and development review; or financial incentives and assistance.
          Response:       The City has not yet amended the Development Code regarding
          additional incentives for extremely low-income housing projects.
          This program will be continued.
A.10-1. To facilitate affordable housing, the City shall comply with State Density Bonus Law. The
City shall update Development Code Chapter 16.82 to comply with AB 2280. The City will
continue to update Chapter 16.82 on an ongoing basis to comply with any future updates to
State Density Bonus law (Government Code Section 65915) as well as evaluate proposed
Development Code amendments to assess whether they pose any constraints to developer
utilization of density bonuses.
          Response:       The City has not completed the Development Code amendment to
          comply with recent changes to State Density Bonus Law.
                                                   125

City of Arroyo Grande                                                        2014-2019 Housing Element
         This program will be continued.
A.10-2. The City shall evaluate and amend the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Permit
procedures in the Development Code (Section 16.16.060) to provide more predictable options
for small lot infill projects in the City’s Residential land use designations.
         Response:         The Development Code has not been amended regarding the PUD
         permit procedures.
         This program will be continued.
A.12-1. The City shall continue to maintain its Geographical Information System (GIS) mapping
and planning database inventory of vacant and underutilized “opportunity sites”.
         Response:         The City maintains a GIS database inventory of vacant and underutilized
         “opportunity sites”.
         This program has been successfully implemented and will be continued.
A.14-1. The City shall amend the Development Code to include a definition of the term
“Attainable housing.”
         Response:         The Development Code has not yet been amended to include the
         definition of “Attainable housing”. This effort will be achieved through an “Affordable
         Housing” program. The City envisions assessing whether proposed projects include
         “Attainable Housing” as applications are submitted.
         This program will be continued.
B.1-1.   The City shall continue tracking all residential projects that include affordable housing to
ensure that the affordability is maintained for at least 45 years for owner-occupied units and 55
years for rental units, and that any sale or change of ownership of these affordable units prior to
satisfying the 45 or 55-year restriction shall be “rolled over” for another 45 or 55 years to protect
“at-risk” units.
                                                      126

City of Arroyo Grande                                                   2014-2019 Housing Element
        Response:       The City tracks all affordable projects through a database, inputting any
        updates regarding ownership or affordability when they occur.
        This program will be continued.
B.2-1.  The City shall continue to contract with the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO)
for the monitoring of affordable units to ensure compliance.
        Response:       The City has an Agreement with the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo
        (HASLO) for affordable housing eligibility verification and compliance. The City is also a
        member of the San Luis Obispo Housing Trust Fund (SLOCHTF), which provides ongoing
        technical assistance.
        This program will be continued.
C.1-1. The City shall continue to allocate financial resources to augment extremely low, very
low and low-income housing development based on the financial projection of the Inclusionary
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
        Response:       The Inclusionary Affordable Housing Trust Fund will continue to devote
        funds to affordable housing projects for people of extremely low, very low and low
        income.
        This program will be continued.
C.4-1. The City shall continue to meet with local non-profit and private developers semi-
annually, or more frequently if opportunities arise, to promote the extremely low, very low, and
low-income housing programs outlined in the Housing Element. The City shall direct private
housing developers to funding sources (such as federal and State housing grant fund programs
and local housing trust funds) to promote affordable housing as outlined in the policies of Goal
C.
        Response:       The City will continue to promote the development of affordable housing
        opportunities for people of extremely low, very low and low income.
        This program will be continued.
                                                  127
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
C.4-2. The City shall continue to participate in financial incentive programs established by the
San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund (SLOCHTF), such as a revolving loan program.
        Response:       The City continues to receive local housing funding through the SLOCHTF.
        This program will be continued.
D.1-1. The City shall encourage specific plans for land within its Sphere of Influence that include
increased residential capacity for multiple-family development.
        Response:       Multiple family developments will continue to be encouraged through
        specific plans.
        This program will continue to be implemented.
E.4-1.  When necessary, the City shall continue to work with property owners of deed restricted
affordable units who need to sell within 45 years of initial sale. When the seller is unable to sell to
an eligible buyer within a specified time period, equity sharing provisions are established (as per
the affordable housing agreement for the property) whereby the difference between the
affordable and market value is paid to the City to eliminate any incentive to sell the converted
unit at market rate. Funds generated would then be used to develop additional affordable
housing within the City.
        Response:       The City will continue to support the affordable housing agreement of
        properties, working with property owners, as needed, who need to sell of deed restricted
        affordable units.
        This program will be continued.
F.1-1.  The City shall evaluate and amend the inclusionary affordable housing requirements in
the Development Code (Chapter 16.80) based on experience using the requirements in
producing affordable units.
Potential changes to the requirements include: (1) consider contracting with a housing
management organization to manage deed-restricted affordable units in the City; (2) consider
                                                 128
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
adding incentives to encourage construction of rental units; and (3) investigate extending the
income categories served by the inclusionary requirements to extremely low income households.
The City will engage the development community during the evaluation process.
        Response:        The City has not amended the Development Code regarding the
        inclusionary affordable housing requirements.
        This program will be continued.
F.1-2.  The City shall amend the inclusionary affordable housing requirements in the
Development Code (Chapter 16.80) to eliminate inclusion of moderate-income units in the
requirements.
        Response:        The City has not amended the Development Code, eliminating the
        inclusion of moderate-income units in the inclusionary affordable housing requirements.
                         This program will be continued.
F.1-3.  The City shall amend the in-lieu fee as called for in the inclusionary affordable housing
requirements in the Development Code (Chapter 16.80).
        Response:        The City has not amended the Development Code.
                         This program will be continued.
G.1-1. The City shall continue to contract with the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO)
to maintain a mailing list of persons interested in development projects containing affordable
housing. Agendas for all City meetings related to these projects shall be mailed to persons on
the mailing list. The City shall also continue to post the agendas on the City’s website.
        Response:        This program will be continued.
G.1-2. The City shall encourage construction and/or rehabilitation of housing units for low, very-
low, and extremely low income households by developing and implementing incentive-based
programs such as fee reductions, fee waivers, flexible development standards, updating the
                                                   129

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
City’s second unit ordinance to reduce barriers to second units development in residential
zones, and similar programs.
        Response:      This program will be continued.
H.1-1. The City shall continue to contract and coordinate with the San Luis Obispo Housing
Authority to maintain and expand Section 8 rental housing assistance to qualified households.
        Response:      The City coordinates with HASLO regarding Section 8 housing assistance
        when needed.
        This program will continue to be implemented.
H.1-2. The City shall develop a program to offer housing developers an alternative to meet
affordable housing requirements by contributing some “sweat equity” on projects where existing
housing units will be rehabilitated or conserved and where appropriate, deed-restricted as
affordable as per the City’s Affordable Housing Program.
        Response:      This program will be continued.
H.2-1. The City shall continue to consider abatement of unsafe or unsanitary structures,
including buildings or rooms inappropriately used for housing, contrary to adopted health and
safety codes. Where feasible, the City will encourage rehabilitation and allow reasonable notice
and time to correct deficiencies. Where necessary and feasible, extremely low, very low and
low-income residents displaced by abatement action shall be eligible for relocation assistance,
subject to Council approval.
        Response:      This program will be continued.
I.1-1.  Written notice shall be required prior to the conversion of any units for low-income
households to market rate units in any of the following circumstances:
       The units were constructed with the aid of government funding
       The units were required by an inclusionary zoning ordinance
       The project was granted a density bonus
       The project received other incentives
                                                130

City of Arroyo Grande                                                       2014-2019 Housing Element
The property owner should work with the City and affordable housing developers, such as
HASLO, to identify qualified buyers and/or funding prior to conversion. In cases where
conversions occur, notice shall at a minimum be given to the following:
        The City of Arroyo Grande
        State Department of Housing and Community Development
        San Luis Obispo Housing Authority
        Residents of at-risk units
         Response:       This program will be continued.
I.2-1.   The City shall annually monitor the status of affordable housing developments. If any
property owners indicate plans to convert affordable units to market rate pricing, or if the City
identifies market conditions indicating potential for “at risk” unit conversion, the City will contact
qualified non-profit organizations or other agencies and explore opportunities to assist and
facilitate the transfer ownership of “at risk” units.
         Response:       The City monitors the development of affordable housing, classifying the
         development of new units based on income brackets of very low, low, moderate and
         above moderate. The City will continue to ensure the availability of affordable housing
         units for people of very low and low income.
         This program will be continued.
J.1-1.   The City shall continue to promote housing opportunities for seniors and other special
needs groups by identifying sites suitable for senior and transitional housing and considering
other incentives to promote senior and transitional housing. Single-room occupancy units (SROs)
shall be added to the use tables in the Development Code allowed in all Mixed-Use zones with a
conditional use permit. SROs shall be allowed in the MFVH zone district with a minor use permit.
         Response:       Within the planning period, one project included the expansion of an
         existing assisted living facility by 17 units (“Alder House”). Recently, a 69 unit assisted living
         facility was approved.
         This program will be continued.
                                                      131

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
K.1-1.   The City shall continue to participate in the South San Luis Obispo County working group
cooperating with other cities, the county and other agencies in the development of programs
aimed at providing homeless shelters and related services.
         Response:        The City continues to work the county and other relevant agencies in
         providing homeless shelters and related services.
         This program will be continued.
K.2-1. The City shall amend the Development Code to allow emergency shelters without a
conditional use permit or other discretionary permits in appropriate locations in compliance with
SB 2, the “Fair Share Zoning” law. The Development Code amendment shall include a definition
for “emergency shelter.” Emergency shelters are currently not allowed in commercial mixed-use
districts,   and    are    allowed    through    the   Conditional Use   Permit   process  in  the
Condominium/Townhouse (MF), Apartments (MFA) and Multifamily Very High Density (MFVH)
residential districts. The Development Code shall be updated to require administrative approval
only for emergency shelters in the Industrial Mixed-Use (IMU) and Highway Mixed-Use (HMU)
districts. These commercial districts have sufficient capacity to house emergency shelters with
approximately 18 acres of vacant or underutilized land available. The IMU district has several
large parcels totaling almost 13.5 acres with ten (10) acres that are currently used as storage
and/or construction yards with small or no permanent structures.          The HMU district has less
potential, although there are about four acres with a couple of large vacant parcels totaling
1.64 acres. About 6.36 of the 18 acres have some type of permanent structure on the individual
parcels, but could be redeveloped to accommodate transitional housing. Transitional and
supportive housing shall be defined as residential uses subject to the same standards that apply
to other housing.
The Development Code can include locational and operational criteria for emergency shelters
such as:
     • Proximity of public transit, supportive services, and commercial services;
     • Hours of operation;
     • External lighting and noise;
     • Provision of security measures for the proper operation and management of a proposed
       facility;
     • Measures to avoid queues of individuals outside proposed facility; and
                                                    132

City of Arroyo Grande                                                  2014-2019 Housing Element
    • Compliance with county and State health and safety requirements for food, medical, and
       other supportive services provided onsite.
Such criteria can act to encourage and facilitate emergency shelters and transitional housing
through clear and unambiguous guidelines for the application review process, the basis for
approval, and the terms and conditions of approval.
The City will solicit input from local service providers and the South San Luis Obispo County
working group in the preparation and adoption of the amendment to the Development Code
to ensure that development standards and permit processing will not impede the approval
and/or development of emergency and transitional housing.
         Response:      The Development Code has been amended to establish emergency
         shelters without a conditional use permit and to define transitional and supportive
         housing as a residential use subject to the same restrictions of a residential use in the
         same zone.
         This program has been implemented.
K.2-2. The City shall implement an overnight parking program for the homeless in appropriate
zoning districts.
         Response:      An overnight parking program has not yet been implemented. A pilot safe
         overnight parking program was approved through a Temporary Use Permit (TUP) at St.
         Barnabas church in 2012. Observations from the pilot program were as follows:         the
         program was not fully utilized (only 3 applications were submitted to participate in the
         program, one of which met the program criteria and was approved); there were no
         reported incidents specific to the program; there were no violations of any conditions of
         the TUP; and neighbors remained concerned that their neighborhood would be
         impacted by the program. The program was discontinued at the request of the church.
         This program will be continued.
L.1-1.   The City shall explore models to encourage the creation of housing for persons with
disabilities, including developmental disabilities. Such models could include coordinating with
the Tri-County Regional Center and other local agencies in encouraging affordable housing
                                                 133

City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
projects to dedicate a percent of housing for disabled individuals; assisting in housing
development; providing housing services that educate, advocate, inform, and assist people to
locate and maintain housing; and models to assist in the maintenance and repair of housing for
persons with developmental disabilities.
         Response:       The City will continue to explore models to encourage development of
         housing for persons with disabilities.
         This program will continue to be implemented.
L.2-1.   The City shall create a policy or amend the Development Code to provide persons with
disabilities   seeking  equal   access     to   housing an  opportunity    to  request  reasonable
accommodation in the application of City building and zoning laws.
         Response:       The City has not amended the Development Code to provide an
         opportunity to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.
         This program will be continued.
L.2-2.   The City will have brochures on universal design available at the Community
Development Department front counter. The City will also consider updating the building code
to encourage use of universal design in home design. Universal design is based on the precept
that throughout life, all people experience changes in their abilities. The goal of universal design
is to provide environments that are usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without
the need for specialization in design and construction and/or facilitate change in occupancy
over time.
         Response:       The City has not yet made progress promoting the universal design
         concept.
         This program will be continued.
M.1-1. The City shall continue working to implement a water and electrical retrofit program for
existing housing units. A plumbing retrofit program was established in 2004, and water
conservation rebate programs were established in 2009. The City will continue to work with PG&E
and other agencies to establish an electrical retrofit program.
                                                   134
City of Arroyo Grande                                                    2014-2019 Housing Element
         Response:       The City has continued to promote Water Conservation Incentive
         programs, including the Plumbing Retrofit Program as well as rebate and education
         programs. The City has also been involved in the San Luis Obispo County Energy Watch,
         a joint project between San Luis Obispo County, Pacific Gas and Electric Company and
         Southern California Gas Company. In 2013 the City adopted a Climate Action Plan and
         partnered with San Luis Obispo County jurisdictions to receive a California Strategic
         Growth Council grant to develop an implementation and monitoring program.              The
         program provides tools and best practices for implementing all CAP programs, such as
         the energy audit and retrofit program.
         This program will be modified and continued.
M.1-2. The City shall establish a program to allow residential projects to receive minor
exceptions if they meet 25% of items on the Tier 1 list of the California Green Building Code (Title
24) or 15% of items on the Tier 2 list of that code.
         Response:       The City has yet to establish a program regarding minor exceptions for
         residential projects that meet a minimum number of items from the California Green
         Building Code.
         This program will be continued.
N.1-1. The City will continue to promote the enforcement of policies of the State Fair
Employment and Housing Commission, and shall resolve housing discrimination complaints
through assistance from HUD, and/or local, regional private fair housing organizations. The City
will prepare a brochure that promotes equal housing opportunities and addresses discrimination.
The brochure will be available at the Community Development department and a link to
download the brochure will be placed on the City’s website. In addition the City shall
disseminate information in one or more of the following ways to ensure the public is aware of Fair
Housing Law:
     • Distribute materials to property owners and apartment managers twice a year.
     • Make      public  service  announcements        through multiple   media   outlets including
        newspaper, radio, television, and social media to run on a regular basis.
     • Conduct public presentations with different community groups once or twice a year.
                                                   135

City of Arroyo Grande                                                     2014-2019 Housing Element
        Response:      The City has not yet prepared a brochure to promote equal housing
        opportunities and address discrimination or disseminated information about the Fair
        Housing Law to the public.
        This program will be continued.
O.1-1. Prior to any public hearing where the City is considering amending or updating its
Housing Element or housing policies, the City will notify all local housing organizations, as well as
social service agencies, and post notices at significant locations.
        Response:      The City will continue to notify the necessary organizations, agencies and
        other parties when amending or updating the Housing Element or housing policies.
        This program will be continued.
P.1-1.  Following amendment of the General Plan Conservation/Open Space and Safety
Elements to comply with AB 162 related to floodplain mapping, the City will amend the Housing
Element if needed for consistency.
        Response:      The City has not yet amended the General Plan Conservation and Safety
        Elements to comply with AB 162. Following any amendments, the Housing Element will be
        modified, as necessary.
        This program will be continued.
                                                136
City of Arroyo Grande                                                             2014-2019 Housing Element
                                                APPENDIX A
                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY
California Department of Housing and Community Development, Income Limits, June 2011.
California Department of Housing and Community Development, Housing Element Questions and Answers,
    June 2001
City of Arroyo Grande, adopted Housing Element, 2007
City of Arroyo Grande, Urban Water Management Plan, 2010
City of Arroyo Grande, Housing Element, June 1993
City of Arroyo Grande, 2001 General Plan Policy Document and Elements, October 2001
City of Arroyo Grande, 2001 General Plan Integrated Program Environmental Impact Report, May 2001
Craigslist, current rental prices in Arroyo Grande for studios and granny units, July 2011
San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, Regional Housing Needs Plan, June 2013
San Luis Obispo County, Department of Planning and Building, Affordable Housing Standards, February
    2014.
San Luis Obispo County, Tribune Newspaper, SLO County home sales decline, but median price rises in
    May, June 24, 2014.
Taylor, H. Economics and Housing Policy National Association of Builders
Tri-Counties Regional Center, 2012 Performance Report for Tri-Counties Regional Center, retrieved from
         http://www.tri-counties.org/phocadownload/tcrcpcyearendrpt-2012.pdf
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2006-2010 ACS Estimates
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2010
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000
United States, Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),2007-2011 Comprehensive Housing
    Affordability Strategy (CHAS), retrieved
    fromhttp://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/cp/CHAS/data_querytool_chas.html. .
                                                        137
FRINGE AND URBAN AREA LAND USE ELEMENT
COUNTY FRINGE AREA
To the northwest, north and southeast of the City of Arroyo Grande, the County’s San Luis Bay Area Plan –
Inland classifies large subareas as “Residential Rural” (RR) and “Residential Suburban” (RS) land use
categories generally composing the “Arroyo Grande Fringe Area”. It should be noted that the prime
agricultural soils of Arroyo Grande Valley and Cienega Valley are NOT included in this unincorporated area
residential fringe, but are appropriately classified Agriculture.
The County’s General Plan Land Use Element includes a report Framework for Planning that describes the
purpose and character of the Residential Rural classification as follows:
RESIDENTIAL RURAL
     Purpose
     a. To provide for residential development at a low density compatible with a rural character and life-
         style which maintains the character of the open countryside and is compatible with surrounding
         agricultural uses.
     b. To allow limited, compatible non-residential uses commensurate with rural parcel sizes.
     c. To emphasize residential uses in areas where agriculture is clearly a secondary use, or where
         agriculture is not feasible yet large open space areas are maintained as part of a residential life-style.
     d. To encourage agricultural and other open space uses as part-time or incidental “hobby” activities such
         as horse raising or specialty farming.
     Character
     a. Areas of existing small-acreage parcels no more than three miles form urban reserve lines that are not
         commercially viable for agriculture, where the average parcel size within any contiguous area is below
         19 acres.
     b. Areas that are outside of urban and village areas and connected to them by county-maintained roads,
         although exceptions may be observed for existing older subdivided areas.
     c. Areas with slopes generally less than 30%.
     d. Areas with marginal agricultural soils.
     e. Areas with a rural landscape high in visual quality (for example, woodlands, hills, rock formations,
         existing agriculture and ag accessory buildings) where clustering of allowed densities to less sensitive
         portions of a site is encouraged to be required through planning area standards.
     f. Areas generally free of fragile natural resources.
     g. Areas where growth will not be premature with respect to utility and public service capacities, or in
         conflict with agricultural, commercial, or industrial uses. Light agricultural uses are to be encouraged.
     h. Areas where horses and other similar farm animals are allowed accessory to residential uses.
     i. Areas where public services demands are limited, septic tanks and individual wells can suffice for
         required water and sewer capability.
                                                    LUE - 1

The purpose and character of the Residential Suburban classification as outlined in the County’s Framework for
Planning are:
     RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN
     Purpose
     a. To allow for single-family residential development on estate sized lots in a semi-rural suburban setting
        within the urban and village areas or in older existing rural subdivisions.
     b. To allow limited, compatible non-residential uses which complement suburban neighborhoods such as
        animal raising or hobby farming.
     c. To designate areas for lower density residential expansion within urban and village boundaries.
     d. To encourage clustering of allowed densities where there are important open space attributes that are
        a community resource or where sensitive habitats exist.
     Character
     a. Areas at the outer portions of communities where open space is prominent, with residences on parcels
        ranging form one to five areas in size.
     b. Areas within urban or village reserve lines, but outside urban service lines and programmed for less
        than full urban services (see Table H).
     c. Although there are several areas of the residential suburban category outside urban and village
        reserve lines, such as Squire Canyon, Arroyo Grande Fringe and Tract 7, those areas are designated to
        recognize existing areas of small lots. Those areas should not be expanded and new areas not
        created except within urban and village reserve lines.
     d. Areas where soil conditions will enable septic systems to serve adequately on larger parcels.
     e. Areas where the majority of land contains slopes less than 30% (with increased lot sizes required a
        slope increases) and where land with slopes less than 20% is available for building sites on all
        proposed parcels.
     f. Areas with a landscape or viewshed of high visual quality (for example, woodlands, hills, rock
        formations, existing agriculture and ag accessory buildings) where clustering of allowed density to less
        sensitive portions of a site is encouraged.
     g. Areas of generally marginal agricultural land.
     h. Areas generally free of fragile natural resources.
     i. Areas where growth will not be premature with respect to utility and public service capacities, or in
        conflict with agricultural, commercial or industrial uses.
     j. Areas where horses and other similar farm animals are allowed accessory to residential uses.
     k. Areas where small-scale neighborhood commercial and service uses may be appropriate in limited
        areas if consistent with individual community and Land Use Ordinance standards.
County Residential Rural and Residential Suburban classified areas of the Arroyo Grande Fringe and Area of
Environmental Concern (AEC) should not be expanded and new areas should not be created.
                                                  LUE - 2

The Residential Suburban area southeast of Arroyo Grande is predominantly composed of Tract 1256 which is
subject to specific Planning Area Standards outlined in the San Luis Bay Area – Inland LUE. These standards
include a minimum parcel size of 2.5 acres (unless the LUO requires larger) and also require a Development
Plan for more than one dwelling unit per lot.
To the northwest and north, however, the County LUO for the Residential Suburban category currently allows
new land divisions ranging from one to three acres depending on average slope and water or sewer facilities
proposed or provided. For slopes less than 16% the minimum parcel size is 1 acre while parcels with 16 to
30% average slope require 2 acres, unless neither community water and sewer are provided, requiring 2.5
acre minimum parcel size. Average slopes in excess of 30% require 3-acre minimum parcel sizes.
The Arroyo Grande Fringe Planning Area Standards require new land division applications for Residential Rural
or Residential Suburban . . . “provide information to demonstrate. . .that:
(1) adequate groundwater resources are available to serve the proposed land division , and
(2) each proposed parcel can accommodate an individual sewage disposal (septic) system.”
It is unfortunate that the Residential Suburban category north of the City implies one-acre minimum parcel
sizes: This intense development, if continued, may deplete limited groundwater resources and produce water
quality problems associated with septic systems in often sloping and clay type hillside soils. The lack of
adequate roads and the high fire hazard and marginal response time are further reasons that one-acre parcels
outside the URL are inappropriate.
Unless areawide groundwater resources are proven adequate and it is proven that ground water quality will
not be adversely affected by cumulative development of greater intensity, the City interprets that existing
Planning Area Standards should preclude further minimum standard new land divisions.
The County LUO criteria for Residential Rural category parcels includes “remoteness, fire hazard and fire
response time, access and slope”.
For the Arroyo Grande Fringe RR, the remoteness test, measured on the shortest public road between the URL
and site is generally less than 5 miles enabling 5-acre minimum parcel sizes. The fire hazard/response time
criteria from the CDF stations is generally 15 minutes or less enabling 5 acre minimum parcel sizes in either
moderate or high and very high hazard areas. The access test enables 5-acre minimum parcels where 40 feet
right-of-way and County gravel road standards are improved and organized or public maintenance is provided.
The slope test for RR category in the Arroyo Grande Fringe requires parcels of 5 acres for 0 – 15% average
slope: 7 acres for 16 to 30% slope and 10 acres for over 30% average slope.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
LU (Fringe) 1- The City requests that the County amend its Land Use Element to reduce
                 Residential Rural and Residential Suburban land uses and density within
                 Arroyo Grande’s Fringe Area and Area of Environmental Concern
                 (AEC)/Planning Area.
LU(Fringe) 1-1 County Residential Rural and Residential Suburban classified areas in the Arroyo Grande
                  Fringe and Area of Environmental Concern should not be expanded and new areas
                  should not be created.
LU(Fringe) 1-2 The County should require 2 ½ acre minimum parcels for all Residential Suburban Land
                  divisions in the Arroyo Grande Fringe Area or 5-acre minimum where slopes exceed
                  30%.
LU(Fringe) 1-3 LAFCO and South County Sanitation District should exclude the Printz, Noyes and Oak
                  Park Road areas from the SCSD Sphere of Influence.
                                                  LUE - 3

LU(Fringe) 1-4 The City, LAFCO and South County Sanitation District should expand the Sphere of
               Influence to the southeast to include the Williams property.
LU(Fringe) 1-5 The County should establish “road impact fees” for all of the Residential Rural RR and
               Residential Suburban RS areas in the Arroyo Grande Fringe and to the southeast of the
               City. The fee should be set based on cost studies to correct deficiencies already
               apparent on State Highway and County roads serving these areas, similar to the fees
               currently imposed on South County Nipomo area developments.
LU(Fringe) 1-6 Caltrans and the County of San Luis Obispo shall minimize further private driveways from
               existing parcels by requiring shared common access to adjoining parcels where feasible, and
               requiring new land divisions in the Residential Suburban RS to also conform to the same
               Planning Area standard as the Residential Rural RR regarding Highway 227 access.
                                               LUE - 4

URBAN LAND USE ELEMENT
         RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, ZONING AND POPULATION DENISTY
Residential land uses, ranging from large-lot single-family homes to multiple-family apartment buildings are the
predominant uses within the City of Arroyo Grande. Most of the land within the City designated for residential
use has been developed. The demand for additional residential development is evidenced by requests for
conversion of non-residential classifications to residential designations as well as requests to increase the
density allowed within residential and non-residential classifications.
Residential density, zoning categories and population density shown on the Urban Land Use Element, Map 3
are summarized on Table; LU-1.
Residential Density, Table LU-1
Classification            DU Density       Consistent Zoning/Min Lot Size Persons/Household   Approximate
                                                                                              Population Density
                                                                                              Persons/acre
Agriculture (Ag)          1 du/10ac.       Gen or Exclusive Agriculture/          2.4p/du     0.24 p/ac
                                           20 ac. (currently 10 ac. In City)
                          1 du/20ac.                                                          0.12 p/ac
Conservation/             1 du/10ac.       OS & PF                                2.4 “       0.24 p/ac
Open Space(C/OS)
                          1 du/5ac.        5ac, 10ac, & 20 ac.                                0.5 p/ac
County Residential        1 du/5ac         County RR/5 – 10ac                     2.4 “       0.5 p/ac
Rural (RR)
County Residential        1 du/2½ ac.*     County RS (Proposed)                   2.4 “       1.0 p/ac
Suburban (RS)
                          (County LUO currently allows 1 –3 ac. lots)
Single Family Residential (SFR)
Very Low Density (VLD)      1du/2 ½ ac.    RE/2½ ac.                              2.4 “       1.0 p/ac
Low Density (LD)           1 du/1½ ac.     RH/1½ ac. (cluster)                    2.4 “       1.6 p/ac
                           1 du/1ac.       City RR/1 ac.                          2.4 “       2.4 p/ac
Low Medium Density(LM)     2.5 du/1ac.     City RS                                2.4 “       6.0 p/ac
Medium Density (MD)        4.5 du/ac       City SF                                2.4 "       10.8 p/ac
Multi-Family Residential (MFR)
Medium High Density (MHD)
Townhouse/Condo           9.0 du/ac        City MF                                2.0 p/du    18.0 p/ac
Mobile Home Park (MHP) 12.0 du/ac          MHP-MHD                                1.5 p/du    18.0 p/ac
High Density (HD)         14 du/ac         City MFA                               2.0 p/du    28.0 p/ac
Apartments
Very High Density(VHD) 25 du/ac            Senior Residential                     2.0 p/du    50.0 p/ac
Mixed Use (MU)
Village Core (VC)         25 du/ac         See                                    2.0 p/du    50.0 p/ac
Office (O)                                 Devt.
PD, SP and CF                              Code
                                                  LUE - 5

        Map 3
Urban Land Use Element
    LUE - 6
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
LU2 Accommodate a broad range of Single Family Residential (SFR) housing densities within the
    City.
    LU2-1  Accommodate the development of equestrian and estate density residential uses in appropriate
           areas designated as Single-Family Residential Very Low Density (SFR-VLD).
           LU2-1.1    Allow a maximum density of 0.4 du/acre (1 du/2.5 acres) within the designation
                      SFR-VLD areas (zoned RE and/or County RS).
           LU2-1.2    Permit the keeping of large animals on lands within the SFR-VLD designation where
                      parcels are a minimum of 2½ acres.
    LU2-2  Accommodate the development of Residential Hillside cluster development and large lot
           conventional subdivisions in appropriate areas, classified as Single Family Residential Low
           Density (SFR-LD).
           LU2-2.1    Allow a maximum density of 0.67 du/acre (1 du/1.5 acres) within appropriate SFR-LD
                      areas (zoned Residential Hillside RH). Encourage clustered subdivision or Planned
                      Development to retain steeper slopes, drainage, natural vegetation and other site
                      features as Conservation Open Space.
           LU2-2.2    Accommodate the development of large lot conventional subdivisions (1du/1ac)
                      within appropriate SFR-LD areas (zoned City RR).
           LU2-2.3    Conditionally permit the keeping of large animals and/or orchards and vineyards on
                      lands within the SFR-LD designation where parcels are a minimum of 1 acre.
           LU2-2.4    Ensure that all residential hillside development, regardless of density, does not
                      excessively intrude on the natural slope and terrain of the hillside, including:
                           •   Density that is commensurate with the steepness of slope
                           •   Discouraging excessive use of retaining walls, intrusive grading and
                               removal of native oak trees
    LU2-3  Accommodate the development of suburban, residential units in appropriate areas designated
           as Single-Family Residential – Low-Medium Density (SFR-LMD).
           LU2-3.1    Allow a maximum density of 2.5 du/acre within lands designated as SFR-LMD (zoned
                      City’s Residential Suburban).
    LU2-4  Accommodate the development of urban, single-family residential units in areas designated as
           Single-Family Residential – Medium Density (SFR-MD).
           LU2-4.1    Allow a maximum density of 4.5 du/acre within the SFR-MD designation, and
                      encourage neo-traditional or modern subdivision depending on the character of
                      adjoining existing development.
           LU2-4.2    The Development Code may provide for alternative development standards, and
                      increased density (maximum of 10%) in all SFR districts where superior neo-
                      traditional subdivision design is proposed.
                                              LUE - 7

    LU2-5  In all Single Family Residential districts the Development Code may allow accessory guest
           and/or secondary studio units as conditional uses.
    LU2-6  Permit compatible home-based businesses (home occupations) in all residential areas, subject
           to applicable economic development element policies and City of Arroyo Grande Development
           Code and other regulations.
    LU2-7  The 21± acre area south of Arroyo Grande Creek east of Tract 409 (Noguera Park), and north
           of E. Cherry Avenue designated Single-Family Residential - Medium Density (SFR-MD) is subject
           to a requirement for a neighborhood plan to coordinate street, drainage, water, sewer,
           agricultural buffer, creekside trail and conservation/open space considerations prior to approval
           of any subdivision or parcel map.
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
LU3 Accommodate a broad range of Multiple Family Residential (MFR) and special needs
    housing types and densities within the City.
    LU3-1  Accommodate the development of medium high density detached or attached multiple family
           residential units in areas designated as Multiple-Family Residential – Medium High Density
           (MFR-MHD).
           LU3-1.1    Allow a maximum density of 9 du/acre within the MFR-MHD designation.
           LU3-1.2    Require developments within MFR-MHD to provide amenities such as common open
                      space and recreation areas.
    LU3-2  Accommodate the development of mobile home parks in areas designated as Multiple Family
           Residential – Mobile Home Park (MFR-MHP).
           LU3-2.1    Allow a maximum density of 12.0du/acre within the MFR-MHP designation.
           LU3-2.2    Require MFR-MHP developments to provide amenities such as common open space
                      and recreation facilities.
           LU3-2.3    Encourage the location of mobile home parks in areas having direct access to major
                      transportation routes and in close proximity to Community Facilities Mixed Use or
                      Regional Commercial facilities.
           LU3-2.4    Allow Mobile Home Parks that do not adversely affect adjoining residential uses.
    LU3-3  Accommodate the development of apartment buildings as well as condominium and townhouses
           in areas designated as Multiple-Family Residential – High Density (MFR-HD).
           LU3-3.1    Allow a maximum density of 14.0 du/acre within the MFR-HD designation in areas
                      (zoned MFA).
           LU3-3.2    Require developments within MFR-HD areas to provide amenities such as common
                      open space and recreational areas.
    LU3-4  Accommodate the development of apartment buildings and group housing in areas classified as
           Multiple Family Residential – Very High Density (MFR-VHD).
           LU3-4.1    Allow a maximum density of 25 du/acre within the MFR-VHD designation.
                                                LUE - 8

            LU3-4.2     Enable development of very high density multi-family residential uses in locations
                        with good access to major transportation routes and in close proximity to Community
                        Facilities, Offices, Regional Commercial and/or Mixed Use zones.
            LU3-4.3     Allow for apartment buildings that do not adversely affect surrounding residential
                        uses.
            LU3-4.4     Encourage senior and other special needs housing facilities within the MFR-VHD
                        designation.
     LU3-5  Provide adequate housing for senior citizens, low- and moderate-income households, and other
            populations with special needs.
            LU3-5.1     Accommodate the development of housing facilities for senior citizens, low- and
                        moderate-income households, and populations with other special needs, such as the
                        physically challenged. Allow for development of housing for low and moderate-
                        income households, special needs populations, and senior housing within Single
                        Family Residential Medium Density (SFR-MD) and Multiple Family Residential and
                        Mobile Home Park (MFR and MHP), PD and SP, Village Core, and Mixed-Use areas
                        (VC and MU).
            LU3-5.2     Permit “Congregate Care” and “Assisted Living” facilities, which provide support
                        services for seniors, within Multi-Family Residential designations (MFR-MHD, MFR-
                        HD, MFR-VHD), PD and SP, Village Core or Mixed Use areas (VC, MU).
            LU3-5.3     Permit “Convalescent Care” facilities, which provide continuous medical care, within
                        Village Core and Mixed Use (V, MU) or within Multi-Family Residential Very High
                        Density: Office, Village Core or Mixed use areas, where they are adjacent to or
                        contiguous with Community Facilities, Offices or Regional Commercial areas.
            LU3-5.4     For special needs housing of a congregate nature, allow single occupant
                        bedrooms at a density of 50 bedrooms per acre, considered equivalent to 25
                        du/ac.
     LU3-6  Encourage the development of special needs housing in locations with good access to public
            transit and shopping facilities.
     LU3-7  Require that special needs housing projects include appropriate leisure and/or recreational
            amenities for its residents.
     LU3-8  Provide up to a 25% density bonus for developments within Single Family Residential and Multi-
            Family Residential categories VC, or MU designations that reserve at least 25 percent of the
            total units for senior or special needs populations.
OFFICES
LU4 Provide for a diversity of medical facilities and professional office uses to complement
     the character and serve the population of Arroyo Grande by designating as Office (O)
     appropriately located areas of the City.
     LU4-1  The Office (O) classification shall provide areas for the establishment of office-based working
            environments for general, professional and administrative offices, medical and health care
            facilities generally along Halcyon Road between E. Grand Avenue and Fair Oaks Avenue and
            other convenient locations.
                                                  LUE - 9

    LU4-2  The Office classification shall complement, and not conflict with, adjoining development.
           Features such as pedestrian oriented plazas, landscaped street yards and off-street parking
           areas, outdoor seating, fountains and similar amenities are encouraged. The maximum floor
           area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.5.
MIXED USE
LU5 Community commercial, office, residential and other compatible land uses shall be located
    in Mixed Use (MU) areas and corridors, both north and south of the freeway, in proximity to
    major arterial streets.
    LU5-1  Provide for a diversity of retail and service commercial, offices, residential and other compatible
           uses that support multiple neighborhoods and the greater community, and reduce the need for
           external trips to adjacent jurisdictions, by designating Mixed Use areas along and near major
           arterial streets and at convenient, strategic locations in the community.
    LU5-2  The MU category shall provide areas for businesses offering the provision and sale of general
           merchandise, hardware/building materials, food, drugs, sundries and personal services which
           meet the daily needs of a multi-neighborhood area (trade area populations range from 15,000
           to 20,000 people; roughly equivalent to the size of Arroyo Grande). Typical businesses in the
           MU category include general merchandise and/or specialty stores such as supermarkets,
           hardware/appliance outlets, building materials/home improvement stores, restaurants, and
           general services/officers, business plazas and parks.           Mixed use development shall be
           compatible in size and scale to ensure preservation of the "rural setting and small town
           character" of the City. This category encompasses agriculturally-related businesses and services
           such as veterinary services and other farm support/supply.
    LU5-3  Ensure that all projects developed in the MU areas include appropriate site planning and urban
           design amenities to encourage travel by walking, bicycling and public transit.
    LU5-4  Conditional use permits shall be required for service stations, car washes, drive through
           windows and other automobile oriented uses and for all commercial uses adjoining residential
           classified areas.
    LU5-5  “Define different Mixed Use overlay or combining designations concurrent with Development
           Code revision for General Plan consistency to clarify allowed, conditionally permitted and
           prohibited uses in each MU subarea.”
    LU5-6  Allowable uses within the MU category shall not include uses that adversely affect surrounding
           commercial or residential uses, or contribute to the deterioration of existing environmental
           conditions in the area.
    LU5-7  Plan for a revitalized East Grand Avenue Mixed-Use corridor that has less of a strip-commercial
           aspect and more coordinated, mixed-use boulevard ambiance with distinct activity subareas
           including “Gateway, Midway and Highway” districts.
    LU5-8  Provide for different combinations, configurations and mixtures of commercial, office and
           residential uses designating the East Grand Avenue, El Camino Real and Traffic Way corridors
           as Mixed Use (MU).
           LU5-8.1     Accommodate the continuance and development of retail commercial, professional
                       offices, eating and drinking establishments, banks, bakeries, deli/cafes, specialty
                       shops, outdoor dining/sidewalk cafes, household goods sales, food sales, drugstores,
                       personal services, tourist accommodations, cultural facilities and similar uses in the
                       Mixed Use corridors. (See ED4-2, LU5-7 and 5-8 and LU5-10)
                                               LUE - 10

       LU5-8.2     Enable Mixed-Uses and development intensities to be n       i creased in the Mixed Use
                   corridors to promote pedestrian activity, provide better shopping opportunities and
                   discourage incompatible commercial service uses in areas adjoining residential uses
                   or classifications.
       LU5-8.3     Promote the development of buildings along a landscaped sidewalk frontage.
                   Promote rear yard parking by discouraging front yard parking and encouraging
                   private, shared or public parking facilities be located to the rear of buildings or side
                   streets in Mixed Use corridors.
LU5-9  All revitalization, redevelopment and new development projects in Mixed Use corridors shall
       include appropriate site planning and urban design amenities to encourage pedestrian travel
       and encourage bike and transit access as well as automotive.
LU5-10 The City in cooperation with the Chamber of Commerce and area property and business owners
       will develop a Conceptual Master Plan for the East Grand Avenue corridor. The Conceptual
       Master Plan should consider adaptive re-use of existing buildings, and identify buildings having
       characteristics worth preserving and integrating into a coordinated distinctive design motif for
       each functional segment: Highway Midway and Gateway.
       LU5-10.1 Promote development of a high intensity, mixed-use, pedestrian activity node
                   centered on the Courtland Street/East Grand Avenue intersection as a priority
                   example of revitalization of this corridor segment known as Gateway.
       LU5-10.2 Accommodate multiple family housing at a maximum density 25du/ac., FAR of 1.5,
                   and total building height no greater than 35 feet.
       LU5-10.3 Promote development of distinctive Mixed Use center in the Midway area between
                   Elm and Halcyon Streets.
       LU5-10.4 Require that Mixed-Use developments be designed to mitigate potential conflicts
                   between the commercial and residential uses (eg., noise, lighting, security, vehicular
                   access) and provide adequate amenities for residential occupants.
LU5-11 Promote a mixture of residential and commercial uses along Mixed Use corridors including
       substantial landscaping and streetscape improvements.
       LU5-11.1 Encourage the development of mixed-use structures that accommodate housing
                   above lower level retail, office or other commercial uses.
       LU5-11.2 Accommodate the development of free-standing multi-family dwelling units on a
                   minimum site area of 20,000 square feet at a density of up to 25 units per gross
                   acre. Require that free-standing units be designed to convey a high-quality image.
       LU5-11.3 Provide functional design including of specialized open space, such as squares,
                   courtyards and greens whose frequent use is encouraged through placement and
                   design, such as in proximity to public transit stops.
       LU5-11.4 Promote public transit-oriented development by allowing density bonuses and Mixed
                   Uses with shared or public parking reduction to conventional individual parking
                   requirements.
       LU5-11.5 Develop phased implementation programs for streetscape improvement along Mixed
                   Use Corridors, including financing strategies, which provide for elements such as
                   landscape, street furniture, signage and pedestrian-scaled lighting.
                                           LUE - 11
            LU5-11.6 The Mixed Use zone will address noise compatibility problems as part of
                        Development Code revisions including design standards and Conditional use
                        provisions.
    LU5-12 Mixed Use developments in current VC, HC, GC, or I zones - Any combination of mixed
            uses, or any project proposing a residential component in a commercial or industrial district
            shall be considered pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval (Development Code
            Section 9-03.050) or Planned Unit Development Permit approval (Development Code
            Section 9-03.160). In addition, where affordable housing is proposed in a Mixed Use
            designation, density incentives exceeding 25% may be considered.
    LU5-13 The 14± acre area southeast of Traffic Way and E. Cherry Avenue is designated as "Mixed
            Use, Planned Development" (MU-PD), including residential, agriculture related, and
            commercial components. The residential planned development component may include
            single-family residential development with lot sizes of 5,500 square feet or more. The
            agricultural related component may include organic farms, teaching farms, or similar
            specialty uses (not involving pesticide applications). The commercial component of the
            Mixed Use, Planned Development may include agricultural services and/or farm supplies,
            nursery, or other uses allowed or conditionally permitted in the Mixed Use district fronting
            on Traffic Way.
VLLAGE CORE
LU6 The historic Village Core (VC) area shall be sustained, enhanced and expanded as the
    symbolic, functional and unique business center of the City, with diverse mixed uses
    emphasizing pedestrian-oriented activities and providing for the needs of residents and
    tourists.
    LU6-1   Designate the historic downtown area as Village Core (VC). The primary purpose of the area
            designated VC is to provide for the continuation and development of commercial, office,
            residential, recreational and community facility land use types that reflect and are compatible
            with the historic, small town nature of the original Arroyo Grande Village area.
    LU6-2   Within the Village Core designation appropriate land uses shall include a wide variety of
            commercial uses, emphasizing retail and low intensity tourist related functions. Typical uses
            include specialty retail (handicraft shops, art galleries, book stores, curio antique stores, flower
            shops), commercial services, restaurants, convenience markets, cultural facilities, financial
            institutions, vocational and trade schools, and bed and breakfast inns.
    LU6-3   Office uses are permitted to the extent that they do not become the predominant ground floor
            use or detract from the overall pedestrian character. Civic offices and meeting facilities, as well
            as public park and recreational uses are encouraged within and adjoining the VC area.
    LU6-4   Ground floor residential uses shall be conditionally permitted.           Upstairs apartments are
            encouraged in conjunction with ground floor commercial uses.
    LU6-5   Village Core developments shall emphasize uses that contribute to the vitality of the whole,
            creating pedestrian traffic and interest, as outlined in the Design Guidelines for the Arroyo
            Grande Village.
    LU6-6   The Village Core encourages the development of outdoor dining and other similar uses provided
            that they do not impede pedestrian use of the sidewalks.
                                               LUE - 12

    LU6-7 All revitalization, redevelopment and new development projects in the Village Core shall include
          appropriate site planning and urban design amenities to encourage pedestrian travel.
    LU6-8 Prohibit drive-through commercial structures and other commercial uses dependent on direct
          automotive access and disruptive to pedestrian orientation in the Village Core.
    LU6-9 Extend the Village Core (VC) designation along Station Way and Traffic Way.
          LU6-9.1      Maintain a distinctive visual and physical environment for the southern gateway
                       streetscape in accordance with the Design Guidelines for the Arroyo Grande Village.
                       These include the use of consistent street trees, landscape (planters), street furniture
                       (benches, trash receptacles, news racks, etc.), street and crosswalk paving, curb,
                       sidewalk and landscape bulbouts, pedestrian-scaled lighting, identification and
                       directional signage, and other appropriate pedestrian scale elements.
          LU6-9.2      Link individual buildings with each other through the use of walkways, in addition to
                       sidewalks and encourage shared or common parking.
          LU6-9.3      Integrate improvements into the design of individual sites and public streetscape that
                       facilitate transit access to the Village Core, such as bus shelters and recessed turn-
                       outs consistent with historic character and particular location.
          LU6-9.4      Discourage private parking facilities placed along and visible from Branch Street or
                       Traffic Way street frontage. Encourage public or shared off-street parking behind
                       street frontage buildings.
    REGIONAL COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS PARK
LU7 Regional Commercial and Business Park uses shall be located along the freeway corridor.
    LU7-1 Designate Regional Commercial (RC) or Business Park (BP) uses in proximity to the US-101
          freeway, where adequate access is provided to/from the freeway system and adjacent arterial
          roads.
    LU7-2 The RC classification shall provide areas for retail and service businesses serving the regional
          population (trade area typically exceeding 50,000 people - roughly equivalent to the Five-Cities
          area). Businesses allowed to locate in RC areas shall include major retail commercial tenants
          associated with a regional mall, “power center” or “outlet center”.
    LU7-3 The Business Park (BP) classification shall include major office uses, such as corporate
          headquarters or regional service centers, research and development facilities, and/or major
          community facilities. At a minimum, one or more major businesses whose individual footprint
          exceeds 50,000 square feet should be incorporated into a Regional Commercial or Business Park
          development.
    LU7-4 Freestanding sit-down restaurants serving the traveling public, and automobile sales of a
          regional nature such as dealerships, may also be included as conditional uses in the RC or BP
          areas. Freestanding or drive-through fast-food restaurants and overnight commercial lodging
          facilities without conference facilities shall be prohibited in RC and BP areas.
    LU7-5 A Specific Plan or property development plan must be approved prior to any land division or
          other development approval of projects in the RC and BP areas. The Specific Plan or property
          development plan shall stipulate phasing of construction and responsibility for public facility and
          infrastructure improvements. RC and/or BP development plans shall include Park and Ride lots,
          bike lockers, bus shelters and/or similar alternative transportation and transit facilities provided
          by the developer.
                                                LUE - 13

       LU7-6   Design of projects in RC or BP areas shall include appropriate standards to establish adequate
               buffers and land use compatibility between commercial and residential uses or other uses on
               surrounding properties and provide for appropriate circulation improvements to assure safe and
               adequate regional access.
       LU7-7   BP areas may also contain commercial services that are required to support business
               development, and retail facilities that support business operations, including but not limited to
               sales areas for manufacturers, printing, copy and mailing/shipping/distribution services,
               restaurants, and branch financial institutions.
       LU7-8   Projects in BP areas shall be located with direct access to arterial or non-residential collector
               streets, and developed in a campus-like setting with standards for landscaping, building façade
               treatments, signage, pedestrian/employee amenities, etc., including but not limited to
               consideration of the following:
                          a.    arrange buildings around common pedestrian walkways and public places
                                (plazas, outdoor dining, etc.);
                          b. development of pedestrian walkways, arcades, and/or other visual elements to
                                interconnect individual buildings;
                          c.    use of common architectural design vocabulary (materials, colors, design
                                character, etc.);
                          d. use of extensive landscape in open areas and parking lots, including broad
                                landscaped setbacks from principal peripheral streets;
                          e.    location of parking to minimize views from principal peripheral streets;
                          f.    enclosure of storage areas with decorative screening or walls;
                          g. use of consistent and well-designed public and informational signage; and
                          h.     installation of elements defining the key entry points and activity locations.
SERVICE COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
LU8 Automobile-related uses, including dealerships, service/repair uses, and light industrial
       uses shall be conditionally permitted uses in Mixed Use and Regional Commercial areas to
       assure that their design and operations are compatible with adjacent uses.
       LU8-1   Permit the continuation of gasoline stations and supporting automotive service facilities in
               appropriate locations adjoining freeway access or at strategic major arterial street intersections
               provided that their design and operation are compatible with adjacent uses. Require that
               expansions or modifications of existing facilities be designed to convey a high quality
               architectural and landscape character, consistent with the overall character of the City.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES
A variety of public and quasi-public uses, serving neighborhood, community or regional needs, are located
throughout the City. These community facilities are beneficial to the City, but their location, nature of
operation, and scale sometimes creates compatibility issues such as noise, traffic, lighting and other problems.
Additional public and institutional uses will be considered based on the diversity, need and location relative to
                                                     LUE - 14

existing and planned land use and circulation. The Parks and Recreation Element of this General Plan provides
more detail regarding these types of Community Facilities.
LU9 Provide for appropriate maintenance, development and placement of Community Facilities
       (CF) relative to existing and planned land uses.
       LU9-1   The Community Facilities (CF) designation includes public or institutional uses that provide a
               community facility or service. The uses allowed in this designation include but are not limited to
               the following: cemeteries, churches, lodges, City Hall, city yard, fire and police stations, places
               of general public assembly, senior centers, women’s centers, museums, other facilities that are
               primarily contained within a structure, and public or private schools, parks, playgrounds and
               sports complexes, South County regional center and other public agency facilities.
       LU9-2   Community facilities other than schools, parks and recreation areas may also be conditionally
               permitted in any other land use designation based on the specific function of the facility,
               compatible with the site and environs. Schools, parks and recreation facilities may be
               conditionally permitted in or adjoining residential neighborhoods or mixed use areas where the
               facilities are intended to serve the areas in which they are located.
       LU9-3   Balance the supply and size of Community Facilities with the existing and planned demand for
               the services they provide based on the General Plan Land Use Element.
       LU9-4   Ensure that new developments provide opportunities for recreation that are commensurate with
               the level and type of development. Ensure that recreational uses are compatible with
               surrounding uses and with sensitive resources that may be present.
       LU9-5   Ensure that new developments provide opportunities for school facilities and education that are
               commensurate with the level and type of development. Ensure that school sites are compatible
               with surrounding uses and with sensitive resources that may be present.
SPECIFIC PLAN, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AND C/OS COMBINING DESIGNATIONS
LU10 Utilize Conservation/Open Space, Planned Development and/or Specific Plan districts or
        combining designations for areas of special site development concerns.
       LU10-1 Where environmental resources require special consideration and/or conventional land use
               classifications alone may be inadequate to avoid or mitigate potential impacts, the City may
               utilize the Conservation/Open Space classification as a “combining designation” to reduce or
               control land use and development standards otherwise allowed.
               LU10-1.1      C/OS combining designation shall reduce the intensity or density of development to
                             the minimum lot size prescribed and all grading and construction shall be subject to
                             conditional use permit approval.
       LU10-2 For relatively large properties or sites involving diverse adjoining land uses or unusual or
               unique features, the City may utilize a “Planned Development” or “Specific Plan” combining
               designation or land use classifications.
               LU10-2.1      Planned Development (PD) combining designation shall require any use or
                             development (more than one dwelling) to be subject to PD zoning approval as
                             described in the City of Arroyo Grande Development Code.
               LU10-2.2      Specific Plan (SP) classification shall require any use or development (more than
                             one dwelling) be subject to preparation and adoption of a Specific Plan pursuant
                                                    LUE - 15

                       to Article 8 (Sections 65450-65456) of State of California Planning, Zoning and
                       Development Laws.
           LU10-2.3    Encourage appropriate use of Specific Plans, and/or Planned Development
                       combining designation with beneficial features that could not otherwise be achieved.
                       Examples of such features include clustering houses and maintaining open spaces,
                       mixed use, and a design that is sensitive to the site as a whole and it’s setting.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
LU11 Promote a pattern of land use that protects the integrity of existing land uses, area
      resources and infrastructure and involves logical jurisdictional boundaries with
      adjacent communities and the County.
    LU11-1 Require that new developments be at an appropriate density or intensity based upon
           compatibility with the majority of existing surrounding land uses.
           LU11-1.1 As part of the development review process, treat the densities and intensities
                      outlined in the Land Use Element as the maximum allowable; do not approve the
                      maximum allowable density or intensity unless the proposed project is consistent
                      with the provisions and intent of the Arroyo Grande General Plan and City
                      ordinances.
           LU11-1.2 Require that adequate buffering and setbacks be provided between dissimilar uses.
           LU11-1.3 Where a question of compatibility exists, require the new use to conform to the lower
                      intensity use.
           LU11-1.4 Restrict new urban single family, multiple family, and mobile home uses to infill areas
                      adjacent to existing developments of similar density.
    LU11-2 Require that new development should be designed to create pleasing transitions to surrounding
           development.
           LU11-2.1 As part of the development review process, new development or the alteration or
                      enlargement of existing development should be viewed not as freestanding projects,
                      but as part of a neighborhood, or as part of the entire community.
           LU11-2.2 Require that the new structures relate to the prevailing existing, or planned scale of
                      adjacent development.
           LU11-2.3 Require that setbacks from streets and adjacent properties relate to the scale of the
                      structure and the width of the street.
           LU11-2.4 Require that new developments be designed so as to respect the views from existing
                      developments; provide view corridors which are oriented toward existing or proposed
                      community amenities, such as a park, open space, or natural features.
           LU11-2.5 Design development projects within the City of Arroyo Grande to provide screening
                      as necessary to shield neighboring properties from the adverse effects of that
                      development.
    LU11-3 Intensity of land use and area population shall be limited to that which can be supported by the
           area's resource base, as well as circulation and infrastructure systems.
                                              LUE - 16

       LU11-3.1 Limit the number of dwelling units within the City to that which is consistent with the
                 long-term availability of resources needed to support area population and that which
                 public services and facilities can adequately support.
       LU11-3.2 Permit new developments only where and when adequate water services can be
                 provided, and the provision of adequate water service can be ensured by providing
                 system-wide water improvements in advance of needs.
       LU11-3.3 Consistent with Circulation Element objectives and policies, particularly CT2, require
                 new developments to mitigate traffic impacts to maintain an acceptable Level of
                 Service. Ensure that the approval of development proposals will not increase the
                 traffic on a City street or roads in unincorporated areas including State Highway 227.
                 Any project that would degrade the Level of Service at the peak hour per City
                 circulation policies will require CEQA review.
       LU11-3.4 Where the construction of master planned water facilities is not practical, permit the
                 construction of interim facilities only to the extent that the financing and construction
                 of ultimate facilities are not jeopardized.
       LU11-3.5 Prior to the issuance of commercial or industrial building permits, or the recordation
                 of residential tract or parcel maps, ensure the availability of adequate fire flow by
                 requiring the testing of all fire hydrants in the vicinity of the project at the applicant's
                 expense. In the absence of adequate flows, require either the installation of on-site
                 fire protection devices or improvements that upgrade the area's water system to
                 accommodate adequate flows, prior to combustible construction.
       LU11-3.6 Ensure that adequate sewer service capacity exists or will be available in a timely
                 manner for a proposed development.
       LU11-3.7 Maintain current information concerning the capability of public police and fire
                 protection services and facilities provided by the City, Schools and other agencies
                 within the City.
       LU11-3.8 Monitor the impact and intensity of land uses on area circulation to ensure that the
                 circulation system is not overburdened.
       LU11-3.9 As part of the CEQA review process, the short- and long-term generation of air
                 pollutants will be assessed using Air Pollution Control District criteria to determine the
                 potential impacts of proposed projects.
LU11-4 Ensure that all extensions of services and utilities to facilitate land use changes are
       accomplished in a manner consistent with the provisions and intent of the Arroyo Grande
       General Plan.
       LU11-4.1 Prior to permitting a major extension of services or utilities to facilitate changes in
                 land use, conduct a thorough review of all social, economic, and environmental
                 factors associated with that extension; require the implementation of appropriate
                 mitigation measures or prohibit the extension.
       LU11-4.2 Ensure that existing residents and businesses are not burdened with the cost of
                 financing infrastructure aimed at supporting new development.
       LU11-4.3 Ensure that public water, sewer, drainage and other facilities needed for a project are
                 constructed prior to or concurrent with development.
                                           LUE - 17
           LU11-4.4 Require that existing public services and facilities deficiencies affecting an
                     undeveloped area be corrected prior to or concurrent with the extension of facilities
                     to serve the area.
           LU11-4.5 Review development projects for their impacts on public services and facilities
                     including, but not necessarily limited to, roadways, water, sewer, fire, police, parks,
                     school facilities, and libraries. If a development project will cause the level of public
                     service or facility provision to fall below the standards maintained by Arroyo Grande
                     and/or the standards of applicable service agencies, require that appropriate on-and
                     off-site improvements be provided either through conditions of approval,
                     development fees, or establishment of assessment districts. If such improvements
                     cannot be provided, decline approval of the project.
           LU11-4.6 Encourage all public service agencies to keep current information regarding their
                     service capabilities. Conduct an annual review of user charges, development fees,
                     and public facilities impact mitigation fees in accordance with AB 1600 to ensure that
                     the charges are consistent with the costs of improvement and maintenance.
LU 11.5 The City of Arroyo Grande shall seek logical and recognizable jurisdictional
        boundaries in cooperation with the adjacent Cities of Pismo Beach and Grover
        Beach, Oceano CSD, the County and Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO),
        subject to mutual approval.
           LU 11-5.1 Oak Park Boulevard is and shall remain the common boundary between Arroyo
                     Grande and Pismo Beach.
           LU 11-5.2 The City of Arroyo Grande shall utilize distinctive street name and
                     identification/entry signage, and where feasible, landscaping and architectural
                     features to reinforce the separate identity of the adjoining urban developments.
           LU 11-5.3 The City of Arroyo Grande shall refer any proposed development within the
                     watershed of Meadow Creek and/or the approximate area west of Equestrian
                     Way and Vista Drive for review and comment by the City of Pismo Beach prior to
                     approval of any further development that may impact the drainage, traffic, or
                     municipal services and facilities shared by these adjoining Cities.
           LU 11-5.4 The City of Arroyo Grande will request that the City of Pismo Beach refer any
                     proposed developments within the watershed of Meadow Creek and/or the
                     approximate area known as Toucan Terrace planning sub-area of Oak Park
                     Heights for review and comment by the City of Arroyo Grande prior to approval
                     of any further development that may impact the drainage, traffic or municipal
                     services and facilities shared by these adjoining Cities.
           LU 11-5.5 The Cities of Arroyo Grande and Pismo Beach shall consider joint powers and
                     other methods of cooperation to correct any apparent service or facility
                     deficiencies (such as fire/emergency response time, park and recreation
                     provisions, drainage improvements, and Oak Park Boulevard traffic enforcement)
                     to efficiently provide municipal services to adjoining areas of the respective
                     jurisdictions.
           LU 11-5.6 Oak Park Boulevard is and shall remain the approximate common boundary
                     between Arroyo Grande and Grover Beach. Portions of the City of Grover Beach,
                     which extend east of Oak Pak Boulevard will be evaluated by both jurisdictions
                     and LAFCO to determine the most logical and efficient jurisdictional boundary.
                                               LUE - 18
        LU 11-5.7 The City of Arroyo Grande shall utilize distinctive street name and identification
                    signage, and where feasible, landscaping and architectural features to reinforce
                    the separate identity of the adjoining urban developments.
        LU 11-5.8 The City of Arroyo Grande shall refer any proposed development within the
                    watershed of Meadow Creek and/or the approximate area west of Hillcrest and
                    Elm Streets for review and comment by the City of Grover Beach prior to
                    approval of any further development that may impact the drainage, traffic or
                    municipal services and facilities shared by these adjoining Cities.
        LU 11-5.9 The City of Arroyo Grande will request that the City of Grover Beach refer any
                    proposed developments within the area generally east of 14th Street (primarily
                    portions of the East Grover Beach neighborhood planning area) be referred for
                    review and comment by the City of Arroyo Grande prior to approval of any
                    further development that may impact the drainage, traffic or municipal services
                    and facilities shared by these adjoining Cities.
        LU 11-5.10 The Cities of Arroyo Grande and Grover Beach shall consider joint powers and
                    other methods of cooperation to correct any apparent service or facility
                    deficiencies (such as fire/emergency response time, park and recreation
                    provisions, drainage improvements, and Oak Park Boulevard traffic
                    enforcement).
LU 11-6 The City of Arroyo Grande shall cooperate with the County of San Luis Obispo, the Oceano
        Community Services District and LAFCO to establish more logical and recognizable
        jurisdictional boundaries between adjoining urban areas and to provide appropriate
        separation or identity.
        LU 11-6.1 Generally, The Pike is and shall remain the boundary between the City of Arroyo
                    Grande and Oceano CSD.
        LU 11-6.2 The City of Arroyo Grande shall utilize distinctive street name and
                    identification/entry signage and where feasible, landscaping and architectural
                    features to reinforce the separate identity of the adjoining urban developments.
        LU 11-6.3 The City of Arroyo Grande shall refer any proposed development generally south
                    of Farroll Avenue and west of Halcyon Avenue for review and comment by the
                    Oceano CSD and County of San Luis Obispo prior to approval of any further
                    developments that may impact the drainage, traffic or municipal services and
                    facilities shared by these adjoining community areas.
        LU 11-6.4 The City of Arroyo Grande will request that the County and Oceano CSD refer
                    any proposed developments east of 22nd Street and north of Paso Robles Street
                    for review and comment by the City of Arroyo Grande prior to approval of any
                    further development that may impact the drainage, traffic or municipal services
                    and facilities shared by these adjoining areas.
        LU 11-6.5 The City of Arroyo Grande will cooperate with the County and Oceano CSD to
                    preserve the agricultural land and remaining forest west and south of Halcyon as
                    a permanent open space separation between Arroyo Grande and Oceano.
        LU 11-6.6 The City of Arroyo Grande will cooperate with the County to preserve all
                    remaining valley floor prime agricultural land within Cienega Valley, particularly
                                            LUE - 19
          those properties adjoining Arroyo Grande Creek both inside and outside Arroyo
          Grande City limits south of Freeway 101 and west of Valley Road.
LU 11-6.7 The City of Arroyo Grande will request that the County preclude all proposals to
          increase density or intensity of development within the Rural Residential
          designated areas of Arroyo Grande Fringe Area north of the City and the Nipomo
          Mesa east of Highway 1 and south of Los Berros Road due to potential adverse
          traffic impacts, public facilities and service deficiencies.
LU 11-6.8 The City of Arroyo Grande will request that the County preclude all proposals to
          expand or to increase density or intensity of development within the Residential
          Suburban designated hillside subdivisions southeast of Arroyo Grande City limits,
          north of Los Berros Road and west of El Campo Road due to potential adverse
          traffic impacts, public facilities and service deficiencies.
LU 11-6.9 The City of Arroyo Grande shall request that the County preserve all Agriculture
          designated lands, whether prime or non-prime soils, east of Arroyo Grande City
          limits on both sides of Freeway 101 in both the San Luis Bay and South County
          Planning Areas.
LU 11-6.10 The City of Arroyo Grande shall cooperate with the County and LAFCO to
          consider annexation of the Frederick/ALC property (known as Arroyo Linda
          Crossroads) and Williams property provided that such future City expansion
          provides for permanent agricultural and open space buffer adjoining Freeway
          101, the east and north sides of potential urban development of the proposed
          Sphere of Influence area.
  LU 11-6.10.1 The City of Arroyo Grande may consider the annexation of the
          unincorporated portion of the Arroyo Linda Crossroads and Williams properties
          within the proposed Sphere of Influence when all of the following findings are
          made:
          a) The proposed annexation will not deplete the water resources required for
               potential General Plan development within other parts of the City nor divert
               water resources needed for current and future Agriculture irrigation;
          b) Clear compatibility exists with the community's basic identity as a rural, small
               town community; the goals and desires of the people and the City of Arroyo
               Grande as a whole; and with the community’s available resources and urban
               services;
          c)   The proposed annexation is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
               2001 General Plan Update, particularly in regard to protection of Agriculture
               and open space lands;
          d) Significant economic development benefits will be derived by the City upon
               annexation;
          e) Significant social and economic interdependence and interaction exist
               between the City and the areas proposed for annexation;
          f)   Adequate infrastructure and services have been or shall be provided in
               accordance with current City standards;
                                  LUE - 20

                           g) The proposed annexation will generate sufficient revenues to adequately pay
                                for the provision of City services and related mitigation measures; and,
       LU 11-7 Support the preparation of reasonable regional land use and transportation planning. The
                City of Arroyo Grande shall work with San Luis Obispo County and San Luis Obispo Council
                of Governments to further regional land use and transportation plans as a means of
                coordinating South County planning efforts.
       TOWN CHARACTER and COMMUNITY DESIGN GUIDELINES
The essence of Arroyo Grande's desirability is reflected in its small town character and rural setting. This
character encompasses a wide range of components including the scale and intensity of existing development;
the rate, scale, and intensity of new development; the existence and proximity of agricultural lands and open
spaces, including natural hillsides, Arroyo Grande and Tally Ho creeks. It also extends to its rural residential
fringe and agricultural environs, and includes preservation of historical structures, especially within the Village
Core area. The retention of this character is one of the basic purposes of planning and growth management,
according to the citizens of Arroyo Grande.
LU12 Components of “rural setting" and “small town character" shall be protected.
       LU12-1 Recognize agriculture, natural hillsides, clean air quality and linear open spaces along Arroyo
                Grande and Tally Ho creeks as valuable components of the City's rural setting and essential
                elements worthy of conservation and preservation.
                LU12-1.1 Emphasize the retention of the natural environment over its conversion to urban
                           forms.
                LU12-1.2 Incorporate existing natural features into project design. Where removal of natural
                           elements is unavoidable, reintroduce natural elements into project design.
                LU12-1.3 Incorporate provisions of the Agriculture, Open Space and Conservation Element
                           (AOSCE) into the review of land development proposals.
       LU12-2 Except for narrow, two and three-story structures within the Village Core and other designated
                Mixed-Use areas, limit the scale of buildings within both the urban and rural portions of Arroyo
                Grande to low-profile, horizontal forms; design buildings to be compatible with Arroyo Grande's
                historic small town character.
                LU12-2.1    In general, limit the height of buildings to no more than 35 feet.
                LU12-2.2    Utilize roofs having low, long spans made of slate, concrete shingles, clay tiles
                            or similar materials. Avoid metal and flat composition roofs.
                LU12-2.3    Provide building elevations that are well-articulated in order to break up building
                            bulk. Incorporate one-story elements in two-story structures.
                LU12-2.4    Ensure that row-type townhouses within the urban portions of Arroyo Grande are
                            constructed such that each unit is varied in its setback and/or architectural
                            treatment,
                LU12-2.5    Residential units within new single family neighborhoods shall be required to
                            provide recognizable variations in their front and side yard setbacks.
                                                   LUE - 21

       LU12-2.6    Neo-traditional residential developments should maximize a feeling of openness.
                   Modern single family subdivisions should utilize variable setbacks and orient road
                   axes to open space areas and areas of visual interest.
       LU12-2.7    Use appropriate and simple roof forms, including shed, gable, and hip roofs, alone
                   or in combination, to achieve a variety of roof lines along the streetscape; avoid
                   unarticulated flat roofs.
       LU12-2.8    Design small lot single family and multiple family residential projects in such a
                   manner as to group dwellings around common open space and/or recreational
                   features.
       LU12-2.9    In higher density projects with opposing garages or carports, turn individual units
                   and orient them to avoid the monotony of parking corridors. Alternately, stagger
                   parking areas and provide appropriate landscaping.
       LU12-2.10 Incorporate architectural treatments that enhance the appearance of           exterior wall
                   elevations of buildings and screen walls. Include:
                   •    Uniform materials and consistent style in exterior elevations.
                   •    Use secondary accent materials and colors to highlight building features and
                        provide visual interest.
       LU12-2.11 Detail multi-story buildings to reduce their vertical appearance as much as possible,
                   except for historic buildings in the Village Core and new buildings in other Mixed-Use
                   areas. In all such areas, include:
                 •     A greater level of architectural details at the ground level than at upper levels.
                 •     Articulate separate floor levels with horizontal bands or by stepping them back
                       from public viewing areas.
       LU12-2.12 Incorporate variations in the setback and massing of the building bulk of large struc-
                   tures along major streets to provide variety and visual interest to the streetscape.
LU12-3 Preserve scenic vistas and retain a feeling of "openness" in new developments.
       LU12-3.1    Vary setbacks along roadways to avoid a monotonous street scene.
       LU12-3.2    Minimize the installation of solid walls along area roadways unless they are needed
                   for a specific screening, safety, or noise attenuation purpose. Where feasible,
                   provide instead a landscaped berm or wide, open area with informal clusters of
                   trees, defined by split rail or similar fencing.
       LU12-3.3    Where construction of a solid wall that will be visible along a public street is
                   necessary, provide landscaping such as trees, shrubs, or vines to soften the
                   appearance of the wall, and to reduce undue glare, heat, and reflection.
       LU12-3.4    The use of any fencing or walls should be consistent with the overall design theme
                   of the development or adjoining existing developments:
                   •    Where they are needed, fences or walls should relate to both the site being
                        developed and surrounding developments, open spaces, streets, and pedestrian
                        ways.
                                           LUE - 22

                   •    Fencing and walls should respect existing view corridors to the greatest extent
                        possible.
       LU12-3.5    Require the provision of open space and recreation areas within the urban
                   residential portions of the City. Within the rural residential portions of the planning
                   area, emphasize the preservation natural landforms and vegetation.
       LU12-3.6    Design and landscape multiple family residential projects to provide pleasing views
                   from the windows of individual units.
                   • Provide a diversity of views from the windows of multiple family units, including
                        distant open views, closer views of greenery, and some views of human activity.
                   • If some windows must look out onto blank walls, plant fast growing vines on
                        such walls to enhance the appearance.
       LU12-3.7    Permit clustering of residential units if the following criteria are met:
                   •    The clustering of dwelling units is proposed pursuant to a Specific Plan
                        (Government Code Section 65540), Planned Development, or similar
                        mechanism.
                   •    The overall permitted density of the project area is not exceeded.
                   •    The resulting project will not require a greater level of public services and
                        facilities than would an equivalent non-clustered project.
                   •    The result of clustering residential units is a more desirable and environmentally
                        sensitive development plan which creates usable open space areas for the
                        enjoyment of project residents and which preserves significant environmental
                        features.
                   •    The project development pattern, including the net density of developed area
                        and proposed lot sizes which result from clustering, are compatible with
                        surrounding areas.
       LU12-3.8    Permit hillside development projects only when the following criteria are met:
                   •    The natural contour of the hillside is preserved and removal of native oak trees
                        is minimized.
                   •    Excessive, intrusive hillside grading is not required in order to satisfy density
                        proposals of the project
                   •    Extensive retaining walls are not required to satisfy density and safety proposed
                        by the project.
                   If these criteria cannot be met, the density of the project shall be reduced or the
                   project shall be denied.
LU12-4 Incorporate a sense of “place,” privacy, and security into Planned Developments and multiple
       family projects. The Development Code should provide for design exceptions for senior and
       special needs housing.
       LU12-4.1    Maintain the function and quality of multi-family residential developments by
                   orienting buildings and living spaces at right angles to each other for privacy, and by
                   adequate provision of private open space areas such as patios and balconies for
                   each unit.
                                           LUE - 23

       LU12-4.2    Provide each building or unit of a multiple family project with some unique elements
                   to create a sense of place and identity.
                   •     Design individual units within a project so as to be distinguishable from each
                         other, providing them with separate entrances and entry paths.
                   •     Design the common space of each building cluster so that the size, dimensions,
                         grading, planting and site furniture of each are different.
                   •     Provide every dwelling unit with a usable private garden, yard, patio, or balcony
                         area.
       LU12-4.3    Provide back and front entrances to planned and multiple family dwellings which are
                   clearly identified and distinguished from each other. Where dwellings have two
                   doors, differentiate between formal and informal entries through the location of
                   guest parking, sidewalk design, address identification, and pathways.
       LU12-4.4    Where there is limited separation of windows from nearby public or common
                   spaces, fencing, planting, or grade differentials should be used to ensure privacy.
       LU12-4.5    Locate windows within planned and multiple family residential projects so that
                   surveillance of semi-private public spaces and pedestrian paths is possible from
                   frequently used rooms without permitting close-in view from those areas to the
                   dwelling.
       LU12-4.6    Units should be designed so that windows in adjacent units or in units across streets
                   are offset.
LU12-5 Preserve significant historic and cultural landmarks.
       LU12-5.1    Require that new development, including signs, within or adjacent to the Village
                   Core area be compatible with the historical architecture of the Village; implement
                   the provisions of the Design Guidelines for the Arroyo Grande Village.
LU12-6 Require that residential street design be sensitive to existing landforms, and minimize traffic
       volumes on local residential streets.
       LU12-6.1    Incorporate provisions into the Development Code which would discourage non-local
                   through traffic on local streets, and require maintenance of two points of access to
                   all residential neighborhoods.
LU12-7 Enhance pedestrian level activity within residential and commercial areas.
       LU12-7.1    Utilize "street furniture” (planters, benches, drinking fountains, newspaper racks,
                   bike racks, trash receptacles) to create and enhance urban open spaces within
                   commercial areas and to emphasize historical and rural architectural themes.
       LU12-7.2    Commercial buildings and projects should be designed so as to have a central plaza
                   or main visual focus or feature.
       LU12-7.3    Through the site plan review process, ensure that commercial facilities are oriented
                   to the pedestrian by the incorporation of seating areas, courtyards, landscaping,
                   and similar measures.
                                           LUE - 24

                 •     Buildings should be designed and sited so as to present a human scale
                       environment, including identifiable pedestrian spaces.
                 •     Uses within pedestrian spaces should contribute to a varied and lively
                       streetscape.
                 •     Buildings facing pedestrian ways and plazas should incorporate design features
                       that provide visual interest at the street level.
                 •     Except in the Village Core and other Mixed-Use areas, where buildings should
                       generally be located at the sidewalk, building setbacks along major streets
                       should be varied to create plaza-like areas which attract pedestrians whenever
                       possible.
                 •     Discourage wide expanses of parking lot between the sidewalk and the front of
                       commercial buildings and provide safe, easily identifiable pedestrian access
                       through the parking lot from multiple access points.
                 •     Parking facilities should be convenient, well-designed, usable, aesthetically
                       attractive, landscaped (with large shade trees) and comply with City design
                       standards and guidelines.
       LU12-7.4  Where appropriate to building architecture, provide covered verandas along the
                 fronts of commercial structures.
       LU12-7.5  Establish a program of public art emphasizing historical, western, and rural themes
                 in parks, public buildings, and public open spaces.
       LU12-7.6  Refine the Circulation Element to include an integrated pedestrian circulation
                 network linking the Village Core and Mixed Use areas, schools, shopping, community
                 facilities, and multiple family residential areas. (See also CT 3-3).
LU12-8 Emphasize the incorporation of landscape themes and extensive landscaped areas into new
       development; provide landscaping and open spaces as an integral part of project design to
       enhance building design, public views, and interior spaces; provide buffers and transitions as
       needed; and facilitate energy conservation.
       LU12-8.1  Require that landscaping integrate with, complement, and improve the visual
                 character of the natural environment of the area; require that landscaping also
                 relate to and complement the architecture of adjacent structures.
       LU12-8.2  Emphasize urban planting schemes which minimize the use of water and which
                 incorporate natural looking clusters of plants rather than highly structured,
                 geometric schemes with trees and shrubs planted at regular intervals.
       LU12-8.3   Include in landscaped areas a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover,
                  flowers, and turf as appropriate and compatible with the surrounding environment
                  and project design theme.
                   •    The selected combination of landscape materials shall be arranged in a
                        harmonious manner.
                   •    The proportion of hardscape materials within any required landscape area may
                        not exceed 20 percent.
       LU12-8.4  Coordinate landscape design with drainage plans for individual projects to maximize
                 percolation of surface water from the site. Employ swale designs in landscaped and
                 turf areas to slow down runoff and maximize percolation.
                                         LUE - 25

         LU12-8.5      Emphasize the use of native and drought tolerant plantings in area landscaping.
  LU12-9 Encourage the provision of custom homes or homes that simulate a rural, small town, custom
         home atmosphere.
         LU12-9.1 Within the unincorporated rural/residential and residential/suburban portions of the
                     community, and all single family residential areas as well as low-density Planned
                     Development areas, emphasize custom homes on large sites.
         LU12-9.2 If custom homes are not proposed, residential tract applicants shall provide required
                     floor plans and elevations at the time of application submittal to provide a wide
                     variety of design choices and diversity of appearance as shown in the table below.
          Number of Single Family               Minimum Number            of   Minimum        Number        of
          Dwellings                             Floorplans*                    Elevation/Floorplan
                   <-20                         3                              3
                  21-40                         4                              3
                  41-60                         5                              4
                  61-80                         6                              4
                81-100                          7                              4
                  >100                          1 additional for each 20 dwellings over 100
         * Includes reverse footprints.
         LU12-9.3 Emphasize the use of natural materials such as rough sawn wood, stone, stucco, and
                     brick facade.
         LU12-9.4 Emphasize building colors in earth tones and complementary accents in muted
                     shades of reds, blues, greens, browns, grays, and yellows. Avoid a monochromatic
                     appearance of residential areas through the use of complementary accents.
         LU12-9.5 On wood frame structures having a primarily stucco exterior, cover a minimum of 25
                     percent of the front facade with a complementary color and material.
         LU12-9.6 Break up front facades with entries and/or other recesses and projections to avoid
                     flat fronts.
         LU12-9.7       Incorporate variations in building heights by incorporation of one-story elements
                        into two story structures, use of a combination of roof styles, and grade variations.
LU12-10  Ensure that residential accessory uses and buildings are consistent with the primary residential
         character of the area, as well as the overall small town character of Arroyo Grande.
         LU12-10.1      Prohibit accessory uses or hobbies that would create additional traffic or need for
                        signage or parking, and ensure that the primary use of garage areas is for parking cars.
         LU12-10.2      Require that the design of accessory structures be compatible with the architectural
                        character of the site and surrounding area.
         LU12-10.3      Require that accessory structures be set back a sufficient distance from property lines
                        so as not to detract from the value of adjacent properties.
LU12-11  Commercial centers shall be developed in a manner that is architecturally harmonious with a defined
         theme consistent with the rural, small town character of Arroyo Grande.
                                               LUE - 26
       LU12-11.1    Ensure the implementation of the Design Guidelines for the Arroyo Grande Village.
       LU12-11.2    Require that materials, textures, colors, and architectural detailing be consistent with
                    the specified design theme consistent with Arroyo Grande's small town character.
       LU12-11.3    Large roof or building masses should be discouraged and architectural variations
                    encouraged.
       LU12-11.4    Encourage the use of earth tones that reinforce compatibility with the rural character of
                    Arroyo Grande; avoid a monochromatic appearance through the use of complementary
                    accents in muted shades of reds, blues, greens, browns, and yellows.
       LU12-11.5    Recesses, reveals, projections, architectural trim, and other elements shall be
                    encouraged to enhance the architectural image of structures.
       LU12-11.6    Shadow patterns created by architectural elements such as overhangs, projections,
                    or recession of stories, balconies, reveals, and awnings are encouraged in order to
                    contribute to a building's character and aid in climate control.
       LU12-11.7    The following design elements shall be encouraged in conjunction with the design
                    and construction of commercial buildings:
                    •      Richness of surface and texture, emphasizing surfaces such as rough sawn
                           woods, split face block, stucco, and facade brick.
                    •      Approximately equal building wall ratio to non-wall (e.g., window, arcade)
                    •      Multi-planed, pitched roofs.
                    •      Vegetation integrated with building walls, roofs and details such as trellises
                           and espaliers.
                    •      Roof overhangs.
                    •      Regular or traditional window rhythms.
       LU12-11.8    The following architectural elements shall be discouraged in conjunction with the
                    construction of commercial buildings:
                    Highly reflective surfaces over the majority of the facade which is visible to the
                    public.
                    •      Large, blank walls.
                    •      Flat roofs without mansards.
                    •      Precision concrete block.
                    •      Metal or plastic siding.
                    •      Irregular window shapes and rhythms.
       LU12-11.9    Develop specific design criteria where feasible for commercial areas not expected
                    to develop as unified centers, in the form of conceptual approaches that integrate
                    landscaping, driveways and parking into functionally unified wholes.
LU12-12 Balance the need for signs within commercial areas as a means to identify businesses with
         the small town character and rural setting of the community.
                                           LUE - 27

       LU12-12.1   Design commercial developments with a precise concept for adequate signage;
                   include provisions for sign placement and number, as well as sign scale in
                   relationship to the building, landscaping and readability as an integral part of the
                   signage concept.
         LU12-12.2   Ensure that signs are integrated into the overall site and architectural design
                     theme of commercial developments.
         LU12-12.3   Require that sign placement, heights, size, materials, proportions, and design
                     within the commercial areas be consistent with the low-profile nature and scale
                     of the community.
         LU12-12.4   Require that sign color be compatible with building color. In general, limit the
                     number of primary colors to no more than two with a secondary color used for
                     accent or shadow detail.
         LU12-12.5   Avoid freestanding pole signs in favor of monument-type signs, wall signs,
                     and/or secondary projecting signage.
         LU12-12.6   In designing signs and sign messages, emphasize utilization of fewer words to
                     create a clean, understandable message. In general, use symbols only if they
                     are easily recognizable or represent a definable logo.
         LU12-12.7   Minimize the size and simplify the shape of signs to avoid sign “clutter”.
         LU12-12.8   Permit signs attached to the underside of a projecting canopy or protruding over
                     a sidewalk or right-of-way as a special sign only if they provide pedestrian-scale
                     atmosphere and enhance the building front.
         LU12-12.9   Require that window signs be designed so as to be pleasing, aesthetically
                     enhance shop fronts, geared to the pedestrian, and be at eye level.
         LU12-12.10 Develop a community signage scheme for street corridors, public buildings and
                     selected entrances to the community and its sub-communities.
LU12-13 Provide appropriate screening for necessary “urban-style” facilities, structures, and features.
         LU12-13.1   Require that the placement and screening of satellite dishes, solar systems, and
                     other appurtenances be accomplished in such a manner that minimizes or
                     eliminates the obtrusiveness of these facilities. Establish setbacks within the rear
                     yard for satellite installations, as well as to establish screening standards.
         LU12-13.2   Require unobtrusive placement and screening of appurtenances such as solar
                     collectors, air conditioning units, and pool equipment.
         LU12-13.3   Require that trash enclosures, loading areas, mechanical equipment, and outdoor
                     storage areas be screened from public view as appropriate; design enclosures
                     and screening with materials which are compatible with the project's
                     architecture, and which do not detract from the rural, small town character of
                     the community.
         LU12-13.4   Require that on-site utilities and/or ancillary equipment within commercial areas
                     be located in an inconspicuous area or vaulted under ground away from public
                     view.
                                          LUE - 28

LU12-13.5  Where on-site utilities and/or ancillary equipment is required to be in public view,
           require that they be screened with a combination of materials that best suit the
           overall project design theme.
LU12-13.6  Require that commercial loading areas be oriented away from the street and
           from residential edges.
           •    If loading areas cannot be so located, require that they be screened from
                public view.
           •    Access to service bays of automotive uses shall be from the interior of the
                site.
LU12-13.7  Require that service station bays, repair garages, and other automobile-related
           uses proposed at corner locations be oriented away from the street frontage.
           •    Orient service areas away from street frontage and provide building
                elevations and architectural details consistent with the overall design theme
                toward the street.
           •    Design access to service bays of automotive uses from the interior of the
                site.
LU12-13.8  Require that ground mounted equipment incidental to commercial development
           be appropriately screened with solid walls and/or landscaping. Locate equipment
           away from the front of the building. Require that screening material be similar or
           complementary to adjacent architecture and materials.
LU12-13.9  Require that commercial loading be screened from public view areas and
           adjacent residential developments, and be located an appropriate distance from
           adjacent residential structures.
LU12-13.10 Require the design and construction of enclosures for trash, recycling bins and
           green waste containers to include the following criteria:
           •    Match the existing building architecture
           •    Use materials consistent with adjacent buildings
           •    Avoid conflicts with loading dock areas
LU12-13.11 Prohibit roof mounted equipment other than television antennas and solar
           collectors within residential areas.
LU12-13.12 Require that roof-mounted equipment on commercial structures be screened
           from public view.
           •    Require that roof screens be solid and continuous, and that equipment be
                covered by continuous grills or louvers.
           •    Require that roof screens be sheathed in a matching or complementary
                material to the exterior building material .
           •    Prohibit the use of picket fence screening.
           •    Minimize the rooftop location of mechanical plants and distribution networks.
                Where necessary, enclose such facilities within efficient roof-top penthouses.
                               LUE - 29

LU12-14 Development Code property development standards and proposed Design Guideline revisions
        shall consider refinement to outdoor lighting design, height, placement and intensity levels to
        minimize unnecessary glare, energy use, intrusion onto adjacent properties or public spaces.
        Factors such as night sky visibility, safety, security/motion and light sensor, controls, timers
        and aesthetic compatibility should be part of outdoor lighting design considerations.
                                        LUE - 30
NOISE ELEMENT
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Noise Standards
N1.       To protect the citizens of Arroyo Grande from the harmful and annoying
          effects of exposure to excessive noise.
          Policy N1-1        The noise standards of this Element represent maximum acceptable
                 noise levels.      New development should minimize noise exposure and noise
                 generation.
                 N1-1.1      Figure N-1 shows the ranges of noise exposure from transportation noise
                             sources which are considered to be acceptable, conditionally acceptable
                             or unacceptable for the development of different land uses. Figure N-1
                             is used to determine whether mitigation is needed for development and
                             land uses near major transportation noise sources.
                                                       FIGURE N-1
                            LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT
                                    NEAR TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                                               COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
        LAND USE                                       LDN OR CNEL, dB
                                         50      55       60        65       70     75        80
RESIDENTIAL, THEATERS,                     AAAA     AAAA
AUDITORIUMS, MUSIC HALLS                                     CCCC     CCCC
                                                                              UUUU    UUUU      UUUU
 TRANSIENT LODGING-MOTELS,                 AAAA     AAAA
HOTELS, B & B's, RV PARKS &                                  CCCC     CCCC    CCCC
CAMPGROUNDS                                                                           UUUU      UUUU
SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES, MUSEUMS,               AAAA     AAAA
HOSPITALS, NURSING HOMES,                                    CCCC     CCCC    CCCC
MEETING HALLS, CHURCHES, PRE-
SCHOOL, CHILD CARE FACILITIES                                                         UUUU      UUUU
PLAYGROUNDS, PARKS                         AAAA     AAAA     AAAA     AAAA
                                                                              CCCC
                                                                                      UUUU      UUUU
OFFICES                                    AAAA     AAAA
                                                             CCCC     CCCC    CCCC
                                                                                      UUUU      UUUU
INTERPRETATION
AAAA = ACCEPTABLE                    CCCC = CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE             UUUU = UNACCEPTABLE
Specified land use is satisfactory.  Use should be permitted only after          Development is usually not
No noise mitigation measures are     careful study & inclusion of protective     feasible in accordance with
required.                            Measures as needed to satisfy the policies  the goals of the Noise
                                     of the Noise Element.                       Element
                                                    NE - 1
                N1-1.2     In areas where the noise environment is acceptable, new development
                           may be permitted without requiring noise mitigation.
                N1-1.3     For areas where the noise environment is conditionally acceptable, new
                           development should be allowed only after noise mitigation has been
                           incorporated into the design of the project to reduce noise exposure to
                           the levels specified by the policies listed below.
                N1-1.4     For areas where the noise environment is unacceptable, new
                           development in compliance with the policies of the Noise Element is
                           usually not feasible.
         Policy N1-2       New development of noise-sensitive land uses shall not be permitted in
                           areas exposed to existing or projected future levels of noise from
                           transportation noise sources which exceed 60 dB Ldn or CNEL (70
                           Ldn/CNEL for playgrounds and neighborhood parks) unless the project
                           design includes effective mitigation measures to reduce noise in outdoor
                           activity areas and interior spaces to or below the levels specified for
                           give n land use in Table N-1.
                                              TABLE N-1
                         MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE
                             TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                                    Outdoor Activity Areas¹                   Interior Spaces
Land Use                                     Ldn/CNEL, dB              Ldn/CNEL,dB        Lsq1/2 dB
Residential                                          60³                      45                --
Transient Lodging                                    60³                      45                --
Hospitals, Nursing Homes                             60³                      45                --
Theaters, Auditoriums, Music Halls                   --                       --                35
Churches, Meeting Halls, Office Buildings            60³                      --                45
Restaurants 4                                        60³                      45                --
Schools, Libraries, Museums,
Preschools, Child Care Facilities                    --                       --                45
Playgrounds (including school
playgrounds)                                         70                       --                --
¹ Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, the exterior noise level standard shall
be applied to the property line of the receiving land use.
² As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
³ Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 dB L dn/CNEL or less
using a practical application of the best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise
level of up to 65 dB L dn/CNEL may be allowed provided that available exterior noise level
reduction measures have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this
table.
4 Restaurants included with or without outdoor dining or entertainment and/or drive-up windows.
                                                  NE - 2

Land Use Compatibility/Noise Sensitive Uses
N2.      To protect the economic base of Arroyo Grande by preventing incompatible
         land uses from encroaching upon existing or planned excessive noise-
         producing uses and traffic.
N3.      To preserve the tranquility of residential areas by                      preventing     the
         encroachment of excessive noise-producing uses and traffic.
         Policy  N2 & 3-1 Noise created by intrusive noise source shall be regulated to prevent
                 excessive nuisance noise.
         Policy  N2 & 3-2 Noise created by new transportation noise sources, including roadway
                 improvement projects, shall be mitigated so as not to exceed the levels specified
                 in Table N-1 within the outdoor activity areas and interior spaces of existing
                 noise sensitive land uses.
         Policy  N2 & 3-3 New development of noise-sensitive land uses shall not be permitted
                 where the noise level due to existing stationary noise sources will exceed the
                 noise level standards of Table N-2 unless effective noise mitigation measures
                 have been incorporated into the design of the development to reduce noise
                 exposure to or below the levels specified in Table N-2.
                                             TABLE N-2
                           MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE
                                 STATIONARY NOISE SOURCES¹
                                          Daytime                          Nighttime²
                                      (7a.m. to 10p.m.)                 (10p.m. to 7a.m.)
Hourly Leq, dB³                               50                              45
Maximum level, dB³                            70                              65
Maximum level, dB-Impulsive Noise4            65                              60
¹As determined at the property line of the receiving land use. When determining the
effectiveness of noise mitigation measures, the standards may be applied on the receptor side of
noise barriers or other property line noise mitigation measures. Where the noise-sensitive land
uses are parks or playgrounds, add ten (10) decibels to the noise level standards in this table.
² “Applies only where the receiving land use operates or is occupied during nighttime hours”.
³ Sound level measurements shall be made with slow meter response.
4 Sound level measurements shall be made with fast meter response.
                                                 NE - 3

       Policy   N3-3.1 Noise created by new proposed stationary noise sources or existing
                stationary noise sources which undergo modifications that may increase noise
                levels shall be mitigated so as not to exceed the noise level standards of Table
                N-2 on lands designated for noise-sensitive uses.
       Policy   N3-3.2 This policy does not apply to noise levels associated with agricultural
                operations.
Transportation and Stationary Noise Mitigation
N4.    To educate the residents of Arroyo Grande concerning the methods available
       for minimizing exposure to excessive noise.
N5.    To avoid or reduce noise impacts through site planning and project design,
       giving second preference to the use of noise barriers and/or structural
       modifications to buildings containing noise-sensitive land uses.
       Policy N4&5-1    The city should require noise mitigation measures where existing noise
                        levels produce significant noise impacts to noise-sensitive land uses or
                        where new developments may result in cumulative increases of noise
                        upon noise-sensitive land uses.
       Policy N4&5-2    New public and private development proposals shall be reviewed to
                        determine conformance with the policies of this Noise Element
                        When mitigation must be applied to satisfy the policies of the Noise
                        Element the following priorities for mitigation shall be observed, where
                        feasible:
                        First:    Setbacks/open space separation
                        Second: Site layout/orientation/shielding of noise-sensitive uses with
                                  non-noise-sensitive uses
                        Third:    Construction of earthen berms
                        Fourth: Structural measures: acoustical treatment of buildings and
                                  noise barriers constructed of concrete, wood or materials other
                                  than earth
       Policy N4&5-3    Where the development of a project subject to discretionary approval
                        may result in land uses being exposed to existing or projected future
                        noise levels exceeding the levels specified by the policies in the Noise
                        Element, the City shall require an acoustical analysis as part of the
                        environmental review under CEQA at the time the application is accepted
                        for processing. For development not subject to discretionary approval
                        and/or environmental review, the requirements for an acoustical analysis
                        shall be implemented prior to the issuance of a building permit.
                        N4&5-3.1 At the discretion of the City, the requirement for an acoustical
                        analysis may be waived provided that all of the following conditions are
                        met:
                                              NE - 4
                    Outdoor Activity Areas
                    a)       The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or
                    for office buildings, churches or meeting halls having a total gross floor
                    area less than 10,000 square feet.
                    b)       The noise source in question consists of a single roadway or
                    railway for which up-to-date noise exposure information is available. An
                    acoustical analysis will be required when the noise source in question is
                    a stationary noise source, or when the noise source consists of multiple
                    transportation noise sources.
                    c)       The existing or projected future noise exposure at the exterior of
                    buildings which will contain noise-sensitive uses or within proposed
                    outdoor activity areas (other than playgrounds and parks) does not
                    exceed 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL) prior to mitigation. For playgrounds and
                    parks, the existing or projected future noise exposure may not exceed 75
                    dB Ldn (or CNEL) prior to mitigation.
                    d)       The topography in the project area is flat, and the noise source
                    and receiving land use are at the same grade.
                    N4&5-3.2 Interior Spaces
                    a)       Required Noise Level Reduction (NLR) is equal to or less than 30
                    dB.
                    b)       The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or
                    for offices, churches, meeting halls with less than 10,000 sq.ft. floor
                    area.
                    c)       Noise source in question consists of a single roadway for which
                    up-to-date noise exposure information is available.          An acoustical
                    analysis will be required when the noise source is a stationary noise
                    source or consists of multiple transportation noise sources.
                    N4&5-3.3 General
                    Effective noise mitigation, as determined by the City is incorporated into
                    the project design to reduce noise exposure to the levels specified in
                    Tables N-1 or N-2. Such measures may include the use of building
                    setbacks, building orientation, noise barriers and the standard noise
                    mitigation packages contained within the Acoustical Design Manual. If
                    closed windows are required for compliance with interior noise level
                    standards, air conditioning or a mechanical ventilation system will be
                    required.
Implementation Measures:
N1-1      If the Community Development Director determines that a noise-sensitive land use
          may be exposed to potential noise levels that exceed the standards of the Noise
          Element, an acoustical analysis shall be required.
                                           NE - 5
N1-2 Where mitigation of existing noise levels in accordance with the policies and
     standards of this Noise Element is not feasible, the City Council may reduce or
     waive the applicable policies and standards to the degree needed to allow
     reasonable use of property, provided noise levels are mitigated to the maximum
     extent possible.
N1-3 Where mitigation of noise levels from a proposed development project in
     accordance with policies and standards of this element cannot be achieved, the
     City Council may require a reduction in proposed uses relative to size, scale, and
     intensity. If excessive noise levels cannot be mitigated, the project shall be
     denied. In instances where mitigation measures will reasonably reduce noise
     levels near the required standard, the City Council may be flexible in its evaluation
     of Policies and Standards. This shall be done on a case-by-case basis.
N2-1 Procedures shall be developed and employed to ensure that noise mitigation
     measures required pursuant to an acoustical analysis are implemented in the
     development review and building permit processes.
N2-3 The City shall enforce the State Noise Insulation Standards (California Code of
     Regulations, Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
N2-4 The City shall request the California Highway Patrol, the County Sheriff and City
     police department to actively enforce the California Vehicle Code sections relating
     to adequate vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
N3-1 The City shall purchase new equipment and vehicles only if they comply with noise
     level performance standards based upon the best available noise reduction
     technology. Alternatives to the use of existing noisy equipment, such as leaf
     blowers, shall be pursued.
N3-2 The City shall periodically review and update the Noise Element to ensure that
     noise exposure information and specific policies are consistent with changing
     conditions within the City and with noise control regulations or policies enacted
     after the adoption of this element.
N4-1 The City shall make the Acoustical Design Manual available to the public so that
     the public can incorporate noise reduction measures into private projects
     consistent with the goals and policies of this Noise Element.
N5-1 The City shall consider one or more of the following mitigation measures where
     existing noise levels significantly impact existing noise-sensitive land uses or where
     cumulative increase in noise levels resulting from new development significantly
     impact noise-sensitive land uses:
     a.   Rerouting traffic onto streets that have low traffic volumes or onto streets that
          do not adjoin noise-sensitive land uses.
     b. Rerouting trucks onto streets that do not adjoin noise-sensitive land uses.
     c.   Construction of noise barriers.
     d. Lowering speed limits.
                                       NE - 6
     e. Acoustical treatment of buildings.
     f. Programs to pay for noise mitigation such as low cost loans to owners of noise-
        impacted property or establishment of developer fees.
N5-2 The City shall consider adoption of a noise ordinance that provides guidelines
     under which intrusive noise sources would be regulated.
                                    NE - 7
PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
OBJECTIVES, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
It is the overall goal of the City of Arroyo Grande to adequately provide for the recreational needs of
Arroyo Grande area residents and visitors. The Parks and Recreation Element should be used as a guide
for development additional park and recreation facilities: It should be recognized that City facilities also
serve residents of adjoining communities and visitors as well as residents of the City.
Neighborhood and Community Park Standards
Objective PR1 Neighborhood and community park facilities, including the sports complex,
should be provided at a ratio of four (4) acres of parkland per 1,000 persons.
         Policy PR1-1 Neighborhood parks serve as the day-to-day recreational areas of the City, and
         should include such amenities as playgrounds, playfields, and areas for passive recreation.
                 Implementation Measure PR1-1.1 Review new development proposals for impacts
                 to neighborhood park facilities and require dedication of land and/or payment of in-lieu
                 fees pursuant to Ordinance 313 C.S.
         Policy PR1-2 Community parks shall include playfields for such activities as baseball, softball,
         soccer and football, volleyball and tennis courts, restrooms and picnic areas.
                 Implementation Measure PR1-1.2 Review new development proposals for impact to
                 community park facilities and require dedication of land and/or payment of fees pursuant
                 to Ordinance 313 C.S.
Cooperation with Other Agencies
Objective PR2 The City should supplement existing park, recreation and cultural facilities
when needed and economically feasible and cooperate with Lucia Mar Unified School
District, the County and adjoining Cities of Pismo Beach, Grover Beach and Oceano CSD to
provide for operation and maintenance and to develop additional facilities and services.
         Policy PR2-1 Pursuant to the objective above, the following are identified as short-term needs
         (1-5 years from present) for additional recreational facilities:
                 Implementation Measure PR2-1.1 Actively seek grants through Proposition 12, and
                 other funding for preservation of Swinging Bridge.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-1.2 Continue creek dedication required by Subdivision
                 Ordinance.
                 Implementation        Measure      PR2-1.3     Construct  Rancho    Grande   Park   capital
                 improvements.
                                                PR - 1
        Policy PR2-2         Pursuant to the objective above, the following are intermediate-term needs
                             (5-15 years from present) for additional recreational facilities:
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.1 Cooperate with the Lucia Mar Unified School
                 District and/or San Luis Obispo County Park Division regarding future joint development
                 of a park with swimming pool and/or multi-purpose room/gymnasium.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.2 In cooperation with other agencies, pursue
                 construction of a senior’s and/or youth recreation center.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.3 Encourage private development of a golf course
                 and identify a potential County area in the Pismo Beach/Arroyo Grande Fringe that could
                 accommodate such a facility. Consider ALC/Williams area as an alternative location
                 subject to Specific Plan.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.4 Investigate use of Methodist Campground or
                 Newsom Springs area for regional day camp/park amphitheater, and/or youth hostel
                 facility.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.5 Improve bike lanes or paths that connect to
                 County, Pismo Beach and Grover Beach systems and serve priority parks and schools.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-2.6 Encourage private development of equestrian
                 facilities in the Oak Park Acres and/or adjoining unincorporated areas.
        Policy PR2-3 Pursuant to the objective above, the following are long-term needs (10 – 20
        years) for additional Commercial recreational facilities:
                 Implementation Measure PR2-3.1 Encourage private development of a miniature
                 golf course by identifying those areas in the City that could accommodate facilities.
                 Implementation Measure PR2-3.2 Cooperate with San Luis Obispo County Parks
                 Division to ensure that trail systems within Arroyo Grande link urban area with County
                 trails.
                 Implementatio n Measure PR2-3.3 Encourage                 private    and      concessions by
                 identifying those areas of the City that could accommodate such facilities.
Special Needs Recreation
Objective PR3 The City should promote recreation programs which meet the special needs
of children, the elderly, and the handicapped.
        Policy PR3-1 Continue and expand pre-school programs to meet existing and future needs.
        Policy PR3-2 Disseminate local child care resource information and provide referral services to
        the residents of Arroyo Grande.
        Policy PR3- 3 Initiate programs and the construction of facilities within public parks that
        generate more outdoor and indoor activities for senior citizens.
        Policy PR3-4 Coordinate an assistance program for elderly citizens requiring transportation to
        recreation programs using volunteers.
                                                 PR - 2

       Policy PR3-5 Provide barrier free access in all new park developments.
       Policy PR3-6 The City should continually assess the ever-changing recreation needs of the
       community.
               Implementation Measure 3- 6.1 The Parks and Recreation Commission shall review
               the Parks and Recreation Element for revision every two years.
               Implementation Measure 3- 6.2 At large, City-sponsored events, when appropriate,
               solicit public input via questionnaires on recreation needs of the City.
Recreational Trails
Objective PR4 A network of recreational trails, bicycle lanes and bikeways should be
established for use by local residents and visitors to the Arroyo Grande Valley.
       Policy PR4-1 Trails should be located generally as shown in Figure PR-2.
               Implementation Measure PR4-1.1 Review development proposals for consistency
               with this element and require easements, dedications, and improvements when
               necessary.
               Implementation Measure PR4-1.2 A regional recreational trail should be established
               along the Arroyo Grande Creek greenbelt from Strother Park to the ocean.
               Implementation Measure PR4-1.3 Proposed trails, especially bicycle lanes which
               serve as connections to schools and recreation facilities, shall be given high priority in
               implementation
               Implementation Measure 4PR- 1.4 All established trails shall be identified by signage
               for identification and access.
               Implementation Measure PR4-1.5                 Safe street crossing provisions shall be
               incorporated into any trails/routes crossing major streets.
Funding and Maintenance
Objective PR5 The City will consider all available financing and acquisition techniques in the
development and maintenance of park and recreation facilities.
       Policy PR5- 1 The financing of the City’s park and recreation facilities and park system
       maintenance should be shared by the City, developers, special districts, and other government
       agencies.
               Implementation Measure PR5-1.1 The City’s Capital Improvement program is a
               means of coordinating the acquisition, improvement and rehabilitation of City park
               facilities.
               Implementation Measure PR5-1.2 Solicit and make use of, to the maximum extent
               possible, any federal and/or state grants, matching funds programs, fees and private
               donations for the acquisition of parkland.
                                               PR - 3

                  Implementation Measure PR5- 1.3 Establish a volunteer program to reduce the cost
                  of maintenance and operation of park facilities and recreation programs.
                  Implementation Measure PR5-1.4 Continue to utilize Quimby Ordinance fees and
                  dedications to the maximum extent feasible, to improve and expand upon parks and
                  recreational facilities.
                  Implementation Measure PR5- 1.5 Implement existing park Master Plans and
                  develop financing programs for needed improvements.
        Policy PR5-2 The City will cooperate with San Luis Obispo County, the Lucia Mar Unified School
        District, other public agencies, and private interests to combine efforts of improvement,
        expansion or construction of new recreation facilities.
                  Implementation Measure PR5-2.1               Pursue development of joint facilities with the
                  Lucia Mar Unified School District.
                  Implementation Measure PR5- 2.2 Coordinate efforts to establish recreational trails
                  with the San Luis Obispo County Parks Division.
                  Implementation Measure PR5- 2.3 The City encourages commercial recreational
                  facilities in the City, such as bowling alleys, miniature golf and/or sports complexes.
        Policy PR5-3 The City shall improve and/or rehabilitate existing parks and recreation facilities
        and maintain them in the best possible condition for maximum public enjoyment.
IMPLEMENTATION METHODS
The financing of improvements described in this Element will require a mix of techniques available to pay
for park development, maintenance, and operations. Several methods of financing new parks and
recreation programs, and renovating and maintaining existing parks are described below. Each
expansion or rehabilitation project should have a financing plan prepared that specifies the sources of
revenue to pay for planning, land acquisition, capital improvements, rehabilitation, and operations and
maintenance. Park and Recreation Facilities should be programmed as part of the City’s Capital
Improvement Program.
Maintenance and Operation
In order to avoid any deficits or cutbacks in the level of park maintenance, the following actions are
recommended:
User fees:      Consider collection of adult user fees and increases over above present level, where
appropriate.
Concessions:       Encourage increased concessionaire activities at appropriate facilities (Soto Sports
Complex).
Citizen, League, and Team participation: Continue volunteer programs to include organized work
days and expand if possible. Continue to encourage donations of time, materials, maintenance, and
expertise by utility companies, businesses, and individuals as well as league and team members.
                                                   PR - 4

New Parks and Facilities
The City has a variety of options to fund new park and recreation operating expenses, including taxes,
fees, bonds, assessments, donations, and /or grants, including the following revenue sources:
Quimby Act: The City will continue to implement the Quimby Act, which requires developers to provide
land and/or fees for the acquisition and development of park and recreation facilities based on the local
standard of four acres of parkland per 1,000 residents.
Federal and State Grants: The City should aggressively seek grants from State and Federal agencies,
including State Park Bond Act funds, the Land and Water Conservation Fund and any new grant
programs.
Land dedications/easements: As development occurs in areas of the City, appropriate land
dedications and easements should be negotiated for park and recreation facilities.
Trail easements: In addition to the conventional park acquisition methods, public trail rights-of-way
can be secured through agreements with public and semi-public organizations, such as utility companies
and flood control districts. Trail development may be accomplished by developers, by contract with
private construction firms, by volunteers (Boy Scouts, riding clubs, etc.), or nominal cost labor
agreements (Honor camps – CMC).
Development impact fees: The City should consider an ordinance establishing development impact
fees for the purpose of financing park improvements, including a portion of transient occupancy tax and
the property transfer tax.
User fees: Designate a portion of adult user fees for new park and recreation facility acquisition.
Citizen participation:       Continue to encourage donations, volunteer labor, foundation grants, and
special events.
General Obligation Bonds: The City could consider a general obligation bond to finance needed park
improvements with a two-third-majority vote. This option should be considered as a means to pay for a
major share of land acquisition, capital improvements, and the rehabilitation of the park system outlined
in the Parks and Recreation Element.
Revenue Bonds: The City may use revenue bonds to finance land acquisition and capital improvements
for park facilities that generate revenues from user fees or concessions. This technique would most
appropriately apply to equestrian centers, swimming pools, gymnasiums, and other special purpose
facilities which can include user fees.
Cooperation with Other Agencies: The City should directly request financial support from the
County, Cities of Grover Beach and Pismo Beach and Oceano CSD to contribute to the operations and
maintenance costs of youth sports and other youth recreation programs serving non-Arroyo Grande City
residents.
                                              PR - 5

SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
This Safety Element has two basic principles:
             •    be ready for disaster, and
             •    manage development to reduce risk.
The first part of this element addresses the first premise – emergency preparedness.          Most natural
disasters will require the combined efforts of our emergency service providers.
The remaining sections of the element describe various types of disasters, focusing principally on fire,
flood and geologic hazards. The purpose of these sections is to describe the physical effects of the
disaster and provide standards for reducing the risk of exposure to the hazards. When distilled, the rules
are quite simple: build above the floodwaters, where the fire fuel is low, and on stable ground.
Residents of the City of Arroyo Grande are subject to a variety of natural and human-caused hazards.
Natural hazards are processes such as earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and wildfires, and have been
occurring for thousands, even millions of years. These natural processes have played an essential role in
shaping the topography and landscape of Arroyo Grande, and become “hazards” when they disrupt or
otherwise affect the lives and property of people. Human-caused hazards often occur as a result of
modern activities and technologies. These potential hazards can include the use of hazardous materials,
and buildings that may be unsafe during a strong earthquake.
To minimize loss from hazards, resources must be committed. While it would be desirable for
communities to provide the maximum level of safety from all potential hazards, this is generally not
feasible. Therefore, hazard reduction efforts are often based on the concept of risk reduction. Risk that is
associated with natural and human-caused hazards can be separated into three general categories for the
purposes of this element:
         Acceptable Risk. This is the level of risk below which no specific action by government is
         deemed to be necessary to further reduce the consequences of a hazard.
         Unacceptable Risk. This is the level of risk above which specific action by government is
         deemed necessary to protect life and property.
         Avoidable Risk. This is a hazardous risk that can be averted while still achieving the individual
         or public objective.
In making land use decisions, the severity and the probability of loss should be considered.
The Safety Element is one of several Elements that comprise the General Plan. Section 65300.5 of the
California Government Code requires the General Plan and its Elements to be “an integrated, internally
consistent and compatible statement of policies...”
The Safety Element is closely linked to the Land Use and Open Space Elements of the General Plan. The
Land Use Element designates the general distribution of land uses within the planning area, as well as
standards for population density and building intensity. To avoid unreasonable public risk, the Land Use
Element takes into account the public safety hazard identification and evaluation in the Safety Element.
By limiting development density in areas that may be subject to significant geologic and other safety
hazards, the risk of loss of life and property can be minimized. One of the purposes of the Open Space
Element is to preserve open space for public health and safety, including areas that require special
management and regulation because of hazardous or special conditions (e.g., earthquake fault zones,
flood plains, unstable soil areas, and high fire risk areas).
                                                      SE - 1

The Safety Element provides a general evaluation of potential public safety hazards in the City. The
hazard identification and evaluation is based on general information available at the time of the Element’s
preparation. No site-specific evaluations were performed for this Element.
The Safety Element is intended to be used for general land use planning purposes only, and should be
used to identify where detailed site investigations should be required for new development.
Legal Requirements for Preparing a Safety Element
The Safety and Seismic Safety Elements first became mandatory parts of the General Plan in 1975
requiring cities and counties to adopt, at a minimum, General Plan policies relating to fire safety, flooding,
and geologic hazards. In 1984 the State Legislature expanded the list of mandatory issues that were to
be evaluated in the Safety Element to provide the direction and resources to help reduce death, injuries,
property and environmental damage, and the economic and social dislocation resulting from natural
hazards. While it is required to focus on fire, flooding, geologic, and seismic hazards, jurisdictions may
address any relevant safety issues that are considered important.
To make land use decisions that minimize the potential for loss of life, injury, and property damage from
natural and human-caused hazards, it is necessary to have an understanding of the causes and potential
effects of the hazards that may affect the City of Arroyo Grande.
In the following sections, several components appear regularly:
    Preparedness. The element begins with this as a separate topic. Each subsequent area has a
    preparedness component. It is essential to maintain our ability to respond to natural and man-made
    disasters.
    Education. An informed citizenry will carry on their activities in a way that reduces the potential for
    disaster to occur or be exacerbated and will be better equipped to deal with disasters when they
    occur.
    Existing Env ironment. The built environment can be improved to reduce the threat of disaster.
    This is geared mostly towards improving structures and their surroundings.
    Land Use Planning. Future development should always be planned with careful consideration
    toward reducing the threat of property and environmental loss. While many considerations are
    involved in development, safety should be paramount.
Each section contains some or all of the following components:
    Objective. This is the desired end state or condition that we would like to achieve.
    Policy. This defines the approach to achieving objectives.
    Implementation Measures. These are specific actions the City or other interested parties should
    take. They take the form of standards (regulatory mechanisms) or programs (other advisory actions
    that are not regulatory).
                                                    SE - 2

1. Emergency Preparedness
OBJECTIVE S1 Attain a high level of emergency preparedness.
Emergency preparedness is necessary to avoid or minimize the loss of life and property as a result of
natural and technological disasters, to reduce the social, cultural, environmental and economic costs of
disasters, and to assist and encourage the rapid recovery from disasters. An important part of
preparedness is the careful assessment of risks before an emergency occurs. San Luis Obispo County’s
Emergency Response Zones are illustrated in Map 8 of the Technical Background Report.
Policy S1-1       Response
Support the response programs that provide emergency and other services to the public when a disaster
occurs. The focus of response activities is saving lives and preventing injury, and reducing immediate
property damage.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S1-1.1           Support efforts of and provide funding to the City Fire Department to
         ensure the readiness of response teams and the smooth implementation of emergency response
         plans.
         Program S1-1.2           Work before disasters occur to make sure there are few or no
         bureaucratic obstacles to performing emergency operations. Support efforts to ensure local
         agency compliance with the Standardized Emergency Management System, an emergency
         response and coordination system used throughout California.
         Program S1-1.3           Establish a program that will reduce the time and effort required to get
         permits necessary to perform emergency repair work. To the extent that it can be done
         beforehand, provide the Engineering Department with sufficient resources to procure permitting
         assistance. (For example, work in riparian corridors may require permits from the U.S. Fish and
         Wildlife Service, California Department of Fish & Game, and perhaps the Army Corps of
         Engineers.)
Policy S1-2       Emergency Preparedness
Continue to improve preparedness programs that educate and organize people to respond appropriately
to disasters. They include education and awareness programs for individuals, families, institutions,
businesses, government agencies and other organizations.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S1-2.1           Support education in the schools that teaches our children how to avoid
         dangers and how to behave during an emergency.
         Program S1-2.2           Support the efforts of many organizations that provide emergency
         outreach and education programs to the region.
Policy S1-3       Coordination
Improve coordination among City, County and State programs, and among others working to reduce the
risks of disasters. This should also include improved coordination with the news media. This will result in
more effective preparedness, response and recovery from disasters.
Implementation Measure:
         Program S1-3.1           Continue to improve information transfer to the media during
         emergencies. Official liaisons should meet with media representatives on a regular basis to
         improve coordination.
                                                   SE - 3

         Program S1-3.2             Review studies predicting the impacts of earthquake and flood
         emergencies on facilities and roadways. Develop revised evacuation routes as necessary.
Policy S1-4       Information Systems and Research
Expand and keep current the database of safety related information. Knowledge about disasters and the
area we live in is growing. New information must be made available to the public and decision makers.
Regularly update the County’s geographic information system (GIS) as new information becomes
available.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S1-4.1             Work with the County to maintain a Geographic Information System
         (GIS) that includes the data layers of this safety element. Continue to build the GIS with
         additional information as it becomes available.
         Program S1-4.2             Seek from other government, academic and private organizations new
         data that can be used for emergency preparedness and response. Endeavor to share information
         with other nearby jurisdictions, news media and with private and public organizations.
         Program S1-4.3             Revise the City’s Emergency Plan, required by the California Emergency
         Services Act, according to the policies and projections in the General Plan. The City’s emergency
         services agencies should review their responsibilities and capabilities in light of this revision, and
         consider the potential for over-reliance on mutual-aid agreements during disasters.
Policy S1-5       Risk Assessment
Continue investigations and programs that reduce or eliminate long-term risks. Ensure that new
development in the City is designed to withstand natural and manmade hazards to acceptable levels of
risk. Risk assessment activities, effectively carried out, can improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of
response and recovery from disasters.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S1-5.1             Structural Committee. Maintain a County-wide committee of building
         professionals who review City regulations, building code updates and other information in order
         to maintain the currency of our codes and procedures.
         Program S1-5.2             Develop additional training for building and safety personnel to keep up
         with current knowledge.
         Program S1-5.3             Revise the City’s building regulations to incorporate all safety
         requirements called out in the General Plan. All new construction, especially public facilities, in
         the City should be built according to the adopted Building and Fire Codes.
         Program S1-5.4             Identify structures not conforming with earthquake, fire or flood
         standards, and require conformance with acceptable levels of risk through programs such as
         structural rehabilitation, occupancy reduction, and demolition and reconstruction.
Critical Facilities
These are structures and services that provide emergency assistance after a major disaster. They include
police and fire stations, schools, hospitals and roadways that are designated evacuation routes.
Policy S1-6       Critical Facilities, Recovery and Reconstruction
After a major disaster, assist public and private efforts that must be made for short-term and long-term
rebuilding, the provision of housing for those displaced, resumption of services, and resumption of
business and government functions. In order to make this effort effective, critical facilities must be
maintained and upgraded as technology and population demands increase.
                                                      SE - 4

Implementation Measures:
      Program S1-6.1             Provide comprehensive assistance to all agencies and organizations
      involved in disaster recovery through planning, engineering and funding. Maintain critical
      facilities for responsiveness to disasters.
      Program S1-6.2            The City’s Headquarters Fire Station and City Hall are located in portions
      of the historic Village Core that may be damaged or destroyed by natural hazards such as
      flooding, or more catastrophic dam failure inundation. These critical facilities should be
      relocated.
                                                  SE - 5

2. Water Hazards
OBJECTIVE S-2: Reduce damage to structures and the danger to life caused by flooding,
dam failure inundation, and other water hazards.
Exposure of the public to water-related hazards can result from flooding, dam failure, and erosion.
Dam failure inundation would result from the sudden failure of a dam and the release of the impounded
water. Although it is very unlikely that a large modern dam would suddenly fail, the effects of this hazard
could be catastrophic. Therefore, this hazard is evaluated in this chapter.
Flood Hazards
Flooding generally occurs in response to heavy rainfall events when streams, rivers, and drainage
channels overtop their banks. Flooding may also occur in low-lying areas that have poor drainage, even
during moderately sized storms. Many factors can increase the severity of floods, including fires in
watershed areas, the placement of structures or fill material in flood-prone areas and areas of tidal
influence, and increased runoff that results from the development of impervious surfaces such as
roadways and rooftops. For planning purposes, the flood event most often used to delineate areas
subject to flooding is the 100-year flood. This is an event that statistically has a one percent chance of
occurring in any given year. Areas within the 100-year flood plain in San Luis Obispo County are
indicated in Map 5 of the Technical Background Report.
Areas of potential 100-year flooding in Arroyo Grande include portions of the creek channels that traverse
the City: Canyon/Meadow Creek on the west side of the City, Corbett Canyon, Tally Ho and Arroyo
Grande Creeks on the east side of the City, and Los Berros Creek in the southeastern portion of the City.
Although inundation areas are generally located along creek channels, adjacent properties could be
adversely affected in isolated areas. Near the convergence of Corbett Canyon and Arroyo Grande Creeks,
the 100-year floodplain widens and impacts properties between Crown Terrace and Mason Streets. The
floodplain along Arroyo Grande Creek also widens slightly on the north and south sides of Highway 101.
Policy S2-1 Flood Hazards
Strictly enforce flood hazard regulations both current and revised. Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) regulations and other requirements for the placement of structures in flood plains shall be
followed. Maintain standards for development in flood-prone and poorly drained areas.
Implementation Measures:
         Standard S2-1.1          Discourage development, particularly critical facilities, in areas of high
         flood hazard potential. Do not allow development within areas designated as the 100-year flood
         plain that would obstruct flood flow or be subject to flood damage. Do not allow development
         which will create or worsen known flood or drainage problems.
         Standard S2-1.2          Discourage single road access into areas that could be closed during
         floods. Additional access ways should be planned to develop areas having only one access.
         Standard S2-1.3          Review development plans for construction of structures in low-lying
         areas, or any area which may pose a serious drainage or flooding condition. Susceptibility to
         damage from flooding should be determined based on the 100-year flood.
                                                   SE - 6
Policy S2-2        Reduce Flood Damage
Reduce flood damage in areas of the City known to be prone to flooding.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S2-2.1            Inventory and reevaluate where appropriate known local flood prone
         areas in the City. Develop a prioritized list of proposed capital improvement projects for low-
         lying, flood prone areas.
         Program S2-2.2            Seek funding to implement capital improvement projects for low-lying,
         flood prone areas.
         Program S2-2.3            When reviewing proposals for potential development of water reservoirs,
         retention ponds, or drainage channels, require an evaluation of potential inundation areas and
         design proven to withstand potential seismic activity.
Dam Inundation
Dam inundation is the flooding of lands due to release of impounded water resulting from the failure or
overtopping of a dam. Although the probability of this type of hazard occurring is highly unlikely, it
warrants consideration in the Safety Element because there are several dams and reservoirs in San Luis
Obispo County. Those areas with potential for dam inundation are indicated in Map 6 of the Technical
Background Report.
Dam failures can result from a number of natural or human causes. Earthquakes, improper siting, fast
rising flood waters, erosion of the dam face or foundation, and structural/construction flaws can all
contribute to a dam breach and ensuing release of impounded water. Other reservoir-related flooding
events have resulted from massive, fast-moving landslides that have displaced large volumes of water
contained in a reservoir. Such a rapid displacement of water can cause large quantities of water to travel
over the dam, resulting in downstream flooding.
The severity of downstream effects resulting from a dam failure will be directly related to the manner in
which the dam fails. The failure of a dam could cause flooding, injury, loss of life, and property damage
due to inundation, erosion, debris and sediment deposition. Other effects include damage to community
infrastructure and interruption of public services. Health hazards from the release of sewage may also
result.
Major Dams near Arroyo Grande
San Luis Obispo County Flood Control owns and operates Lopez Dam, which is located northeast of the
City of Arroyo Grande. Lopez Reservoir has an approximate 51,000 acre-foot capacity. Lopez Dam is
under the jurisdiction of the State of California Division of Safety of Dams who conduct periodic reviews
to evaluate dam safety. In the event of complete failure of Lopez Dam, water would flow in a westerly
direction following Arroyo Grande Creek, approximately 3,000 feet in each direction of the centerline of
the creek channel. Water flows would pass through the City before reaching the Pacific Ocean, likely
resulting in substantial impacts to life and property.
Policy S2-3        Dam Failure
Minimize the risk of, and those associated with, dam failure.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S2-3.1            Work with appropriate agencies at the County, State and federal levels
         to assist with the inspection and maintenance of dams to minimize the risk of failure.
         Program S2-3.2            Maintain a dam failure evacuation plan including responsibilities for
         public officials on emergency notification and evacuation instructions, including use of the
         emergency alert system to notify the public.
                                                     SE - 7
          Program S2-3.3           Prohibit the development of additional critical facilities in areas of
          potential dam inundation areas and Program relocation of those currently in risk areas
3. Fire Safety
OBJECTIVE S- 3:         Reduce the threat to life, structures and the environment caused by fire.
Fires can cause significant life, property and environmental losses, and can occur in both urban and rural
settings. Urban fire hazards can be influenced by a variety of factors, including building location and
construction characteristics, access constraints, the storage of flammable and hazardous materials, as
well as inadequate supplies of fire suppression water, and response time for fire suppression personnel.
Fire-related hazards in rural areas generally result from the development of residences in hillside or other
areas with dense vegetation and/or inadequate access, water supply and response time.
Fires are also an important component of the regional ecosystem. Wildlands must burn periodically to
naturally maintain viable environments. Fuel maintenance (controlled burns, mowing, cattle grazing and
other means) is a necessary replacement to uncontrolled wildland fires because of threats to human
habitation. Development patterns in rural lands can reduce the ability to manage fuel and defend “values
at risk”.
The majority of Arroyo Grande is located in a generally flat valley that has been developed with urban
and agricultural uses. The northern and eastern portions of the City, however, are hilly and contain
parcels that are within or adjacent to grassland and forested areas. Fire protection for the structures
located within these urban/wildland interface areas may be constrained by heavy fuel loads, steep slopes,
limited access, and possibly limited water supplies. Specific areas of the City identified as having
potential fire suppression deficiencies are listed in the Technical Background Report, while Map 7 of the
Report shows Arroyo Grande as having high fire hazard potential.
Fire suppression and prevention services within Arroyo Grande are provided by the City of Arroyo Grande
Fire Department. The City’s only fire station, constructed in 1980, is located at 140 Traffic Way. The Fire
Department is staffed by a fire chief, additional full-time supervisory staff and volunteer fire fighting
crews. The most apparent fire hazards are generally associated with the urban/wildland interface areas
of the City. City Ordinance 472 adopted the 1994 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code, with several
amendments.
Policy S3-1       Pre- Fire Management
New development should be designed and constructed to minimize fire hazards, with special attention
given to fuel management, adequate water supply for suppression and improved access in higher fire risk
areas.
Implementation Measures:
          Program S3-1.1           Identify high value and high risk areas, including urban/wildlife interface
          areas, and develop mitigation efforts to reduce the threat of fire.
          Program S3-1.2           Require that fire safety personnel review the design of new subdivisions
          in high and very high fire hazard areas and require the clustering of lots or buildings as
          appropriate, in addition to the maintenance of defensible space around all structures and
          vegetation management programs.
          Program S3-1.3           Require fire resistant material to be used for building construction in fire
          hazard areas. Require the installation of smoke detectors in all new residences.
                                                     SE - 8

Policy S3-2       Facilities, Equipment and Personnel
Ensure that adequate facilities, equipment and personnel are available to meet the demands of fire
fighting in the City of Arroyo Grande.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S3-2.1             Evaluate population and settlement patterns, incident trends and values
         at risk every five years to determine where facilities, equipment and staff need augmentation.
         Program S3-2.2             Evaluate fire flow capacities and deficiencies, in relation to ISO ratings,
         and develop alternative remedies, if necessary.
         Program S3-2.3             Cooperate with other adjoining jurisdictions including County/CDF, Pismo
         Beach and Grover Beach to plan for future equipment, communication systems, station and
         personnel requirements. The City’s Fire Department is responsible for fleet management,
         ensuring that future vehicle needs are identified; replacement schedules and funding
         mechanisms are established; maintenance and rotation schedules are developed and met. The
         Fire Department is responsible for communicating its needs to the City Council and the City
         Managers office.
Policy S3-3       Readiness and Response
Maintain and improve the Fire Department’s ability to respond to emergency calls and suppress fires
throughout the City within a maximum response time of six (6) minutes.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S3-3.1             Prepare and work to achieve a maximum of six (6) minutes response
         time goal. This maximum response time will be based upon density of development, and the
         value at risk contrasted with an acceptable level of risk. More concentrated urban uses should be
         within four (4) minutes response time.
         Standard S3-3.2            Train staff and volunteer fire fighters to a level appropriate to their
         position and responsibilities; provide emergency medical care training and job-required
         specialized training; maintain and enhance training materials and instruction techniques; and
         provide educational incentives for all personnel.
         Program S3-3.3             Work to continually improve information resources about the location of
         fire hazard areas response constraints and resources and other values at risk within them.
Policy S3-4       Loss Prevention
Improve structures and other values at risk to reduce the impact of fire. Regulations should be
developed to improve the defensible area surrounding habitation, particularly in high risk urban/wildland
interface areas or other areas with access or water supply deficiencies or beyond 6-minute response
time.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S3-4.1             Inform homeowners of the dangers and appropriate responses to fire
         and ways to prevent loss. Continue to promote the efforts of the Fire Safe Council.
         Standard S3-4.2            Require a “defensible space” around structures and values at risk, able
         to provide fire fighter with enough room to defend structures and maneuver.           Review        of
         development plans by fire safety personnel to assure adequacy of access for equipment, water
         supplies, construction standards, and vegetation clearance.
         Program S3-4.3             Coordinate with Public Works to ensure that sufficient water supplies are
         available for protection of structures, and encourage built-in fire suppression systems such as
         sprinklers, particularly in high risk or hi value areas.
                                                       SE - 9

4. Geologic & Seismic Hazards
OBJECTIVE S- 4: Minimize the potential for loss of life and property resulting from geologic
and seismic hazards
Geologic conditions define the stability of the ground below a site, and how that site will respond to the
natural forces of earthquakes and weather. The frequency and strength of earthquakes will depend on
the activity, number and type of faults that pass through or can influence a particular region. Geologic
and seismic conditions are characterized to help assess the vulnerability of development to seismic and
geologic hazards.
Seismic Hazards
Arroyo Grande is located in a geologically complex and seismically active region. Seismic, or earthquake-
related, hazards have the potential to result in significant public safety risks and widespread property
damage. Two of the direct effects of an earthquake that are required to be considered as part of the
Safety Element include the rupture of the ground surface along the trend or location of a fault, and
ground shaking that results from fault movement. Other geologic hazards that may occur in response to
an earthquake include liquefaction, seismic settlement, and landslide. Other hazards, such as slope
failure, flooding from a dam failure, fires, and structural hazards that may be related to earthquakes, are
evaluated in separate sections of the Safety Element.
Fault Rupture Hazards
Fault rupture refers to displacement of the ground surface along a fault trace. Rupture of the ground
surface along a fault trace typically occurs during earthquakes of approximately magnitude 5 or greater.
Fault rupture can endanger life and property if structures or lifeline facilities are constructed on, or cross
over, a fault. Fault rupture tends to occur along or within a zone of linear traces of previous ruptures
that define the fault zone, and as sympathetic movement on adjacent or intersecting faults.
The Wilmar Avenue fault is a potentially active fault adjacent to the City of Arroyo Grande. The Wilmar
Avenue fault is exposed in a sea cliff in Pismo Beach, and the buried trace of the fault is inferred to strike
northwest-southeast parallel and adjacent to Highway 101 beneath portions of Arroyo Grande. This
potentially active fault poses a moderate potential fault rupture hazard to the City.
Additionally, the inactive Pismo fault underlies portions of Arroyo Grande. However, this inactive fault
poses a very low potential fault rupture hazard to the City. Further studies to evaluate the activity of the
faults are warranted, prior to placing structures near the mapped fault traces. Map 2 of the Technical
Background Report shows the fault hazards in San Luis Obispo County.
Policy S4-1       Fault Information
Information on faults and geologic hazards in the City should continue to be updated. The City will
enforce the General Plan and applicable building codes that require developments, structures, and public
facilities to address geologic and seismic hazards through the preparation and approval of geotechnical
and geologic reports.
          Program S4-1.1          The City may require applicants to provide documentation (reports,
          technical documents, and plans) be reviewed by an independent consultant licensed with the
          State of California to practice in their area of expertise. In such cases, the independent
          consultant should review and render an opinion as to whether the documents were prepared in
          accordance with standard practices, applicable codes and regulations pertaining to geologic
          hazards.
                                                    SE - 10
Policy S4-2       Fault Rupture Hazards
Locate new development away from active and potentially active faults to reduce damage from fault
rupture. Enforce applicable regulations of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act pertaining to
fault zones to avoid development on active faults.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S4-2.1         Require geologic studies to be performed, based on the Alquist-Priolo
         Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, so that habitable structures and essential facilities will be sited
         away from active and potentially active faults.
Groundshaking Hazards
Groundshaking refers to the motion that occurs in response to local and regional earthquakes, and can
endanger life and safety due to damage or collapse of structures or lifeline facilities. Uniform Building
Code requirements set forth the minimum design and construction standards for structures to resist
seismic forces. These building codes are typically updated every three years to reflect a progressive
review of the performance of structures and lifelines (pipelines, roads, etc.) that have been subject to or
damaged by earthquakes in the past.
The City of Arroyo Grande is near a number of active and potentially active faults capable of producing
strong ground motion in response to seismic events, including Wilmar Avenue, Blind Thrust Point San
Luis, Los Osos, Pecho, Hosgri, Casmalia, La Panza, and San Andreas faults. Table 4-9 in the Technical
Background Report describes the sources of groundshaking in the vicinity of Arroyo Grande. With a high
probability for producing a major earthquake in the near future, the San Andreas fault and offshore
Hosgri faults present the most likely groundshaking to the City. Portions of Arroyo Grande that are
underlain by layers of unconsolidated, recent alluvial soil material have an increased risk of experiencing
the damaging effects of groundshaking.
Hazards from Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
In a strong earthquake, any type of structure may experience some level of damage resulting from
ground shaking. Some types of construction materials generally perform better in earthquakes than
others, and almost any material can be designed in such a manner so as to be safe during an
earthquake. Buildings made of unreinforced masonry, however, typically provide little earthquake
resistance. To address public safety risks posed by unreinforced masonry buildings, the California
Legislature passed Senate Bill 547 in 1987. This bill required local jurisdictions to identify unreinforced
masonry buildings, and to develop a program to mitigate potentially hazardous structures.
To comply with SB 547, the City adopted the Uniform Code for Building Conservation. Surveys identified
few unreinforced masonry buildings requiring modifications to meet earthquake resistance structural
standards, most of which were located in the Village Area. The City worked closely with property owners,
and through voluntary measures, minimum earthquake resistance improvements were made to all but
one building.
Policy S4-3       Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
Reduce the danger to people and property from unreinforced masonry buildings.
Implementation Measure:
         Program S4-3.1         Continue to identify local unreinforced masonry buildings and require
         reinforcement through enforcement of applicable design standards.            Maintain the list of
         unreinforced masonry buildings.
                                                   SE - 11
Policy S4-4       Reduce Seismic Hazards
Enforce applicable building codes relating to the seismic design of structures to reduce the potential for
loss of life and reduce the amount of property damage. (Also See S4-3 regarding Unreinforced Masonry
Buildings)
Implementation Measures:
         Program S4-4.1             Prohibit the construction of development directly astride known active or
         potentially active fault zones.
         Program S4-4.2             Enforce applicable building code regulations pertaining to the design of
         structures and grading relative to seismic hazards.
         Program S4-4.3             Review, amend, and adopt new Uniform Building Code requirements,
         when necessary, to promote the use of updated design standards.
         Program S4-4.4             Encourage investigations to improve the existing characterizations of
         faults in areas of existing or proposed development, and their potential to generate damaging
         earthquakes, for the purpose of assisting in the design of structures to resist seismic loads.
         Implement appropriate design standards and building codes that address local seismic conditions.
Liquefaction and Seismic Settlement
Liquefaction is the sudden loss of soil strength due to a rapid increase in soil pore water pressures
resulting from groundshaking during an earthquake. Seismic settlement is the reduction of volume within
a saturated or unsaturated soil mass due to groundshaking during a seismic event. Seismic settlement
may occur simultaneously or independent of liquefaction. Liquefaction potential, and its potential to
present a hazard, can only be assessed through site-specific studies and subsurface exploration. Map 3
of the Technical Background Report identifies areas within San Luis Obispo County having high
liquefaction potential. The currently adopted Uniform Building Code requires that the potential for
liquefaction be assessed for the design of all structures.
The magnitude and duration of groundshaking are also important factors in causing liquefaction to occur.
The larger the earthquake magnitude, and the longer the duration of strong groundshaking, the greater
the potential for liquefaction to occur in an area that is susceptible to the hazard. The areas most likely
to be vulnerable to liquefaction are underlain by younger alluvium where groundwater and granular
sediments are both present. Areas potentially underlain by liquefiable alluvium are low lying lands
adjacent to rivers, creeks, beaches, and estuaries.
The portions of the City with high liquefaction potential are those areas underlain by younger alluvium
(Qa), which includes most of the low-lying downtown areas south of Branch Street and along Grand
Avenue. Higher elevation at the west end of the City, and north of Highway 101 and Branch Street, are
underlain by older Quaternary sediments comprised of sand dune deposits (Qos) and the Paso Robles
Formation (QTp) that have moderate liquefaction potential. Site specific studies are needed to evaluate if
a geologic unit actually contains potentially liquefiable materials, and if they require mitigation for
development.
Policy S4-5       Liquefaction and Seismic Settlement
Require design professionals to evaluate the potential for liquefaction or seismic settlement to impact
structures in accordance with the currently adopted Uniform Building Code.
                                                     SE - 12
Implementation Measures:
         Program S4-5.1             Enforce current building code requirements that require the potential for
         liquefaction to be addressed in the design of structures. Discourage the construction of critical
         facilities in areas of potential liquefaction.
         Program S4-5.2             Require geotechnical studies to be performed for habitable or important
         structures (as defined by the building code) sited in areas having a medium to high potential.
         The geotechnical study should evaluate the potential for liquefaction and/or seismic related
         settlement to impact the development, and mitigation to reduce these potential impacts, if
         needed.
Slope Instability and Landslides
Landslides and slope instability can occur as a result of wet weather, weak soils, improper grading,
improper drainage, steep slopes, adverse geologic structure, earthquakes, or a combination of these
factors. Slope instability can occur in the form of creep, slumps, large progressive translation or rotational
failures, rockfall, debris flows, or erosion. Landslides can result in damage to property and cause
buildings to become unsafe either due to distress or collapse during sudden or gradual slope movement.
Structures constructed in steep terrain, possibly on stable ground, may also experience landslide hazards
if they are sited in the path of potential mud flows or rockfall hazards.
A majority of the existing development in Arroyo Grande is located on gently inclined alluvial valley
sediments, which has low to very low potential for slope stability hazards. However, the residences
located on the hilly terrain north of Branch Street have greater potential for landslide activity.
Additionally, there are relatively steep hillsides and canyons adjacent to the City and as development
moves into those areas, there could be even greater potential for slope stability related concerns. A
thorough geologic/geotechnical study should be prepared prior to development in hillsides and other high
landslide hazard areas, as mandated by the City’s adopted version of the Uniform Building Code. Areas
of potential landslide hazards in San Luis Obispo County are indicated in Map 4 of the Technical
Background Report.
Policy S4-6        Slope Instability
Avoid development in areas of known slope instability or high landslide risk when possible, and continue
to encourage that developments on sloping ground use design and construction techniques appropriate
for those areas. The City acknowledges that areas of known landslide activity are generally not suitable
for residential development.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S4-6.1             For developments in areas of known slope instability, landslides, or
         slopes steeper than 20 percent, the stability of slopes shall be addressed by registered
         professionals practicing in their respective fields of expertise. For subdivisions, such studies
         should be performed prior to delineating lot lines and building envelopes.
         Program S4-6.2             Do not permit new development in areas of known landslide activity
         unless development plans indicate that the hazard can be reduced to a less than significant level
         prior to beginning development. Do not permit expansion to existing structures or developments
         in areas of known landslide activity except when it will reduce the potential for loss of life and
         property.
         Program S4-6.3             Require development proposals to mitigate the impacts that their
         projects contribute to landslides and slope instability hazards on neighboring property, and
         appurtenant structures, utilities, and roads.
                                                        SE - 13

         Program S4-6.4            Require slope stability evaluations for developments in areas of
         moderate or higher landslide risk. Require certification of the proposed building site stability to
         the adverse effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of building permits.
5. Other Hazards
OBJECTIVE S- 5: Reduce the potential for harm to individuals and damage to the
environment from radiation hazards, hazardous materials, electromagnetic fields, radon, and
hazardous trees.
Radiation Hazards
The Diablo Canyon Power Plant is the primary radiation hazard risk in the region. An uncontrolled release
of radioactive material would have the potential to result in significant health and safety impacts. To
prepare for potential emergency situations that might develop at the power plant, extensive warning,
reporting, and response plans have been developed. Updated information regarding the Emergency
Response Plan is distributed to the public each year. Additional potential radiation hazards include low-
level radioactive waste from medical facilities and elsewhere. The hauling, handling and disposal of these
materials are governed by comprehensive regulations.
Policy S5-1      Radiation Hazards
Maintain a high level of emergency preparedness and information about radiation hazards.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S5-1.1            Work with PG&E to review and update information about emergency
         preparedness and evacuations related to radiation hazards.
         Program S5-1.2            Review the City’s Emergency Plan in anticipation of emergency services
         which may be required under mutual aid agreements in the event of a radiological accident at the
         Diablo Canyon Power Plant. Attention should also be given to potential radiological spills during
         the transportation of radioactive fuel to and from the Diablo Canyon Plant. If evacuation
         programs are determined inadequate, alternative measures shall be considered.
Hazardous Materials
Due to the quantity and frequency with which hazardous materials are shipped through the region,
transportation-related accidents pose the most significant hazardous material risk to City residents.
Highway 101 runs through the center of Arroyo Grande and is considered a major transportation route
for the shipping of hazardous materials. A major release of hazardous materials on this Highway would
have the potential to expose a significant portion of the City’s population to health and safety hazards. In
addition, potential exposure of the public to hazardous materials can result from the numerous oil, fuel
and natural gas pipelines located in the City. Agricultural and household use of hazardous materials also
has the potential to result in their release into the environment.
Policy S5-2      Hazardous Materials
Reduce the potential for exposure to humans and the environment by hazardous substances, and
develop information programs consistent with “Community Right to Know” laws.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S5-2.1            Review commercial development projects which use, store, or transport
         hazardous materials to ensure necessary measures are taken to protect public health and safety.
         Program S5-2.2            Work with Caltrans to require all transport of hazardous materials to
         follow Caltrans approved routes, with all necessary safety precautions taken to prevent
         hazardous materials spills.
                                                     SE - 14

         Program S5-2.3             Sponsor periodic information or educational programs to inform residents
         along approved haul routes of the potential for hazard release. Develop alternate evacuation
         routes in case of a spill.
         Program S5-2.4             Develop information programs consistent with “Community Right to
         Know” laws.
Electromagnetic Fields [EMF]
The transmission of electricity and the use of electrical appliances result in the creation of
electromagnetic fields. At this time, the evidence of potential health hazards from the delivery and usage
of electric power is incomplete and inconclusive. Until the necessary information is available to make
informed decisions about possible health effects resulting from the long-term exposure to
electromagnetic fields, individuals and local jurisdictions may wish to consider adopting an avoidance
strategy which keeps residences and workplaces away from high tension lines. Such a strategy includes
adopting measures to avoid electromagnetic field exposures when it is reasonable, practical, relatively
inexpensive, and simple to do so.
Policy S5-3        EMF
Reduce the potential for health hazards from electromagnetic fields.
Implementation Measures:
         Program S5-3.1             Maintain a prudent avoidance strategy relative to high voltage
         transmission lines. EMF standards established by the California Energy Commission and Public
         Utilities Commission (if any) should be applied.
         Program S5-3.2             Continue to monitor the information available regarding EMF hazards.
         Program S5-3.3             When practicable; keep higher density development away from large
         transmission lines.
Radon
Radon is a naturally occurring gas produced by the breakdown of uranium in soil, rock, and water.
Accumulations of this gas inside structures can become a significant health hazard because radon is
known to cause lung cancer. The threat of radon is very low in a well-ventilated structure. Basements,
which are rare in this region, are common problem areas.
Policy S5-4        Radon
Reduce the potential for health hazards from radon through education.
Implementation Measure:
         Program S5-4.1             Sponsor periodic information and education programs to inform the
         citizens of Arroyo Grande where the high radon risk areas are and how to prevent problems.
Hazardous Trees
Pine pitch canker is threatening the health of pine trees throughout the region. This disease can result in
the death of a pine tree in a relatively short period of time. If an infected tree is not properly removed, it
can spread the disease. The tree may also become a safety hazard if it becomes uprooted and falls
during a storm. Other trees become hazards because of their age or from storms.
Policy S5-5        Hazardous Trees
Reduce the danger to people and property from trees that are weakened and susceptible to falling or
limb loss during storms by requiring removal.
Implementation Measure:
         Program S5-5.1             Identify and remove trees within the City that pose potential hazards,
         paying particular attention to trees in roadways and pedestrian/bicycle paths.
                                                    SE - 15

