Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                          Page 1 of 399
                                         INTRODUCTION
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                    Page 2 of 399
                                    1.0 City of Solana Beach – An Overview
      Solana Beach is a small city located in southern California on the central coast of San Diego
      County. It overlooks the Pacific Ocean to the west from sloping green hills and sandstone bluffs. It
      is bounded on the north by the San Elijo Lagoon and the city of Encinitas. To the east lies the San
      Dieguito County Park, rural residences and the San Dieguito River Valley. The cities of San Diego
      and Del Mar form the southern boundary.
      The majority of the citizens are year-round residents. There are churches and synagogues of many
      denominations, public and private schools and numerous recreational facilities. The city is
      approximately 95 percent developed and is undergoing reconstruction in a few areas.
      In 1986, the citizens of Solana Beach voted to incorporate as a city to preserve a way of life and
      self determine goals for the future. Subsequent to being incorporated, a group of citizens were
      designated by the City Council to initiate the process for preparing the state-mandated general plan
      for the city.
      More than 80 dedicated individuals from all walks of life were organized into a cohesive, active
      group called the “Citizens Advisory Committee.” They divided the city into seven areas for
      purposes of defining and evaluating land use, both existing and future. In addition, they formed
      committees to establish guidelines for each of the eight general plan elements. The end product is
      this document.
      This general plan evaluates, defines, and sets goals for development preservation and rehabilitation
      of distinct neighborhoods and commercial areas. Furthermore, it is the spirit and intent of this plan
      to achieve and sustain a high quality of life for citizens and visitors alike through harmonious
      integration of pedestrians and vehicles, social and civic activities, recreational and economic
      opportunities and by the preservation of the city’s natural beauty, now and in the future.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                          Page 3 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                    Page 4 of 399
                                          2.0 Purpose of the General Plan
      The major purposes of this general plan are:
      1. To articulate goals for the future physical, social, and economic development of the city of
      Solana Beach;
      2. To describe public policies adopted to attain community goals; and
      3. To provide the basis for informed decisionmaking and to establish a basis for subsequent
      planning efforts such as the preparation of specific plans and special studies.
      As a whole, the goals, objectives, and policies set forth in this general plan provide the framework
      for guiding the long-term development of the city. Section 4.2 of this Introduction discusses the
      range of measures available to the city for implementing its adopted goals, objectives, and policies.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                      Page 5 of 399
                                       3.0 Legal Authority and Requirements
      3.1 Government Code Sections
      State Law (Section 65300) requires each city to adopt a comprehensive, long term and internally
      consistent general plan for the physical development of the city and any land outside the city’s
      boundaries which is felt to bear relation to the city’s planning. The state requires cities to adopt
      general plans based on the belief that the future growth of the state is determined largely through
      local actions.
      State policies pertaining to general plans can be summarized as follows:
      ■    To improve the quality of life in California by preserving and using the resources of the land in
      economically and socially desirable ways. (Adapted from Government Code Section 65030.)
      ■    To maintain, improve, and enhance the quality of air, water, and land according to state and
      national standards and local needs. (Adapted from Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.)
      ■    To ensure the preservation of open space for scenic beauty, recreation, the conservation of
      natural resources, and the protection of public health and safety. (Adapted from Government Code
      Sections 65560 and 65561.)
      ■    To ensure the provision of “decent housing and a suitable living environment for every
      California family.” (Adapted from Health and Safety Code Section 37112 and Government Code
      Section 65580(a).)
      ■    To conserve water, air, and energy by considering the effect of future development on these
      resources and by encouraging new development which uses public facilities currently available and
      minimizes the need to travel. (Adapted from Public Resources Code Section 21001.)
      ■    To provide transportation facilities and services that are adequate and efficient and that
      significantly reduce hazards to human life, pollution, noise, disruption of community organization,
      and damage to the natural environment. (Adapted from Government Code Section 14000.)
      ■    To identify and reduce hazards to health and property from natural and man-made conditions,
      including floods, fires, landslides, soil erosion, seismic activity, airplane crashes, excessive noise,
      hazardous wastes, and congested and unsanitary living conditions. (Adapted from Water Section
      Code 8401, Government Code Section 26215, Public Utility Code Section 21670, and Health and
      Safety Code Sections 25101, 33071, and 37121.)
      ■    To use reasonable and practical means in carrying out the general plan so that it will serve as
      a pattern and guide for orderly physical development and the preservation and conservation of open
      space land and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of public funds. (Adapted from Government
      Code Section 65400(a).)
      ■    To ensure that land use decisions are made with full knowledge of the long- and short-term
      economic and fiscal implications, as well as environmental effects. (Adapted from Government
      Code Section 65030.2.)
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                    Page 6 of 399
      3.2 Mandated Elements
      Government Code Section 65302 specifies that every city and county shall include the following
      seven elements in its general plan:
      ■     Land Use Element
      ■     Circulation Element
      ■     Housing Element
      ■     Conservation Element
      ■     Open Space Element
      ■     Noise Element
      ■     Safety Element
      Although these elements are mandatory, they may be combined at the discretion of the city as long
      as the city complies with all requirements governing the content and adoption of mandatory
      elements.
      3.3 Optional Elements
      Government Code Section 65303 states that local governments may adopt “any other elements or
      address any other subjects which...relate to the physical development of the...city.”
      The city of Solana Beach has determined that an Economic Development Element, which is an
      optional element, is appropriate for inclusion in this general plan. It should be noted that optional
      elements have the same force and effect as required elements.
      3.4 Internal Consistency
      Since all elements of the general plan have equal status, no element may supersede another
      element. Therefore, as required by Government Code 65300.5, the general plan and elements and
      parts thereof must comprise an integrated, internally consistent, and compatible statement of
      policies for the adopting agency. All baseline data, goals, objectives, and policies adopted in the
      general plan must be consistent. Exhibit 2 provides a matrix which reflects the consistency of the
      elements comprising this general plan.
      3.5 Relationship to Other Planning Documents
      To make the long-range comprehensive planning of the general plan more meaningful, a link
      between the general plan and day-to-day actions of the city is required. In California, the general
      plan has been institutionalized through the enactment of statutes requiring consistency of certain
      local actions with the general plan. Additional statutes, while not mandating consistency, require
      findings or a report on whether proposed actions conform to the general plan. The state’s general
      rule for consistency determination is stated as:
            An action, program, or project is consistent with the general plan if it, considering all
            aspects, will further the objectives and policies of the general plan and not obstruct their
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                            Page 7 of 399
            attainment.
      Following is a list of provisions in state law that require local actions and documents to be
      consistent with the general plan:
      Zoning:
      Government Code Section 65860 requires that city and county zoning ordinances be consistent
      with the general plan.
      Subdivisions:
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                      Page 8 of 399
      Government Code Sections 66473.5 and 66474 require that subdivision and parcel map approvals
      in all jurisdictions be consistent with the general plan.
      Reservations of Land within Subdivisions:
      Government Code Section 66479 requires that reservations of land for parks, recreational facilities,
      fire stations, libraries, and other public uses within a subdivision conform to the general plan.
      Open Space:
      Government Code Section 65566 requires that acquisition, disposal, restriction, or regulation of
      open space land by a city or county be consistent with the open space element of the general plan.
      Government Code Section 65567 prohibits the issuance of building permits, approval of subidivision
      maps, and adoption of open space zoning ordinances that are inconsistent with the open space
      element of the general plan.
      Government Code Section 65910 requires that every city and county adopt open space provisions
      in their zoning ordinances consistent with the open space element of the general plan.
      Government Code Section 51084 requires cities and counties accepting or approving an open
      space easement to make a finding that preservation of the open space land is consistent with the
      general plan.
      Capital Improvements:
      Government Code Sections 65401 and 65402 require the review of and report on the consistency of
      proposed city, county, and special district capital projects, including land acquisition and disposal,
      with the applicable general plan.
      Development Agreements:
      Government Code Section 65867.5 requires that development agreements between developers and
      local governments be consistent with the general plan.
      Special Housing Programs:
      Health and Safety Code Section 50689.5 requires that housing and housing programs developed
      under Health and Safety Code Section 50680 et seq. for the developmentally disabled, mentally
      disordered, and physically disabled be consistent with the housing element of the general plan.
      Parking Authority Projects:
      Street and Highway Code Section 32503 requires that parking authorities, in planning and locating
      any parking facility, are “subject to the relationship of the facility to any officially adopted master
      plan or sections of such master plan for the development of the area in which the authority
      functions to the same extent as if it were a private entity.”
      Project Review under CEQA:
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                      Page 9 of 399
      Title 14, California Administrative Code Section 15080 requires examination of projects subject to
      the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act for consistency with the general plan.
      Mineral Resources:
      Public Resources Code Section 2763 requires that city and county land use decisions affecting
      areas with minerals of regional or statewide significance be consistent with mineral resource
      management policies in the general plan.
      Transmission Lines:
      Public Utilities Code Section 12808.5 requires cities and counties approving electrical transmission
      and distribution lines of municipal utility districts to make a finding concerning the consistency of
      the lines with the general plan.
      3.6 Environmental Assessment
      The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires that environmental issues related to the
      adoption of a general plan be addressed either in the general plan itself or through the preparation of
      an Environmental Impact Report (EIR). As defined by Section 15206 of the State CEQA Guidelines,
      a proposed general plan shall be considered as a project of statewide, regional, or areawide
      significance if it involves the preparation of an EIR and shall be subject to review by state agencies.
      Pursuant to CEQA, an EIR has been prepared for the Solana Beach General Plan and is provided
      as a companion document.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                     Page 10 of 399
                                          4.0 The General Plan Process
      4.1 Preparation Process
      This general plan is the product of a team effort involving the citizens of Solana Beach, the Solana
      Beach City Council, city staff, and a multi-disciplined team of consultants. As illustrated by Exhibit
      3, the general plan process involved the following key aspects:
      1. The identification and analysis of issues.
      2. The establishment of goals and objectives.
      3. The development and evaluation of alternative land use plans.
      4. The selection of a preferred alternative and the establishment of an implementation program.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                 Page 11 of 399
      Continuous opportunities for citizen participation were provided throughout the process. The
      primary arena for public involvement was an extensive series of General Plan Advisory Committee
      meetings and workshops.
      This citizen participation was essential to the identification of community values and goals which
      served as the foundation of the plan. Further, the General Plan Advisory Committee reviewed work
      in progress and provided recommendations concerning key decisions to be reached during the
      process.
      4.2 General Plan Implementation
      The city of Solana Beach has several implementation measures available to carry out its adopted
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                    Page 12 of 399
      goals and objectives. Within the general plan itself, each element contains policies which call for
      specific implementing actions to be taken by the city. Other polices are set forth which call for
      subsequent programs and actions to be taken which will implement the provisions of the general
      plan.
      In addition to the measures established in the general plan itself, other implementation measures
      are derived from the city’s corporate and police powers granted by state law. The adoption of a
      zoning ordinance is the city’s principal instrument for implementing the general plan and is derived
      from the police power given to the city. This ordinance regulates land use by dividing the city into
      zones and specifying permitted uses, allowable development intensities, minimum lot size, building
      height and setback limits, and other development parameters within each land use zone.
      Other implementation measures derived from the city’s police power include the city’s power to
      regulate subdivisions, to adopt specific plans, to enforce building and housing codes, to establish
      park dedication requirements, and to utilize environmental and design review procedures when
      considering development proposals.
      Implementation measures derived from the city’s corporate powers include the construction of
      streets, water, and sewer facilities, the acquisition and development of parkland, the acquisition of
      sites for low income housing, and the acquisition of open space, conservation, or scenic
      easements.
      4.3 General Plan Amendment Procedures
      A. Notwithstanding anything in Subsection (b) of Section 65358 of the Government Code to the
      contrary, no Element of this General Plan shall be amended more than twice per calendar year,**
      except for (i) amendments necessary to comply with State or Federal law; (ii) amendments to
      implement or obtain certification of a local coastal plan; or (iii) amendments specified in
      Subsections (c) or (d) of Section 65358.
      B. Notwithstanding anything in Section 65356 of the Government Code to the contrary, any
      amendment to, or repeal or readoption of, the Land Use Element (including the Land Use Map) shall
      be subject to paragraph E, below.*,****
      C. Notwithstanding anything in Section 65356 of the Government Code to the contrary, any
      amendment to, or repeal and readoption of, any other element requiring an amendment to the Land
      Use Element in order to maintain internal consistency between the various Elements of this General
      Plan, shall be subject to paragraph E, below.***,****
      D. Notwithstanding anything in Sections 65090, 65091, 65353 or 65355 of the Government Code to
      the contrary, if a proposed General Plan Amendment would affect the permitted uses or intensity of
      uses of one or more parcels of real property, mailed notice of the public hearing shall be given to
      the owner (as identified pursuant to Government Code Section 65091) of each parcel of real
      property located within 1/2 mile of the real property.***
      E. No General Plan Amendment, including Specific Plan adoptions or changes, shall be adopted
      which would:
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code INTRODUCTION                                                                    Page 13 of 399
      1. change, alter or increase the General Plan Residential Land Use categories; or
      2. change any land use designation to any other, except changes to land already designated
      residential that clearly result in a reduction in intensity or density of said land use designated as
      residential:
      unless and until such action is approved by a majority of voters in the City.
      This provision shall not apply to amendments which are necessary to comply with state or federal
      law or which are necessary to implement or obtain certification of the local coastal program.****
      *   Resolution 93-5, adopted Jan. 19, 1993 (see B. above)
      **    Resolution 96-45, adopted May 6, 1996 (see A. above)
      ***    Resolution 97-5, adopted Jan. 7, 1997 (see C. and D. above)
      ****    Ordinance 266, General Plan Amendment language effective 5-27-98, adopted as a
        citizens’ initiative, Proposition T, the Solana Beach Community Protection Act, at the 11-7-2000
        General Municipal Election and by the City Council on 12-5-00 (see B, C and E above)
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                     Page 14 of 399
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                         Adopted by Res. 2014-141, passed November 19, 2014.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 15 of 399
                                                   I. Introduction
      This Land Use Element describes existing land use characteristics and development patterns in
      Solana Beach and establishes a plan for future development and redevelopment. It identifies issues
      that affect land use planning and articulates the goals and policies that are designed to ensure a
      well-balanced and compatible mix of land uses that are consistent with the community’s character
      and image.
      A.   Content
      The Land Use Element is required by state law. As specified in Government Code Section
      65302(a), the Land Use Element:
      Designates the proposed general distribution and general location and extent of the uses of the land
      for housing, business, industry, open space (including agriculture, natural resources, recreation,
      and enjoyment of scenic beauty), education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste
      disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land. The location and
      designation of land for public and private uses shall consider natural resources including rivers,
      creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian habitats, and land that may accommodate floodwater for
      purposes of groundwater recharge and storm water management.
      The Land Use Element shall include a statement of the standards of population density and building
      intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory covered by the plan.
      The Land Use Element shall also identify and annually review those areas covered by the plan that
      are subject to flooding identified by flood plain mapping prepared by the Federal Emergency
      Management Agency (FEMA) or the Department of Water Resources.
      The Land Use Element shall also do both of the following:
      (1) Designate in a land use category that provides for timber production those parcels of real
      property zoned for timberland production pursuant to the California Timberland Productivity Act of
      1982.
      (2) Consider the impact of new growth on military readiness activities carried out on military bases,
      installations, and operating and training areas, when proposing zoning ordinances or designating
      land uses covered by the General Plan for land, or other territory adjacent to military facilities, or
      underlying designated military aviation routes and airspace.
      B.   Purpose
      This Land Use Element is intended to establish a long range plan for development that reflects the
      opportunities and constraints affecting land use in Solana Beach. It is meant to maintain a balanced
      land use pattern with a mix of uses that preserve the city’s residential and recreational character
      while enhancing economic vitality and protecting cultural and environmental features. It is also
      aimed at ensuring the ongoing availability and maintenance of adequate public facilities and
      services in support of existing and future development.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 16 of 399
      C.    Key Issues
      Solana Beach is essentially built-out with very little vacant land remaining (approximately 22 acres
      or one percent of the total land area). Therefore, future development will primarily involve the
      redevelopment or reuse of currently developed parcels and infill development on the city’s few
      remaining vacant parcels. In general, such development is expected to occur in the area west of
      Interstate 5 (I-5). This is primarily due to the age and mix of this area’s existing development.
      In addition to a lack of vacant land, a variety of physical and environmental constraints will also
      affect future development such as small lot sizes and irregular parcel configurations, steep slopes,
      and sensitive coastal bluffs.
      As new development occurs, one of the highest priorities of the City of Solana Beach is to maintain
      the small town coastal community charm by respecting the beachside setting, considering scenic
      views, minimizing conflicts among adjacent land uses, and ensuring that new development is
      compatible with existing community character.
      Another key issue is environmental protection. Solana Beach is known for its environmental
      stewardship and has taken many steps towards becoming a more sustainable community.
      Furthering the use of green building techniques, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving
      water quality, promoting alternative modes of transportation, reducing energy and water
      consumption, and increasing energy efficiency and the availability of renewable resources are very
      important considerations for future development.
      Promoting public health is also extremely important to Solana Beach. To encourage physical
      activity, the City is dedicated to improving and expanding its network of bicycle and pedestrian
      pathways, enhancing the walkability and livability of its neighborhoods, maintaining a high sense of
      safety and security, increasing recreational opportunities, and raising awareness about the
      importance of healthy behaviors and physical fitness to overall well-being. To support respiratory
      health, the City will be looking for ways to lower harmful greenhouse gas emissions and improve air
      quality. Additionally, the City will be seeking opportunities to foster healthy eating habits and
      facilitate access to nutritious foods by promoting organic community or private farms or gardens
      and other edible landscapes.
      The Land Use Element also supports implementation of the Circulation and Housing Elements.
      State law requires that the Circulation Element plan for a balanced, multimodal transportation
      network that meets the needs of all users. However physical modifications to existing streets to
      better accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders is not enough to encourage these
      alternative forms of travel. The land use pattern and the character of land development also
      impacts travel behavior. Mixed-use, compact development that reduces the distance between trip
      origins and destinations makes other modes of travel more viable. In addition, a visually attractive
      environment that is designed for the comfort of pedestrians and bicyclists also encourages non-
      motorized travel. These issues are addressed in this Land Use Element.
      Furthermore, State law requires that the Land Use Element contain enough land designated for
      residential development at appropriate densities to accommodate the City’s projected housing
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                              Page 17 of 399
      needs for all income levels. Solana Beach contains adequate sites designated for mixed-use and
      higher density residential to accommodate its share of the regional housing need. These sites are
      generally located where mixed-use and compact infill development is encouraged such as along the
      planned multi-modal boulevards and adjacent to existing commercial areas. Accommodating
      additional housing in these locations further supports the goals and objectives of the Land Use and
      Circulation Elements.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                             Page 18 of 399
                                               II. Historical Context
      Solana Beach’s initial development dates back to the early 20th century when George Jones
      acquired 220 acres of land known as Lockwood Mesa in 1908. The acreage was used by Jones for
      more than a decade to cultivate grain and lima beans. Other early activities which influenced the
      formation of Solana Beach were the Santa Fe Railroad operations and the development of Highway
      101, prior to World War I.
      In 1922, Colonel Ed Fletcher of the Santa Fe Land and Improvement Company acquired the Jones
      property. On March 5, 1923, Fletcher filed the original subdivision map of Solana Beach. Fletcher
      then proceeded to cut an opening through the bluffs so that the beach could be viewed from the
      townsite. Following several months of hydraulic operations, an opening to the beach was created at
      what is now known as the Plaza, just west of the Highway 101/Lomas Santa Fe Drive intersection.
      The availability of an adequate water supply from Lake Hodges enabled Fletcher and his associates
      to begin developing the community. Prior to the onset of the Great Depression in 1929, about one-
      half of the town site had been sold. Following the Depression and World War II, Solana Beach and
      several other nearby communities continued to grow with residential and commercial development.
      In the late 1960s, in response to requests from major community organizations in the San Dieguito
      area, the County of San Diego initiated preparation of the San Dieguito General Plan. The General
      Plan was followed by the more detailed San Dieguito Community Plan (adopted in 1974) which was
      intended to regulate and control growth in the area’s unincorporated communities, including Solana
      Beach. Urban development in Solana Beach continued in the area west of I-5, generally on a parcel-
      by-parcel basis. Conversely, most of the area east of I-5 developed pursuant to the Lomas Santa
      Fe Master Plan. By the mid-1980s, Solana Beach had become highly developed with only a few
      remaining acres of undeveloped property.
      On April 30, 1985, a committee of Solana Beach residents named “Citizens Intending to
      Incorporate” (CITI) filed a formal application for incorporation as the City of Solana Beach.
      Following approval by the County’s Local Agency Formation Commission and the affirmative vote
      by the citizens, the City of Solana Beach was officially incorporated on July 1, 1986.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 19 of 399
                                              III. Existing Conditions
      A.    Existing Land Uses
      Solana Beach is comprised of approximately 2,200 acres of land area or 3.4 square miles. Existing
      land uses in Solana Beach are predominantly residential, accounting for approximately 56 percent
      of city’s land area. There are approximately 6,540 housing units in Solana Beach as reported by the
      2010 U.S. Census. Other predominant land uses include recreation/open space, which accounts for
      approximately 11 percent of the total area, and commercial uses, which account for approximately
      four percent of the total land area. A significant amount of land area (approximately 20 percent) is
      occupied by right-of-way. This area includes all roadways, including I-5, and right-of-way
      associated with the rail line. Table LU-1 summarizes Solana Beach’s existing land use composition
      and Figure LU-1 is a map identifying the existing development pattern.
                                                      Table LU-1
                                           Existing Land Use Inventory
                                               Solana Beach (2013)
                            Existing Land Use                 Acres              Percent
                      Vacant                                          22.39            1.0 %
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                             Page 20 of 399
                       Residential                                 1175.06             53.7 %
                       Commercial                                   101.09              4.6 %
                       Light Industry                                23.09              1.0 %
                       Office / Professional                         43.48              2.0 %
                       Recreation / Open Space                      284.02             13.0 %
                       Public / Institutional                        92.43              4.2 %
                       Right-of-Way                                 449.02             20.5 %
                       Total                                       2190.58           100.0 %
      Source: SANDAG Draft Series 2013 land use inventory
      Residential uses are located throughout the city with a large concentration of pre-World War II
      housing developments occurring on the western side of the city while the more modern
      developments took form after World War II in the eastern portion of the city.
      Solana Beach’s predominant commercial land uses are located along Highway 101 and Lomas
      Santa Fe Drive, which are the primary areas of Solana Beach’s commercial business activity. In
      addition, Cedros Avenue offers a mix of commercial, office/professional, and light industrial land
      uses and also represents an important focus of Solana Beach’s business activity. Concentrated
      commercial uses also exist on Stevens and Valley Avenues. Within Solana Beach’s commercial
      areas, residential uses may be allowed as a secondary use in conjunction with permitted
      commercial uses.
      Other business-related land uses such as office/professional and light industrial uses represent a
      minor proportion of Solana Beach’s existing land use and each amount to approximately two
      percent of Solana Beach’s existing land area.
      During the 1940’s, an increase in industrial and manufacturing uses occurred along Cedros Avenue.
      By the 1990’s, however, the South Cedros area began a rapid transformation into a pedestrian-
      friendly, retail environment and upscale design district with artisans, decorators and antique
      dealers. The South Cedros Improvement District installed new street lights, curbs, gutter,
      sidewalks and undergrounded overhead utilities. Currently, existing light industrial land uses in
      Solana Beach are minimal and tend to be limited to the areas of Stevens Avenue West, and a few
      parcels on North and South Cedros Avenue. Types of uses in light industrial areas consist of mini-
      warehouse/storage, commissioned furniture design, art studios, and iron works.
      Recreation lands within the community include Fletcher Cove, Tide Beach, and North Seascape
      Surf beach parks, La Colonia Park, the Lomas Santa Fe Country Club, and the Lomas Santa Fe
      Executive Golf Course. Most of the open space in Solana Beach is a result of natural conservation
      efforts, especially in the Holmwood Canyon area and in proximity to the Pacific Ocean, San Elijo
      and San Dieguito Lagoons.
      Public and quasi-public uses include schools, public facilities, churches, medical facilities, and
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 21 of 399
      utilities, among others. Examples of specific uses include Skyline Elementary School, Earl Warren
      Middle School, Solana Beach Fire Department, City Hall, and the Amtrak/Coaster Train Station,
      which relocated from Del Mar in 1995. The train tracks were lowered in 1999.
      Vacant lands in Solana Beach account for approximately one (1) percent of the total land area in
      Solana Beach and are dispersed throughout the city. Of the vacant parcels, the majority (17 acres)
      is planned for future residential uses, while only four (4) acres are planned for commercial uses.
      B.     Local Coastal Program
      In 1976, the California Legislature enacted the Coastal Act, which created a mandate for coastal
      cities and counties to manage the conservation and development of coastal zone areas through a
      comprehensive planning and regulatory program called the Local Coastal Program (LCP). The LCP
      is intended to ensure that the local government’s land use plans, zoning ordinances, zoning maps,
      and implementation actions meet the requirements of, and implement the provisions and policies of,
      the Coastal Act at the local level.
      Solana Beach is located entirely within the state’s coastal zone. The City’s LCP consists of a Land
      Use Plan (LUP) and a future Local Implementation Plan (LIP), which together will meet the Coastal
      Act requirements. The LCP/LUP represents a collaborative planning effort initiated by the City and
      developed over the course of many years with the participation of various interests, including
      environmental groups and property owners. On February 27, 2013, the City Council adopted the
      City’s first California Coastal Commission (CCC) approved LCP/LUP. At that meeting, the City
      Council also directed City staff to begin preparing a Land Use Plan Amendment (LUPA) to modify
      some of the key provisions in the LUP relating primarily to bluff top development and shoreline
      protection. Staff developed the LUPA in conjunction with CCC staff and interested stakeholders.
      The LUPA was certified by the CCC on January 9, 2014 and approved by the City Council on June
      11, 2014. The next step is for the LIP to be approved by both the Coastal Commission and the City
      Council.
      Once both the LCP/LUP and LIP are ratified, permit authority to review and approve development in
      Solana Beach will be transferred to the City, which will apply the requirements of the LCP/LUP and
      LIP in reviewing new development proposals. The Coastal Commission will still act on appeals from
      local government coastal permit decisions and review and approve any amendments to the
      previously certified LCP/LUP and LIP.
      Two notable provisions of the approved LCP/LUP involve: 1) the creation of a Visitor Serving
      Commercial Overlay (VSCO) as a land use category; and 2) requirements that new building
      improvements be setback a safe distance from the bluff edge. The purpose of the VSCO is to
      provide land to meet the demand for goods and services required primarily by the tourist population,
      as well as local residents who use the beach area. To reduce the need for bluff retention devices,
      foundation footings for all new development on bluff property will be landward of an established
      Geologic Setback Line (GSL).
      This General Plan maintains consistency with the LCP/LUP.
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                Page 22 of 399
      C.    Redevelopment Plan Transition
      On July 13, 2004, the Agency and the City Council adopted Ordinance No. 326, which approved and
      adopted the Solana Beach Redevelopment Project as the official Redevelopment Plan. Two
      redevelopment project areas were created: 1) the Highway 101 commercial corridor, generally
      located north of Dahlia Drive and 2) the Eden Gardens residential neighborhood. Combined, these
      two areas covered approximately 226 acres.
      Due to recent budget challenges for the State of California, the legislature has passed bills to
      recover redevelopment funds from local governments and to dismantle the various redevelopment
      agencies. While some benefits of redevelopment have already been realized in Solana Beach,
      significant capital improvement projects identified in the Redevelopment Plan remain to be
      completed including the La Colonia Park improvements and the Solana Beach Train Station.
      Because premature dissolution of the Solana Beach Redevelopment Agency (RDA) may result in
      these projects and others being delayed, or worse, failing to come to fruition, the City Council
      adopted Ordinance 432 on September 14, 2011, whereby the City elected to comply with and
      participate in the Alternative Voluntary Redevelopment Program contained in Part 1.9 of Division 24
      of the California Health and Safety Code.
      Ordinance 432 was the first step in the process for the City to “opt in” under AB 1X 27 so that the
      RDA could continue to function and implement various necessary and beneficial public projects,
      while the California Redevelopment Agency (CRA) / League of California Cities (LCC) petition
      progressed in the court system.
      The California Supreme Court issued a ruling in December 2011, effectively shutting down
      redevelopment agencies. Each RDA is now operated by a “successor agency” board, which has
      been established to manage property tax revenues, debt retirement, and asset disposal. Each of
      these successor agencies is governed by a seven-member oversight board and is evaluated on
      how the remaining, encumbered funds are used.
      Despite the recent actions by the court, it is anticipated that redevelopment of existing uses will
      continue to be vital to the community’s long term health and well-being. However, the process of
      revitalization will need to rely more on private investment activities due to the loss of public
      redevelopment funding.
      D.    Specific and Master Plans
      1.    Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
      The Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan is a plan for physical development and redevelopment of
      this important roadway area that significantly defines Solana Beach. Highway 101 has grown over
      the decades to serve as a vital commercial corridor for the region. Developed with extensive
      community participation, the adopted plan envisions revitalization of the Plaza, Fletcher Cove Park,
      the Highway 101 corridor, and North and South Cedros, as the heart or downtown of Solana Beach.
      The Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan identifies the types, intensity, location, standards, criteria
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 23 of 399
      and implementation measures for future development and conservation of the 163-acre project
      area. It was originally adopted by Ordinance No. 303, effective June 19, 2003, and later amended
      by Ordinance No. 346, effective July 28, 2006.
      With most of the land area built out, the future development and redevelopment of this vital
      commercial corridor is essential to the long term economic stability of the community. The Specific
      Plan is intended to integrate open space, the beach, community facilities, residential
      neighborhoods, retail businesses, and transit access. The vision includes a more attractive,
      pedestrian-oriented commercial core, improved landscaping and development quality along the
      Highway 101 corridor, and creation of a distinct image that maintains an eclectic, low-key, small
      town vibe.
      2.   North Rios Specific Plan
      In 1997, the North Rios Specific Plan was adopted to rezone approximately 10 acres of agricultural
      land to low-density residential. The intent of the North Rios Specific Plan was to create a
      compatible and complimentary land use adjacent to the existing residential neighborhood, and to
      produce aesthetically pleasing design elements for sustainable neighborhood planning.
      The subject land, located at the northeast corner of Rios Avenue and Patty Hill Drive, is situated
      approximately 300 feet south of the San Elijo Lagoon. Specifically, the property is located between
      Rios Avenue to the west and the slope embankment of the Barbara Avenue subdivision to the east.
      The residential development proposed to create a “livable” neighborhood through the
      implementation of sensitive street and lot design. Varied setbacks respond to the individual
      conditions of each parcel and the overall goals of the project.
      To date, all of the subject property has been developed for residential use.
      3.   Tangaroa Estates Specific Plan
      The Tangaroa Estates Specific Plan provides for the residential development of nine lots, located at
      the northern terminus and east of Rios Avenue on the northern edge of the San Elijo Lagoon. The
      Specific Plan satisfies the terms of Resolution No. 96-94, dated September 3, 1996, which
      amended the General Plan Land Use Map and approved rezoning the subject property from a
      combination of agricultural and open space/recreation to a combination of low density residential
      and open space/recreation.
      To date, all of the subject property has been developed for residential use.
      4.   Eden Gardens Master Streetscape Plan
      Eden Gardens is one of the oldest residential neighborhoods in Solana Beach. The Eden Gardens
      Master Streetscape Plan seeks to improve the unique public streetscape in the area with design
      elements such as lighting, sidewalks, special pavings, curbs, on-street parking configuration, and
      signage within public rights-of-way. Some of the key streetscape concepts include Mexican-
      American heritage as the design unifier and special paving at key entry points. The plan was
      adopted in 1995 and is being implemented in phases.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 24 of 399
      As funding becomes available, projects are prioritized as part of the City’s Capital Improvements
      Program.
      5.    Art Master Plan
      Public art fosters a sense of arrival and distinction to Solana Beach’s scenic coastal community, so
      many of the city’s main entrances or “gateway” locations are well suited for public art such as:
      •   The northern and southern ends of Highway 101, including access to the Coastal Rail Trail;
      •   The corner of Via de la Villa and Valley Avenue; and
      •   Intersections with Lomas Santa Fe at Highway 101 (Plaza St.), I-5, and Highland Dr.
      To enhance the identity of Solana Beach as an artistic community, a public art program has been
      developed to acquire and exhibit quality works of art. The public art program will result in a mixture
      of enriching opportunities, cultural events, and a visual art collection that reflects the local
      environment, cultural values, and artistic vitality of the community.
      With the assistance of the Public Arts Committee (PAC), the City adopted a Master Art Plan (MAP),
      which establishes guidelines and formalizes the process to acquire and fund public art. It also
      establishes mechanisms to ensure new development projects incorporate public art into the
      cityscape and it establishes uniform administrative guidelines and procedures to follow for all new
      art/artistic proposals presented to the City Council for review.
      E.    Timberland
      The planning area does not contain any land suitable for timber production and does not contain any
      parcels of real property zoned for timberland production pursuant to the California Timberland
      Productivity Act of 1982 (Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Government Code Section 51100) of Part 1
      of Division 1 of Title 5).
      F.    Military Facilities
      The impact of new growth on military readiness activities has been considered as part of this
      General Plan update. There are no military facilities within the planning area and no land use
      changes are proposed. Therefore, this General Plan will not have an impact on surrounding military
      facilities. The following facilities were considered as part of this update:
      •   Naval Base San Diego (approximately 26 miles south of Solana Beach)
      •   Naval Base Coronado and Naval Air Station North Island (approximately 29 miles south of
      Solana Beach)
      •   Naval Base Point Loma (approximately 25 miles south of Solana Beach)
      •   Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego (approximately 20 miles south of Solana Beach)
      •   Marine Corps Air Station Miramar (approximately 16 miles southeast of Solana Beach)
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 25 of 399
      •   Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton (approximately 31 miles north of Solana Beach)
      •   March Air Force Reserve Base (approximately 79 miles northeast of Solana Beach)
      G.    Schools
      Solana Beach is served by the Solana Beach School District and the San Dieguito Union High
      School District. The Solana Beach school district has a total enrollment of approximately 3,000
      students in kindergarten through sixth grade (K-6)1. The District also serves the communities of
      Carmel Valley, Fairbanks Ranch, and Rancho Santa Fe. The District has six elementary schools
      and a seventh Child Development Center with programs for toddlers, preschoolers, and before and
      after school support and services. The elementary schools are: Solana Vista (K-3); Skyline (4-6
      and the K-6 Global Education Program); Solana Santa Fe (K-6); Carmel Creek (K-4); Solana
      Highlands (K-4); and Solana Pacific (5-6).
      Two schools within the San Dieguito Union High School District serve Solana Beach: Earl Warren
      Middle School and Torrey Pines High School. Earl Warren Middle School is located at 155 Stevens
      Avenue in Solana Beach and Torrey Pines High School is located at 3710 Del Mar Heights Road in
      San Diego.
      In addition to these public schools, there are also a variety of private schools located within various
      land use designations throughout Solana Beach.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 26 of 399
                                     IV. Future Development Considerations
      A.    Infill Development and Reuse of Currently Developed Parcels
      As previously noted, there are very few remaining vacant parcels in Solana Beach, so the majority
      of future development will likely involve the redevelopment or reuse of currently developed parcels
      and infill development on the few remaining vacant parcels. The areas where future reuse of
      developed parcels and infill development are most likely to occur include areas along Highway 101
      and Lomas Santa Fe Drive, where the majority of the city’s commercially-designated land is
      located. Residential development is permitted within the commercial land use designations and
      more mixed-use projects are expected as these areas evolve over time. This increased mix of land
      uses, particularly near the transit station, is expected to promote public transit use, walking, and
      biking. To complement this development, additional streetscape enhancements have been recently
      completed along the Highway 101 corridor.
      Maintaining community character and minimizing potential conflicts between adjacent land uses is
      particularly important for future infill development and redevelopment. The generally quiet nature of
      residential neighborhoods should be preserved and the bulk and scale of new development should
      be sensitive to the context of its surroundings. Measures that may minimize the potential for
      conflicts among adjacent land uses include, but are not limited to:
      •   Locating commercial land uses along arterial roadways to buffer traffic noise from residential
      areas;
      •   Providing an adequate circulation system and sufficient parking to minimize spillover into
      residential areas;
      •   Respecting private views;
      •   Minimizing apparent size, bulk, and scale through appropriate roof style and pitch, varied
      setbacks, and stepbacks; and
      •   Emulating the form and characteristics of existing surrounding development.
      B.    Public Health and the Environment
      A better understanding of the connections between human health and a healthy environment has
      become increasingly widespread in recent years and has helped to garner more support for
      sustainable development. There are a number of planning decisions related to transportation
      systems, density and intensity of uses, land use practices, and street design which influence travel
      behaviors, stress levels, eating habits, and air and water quality – all factors that affect human
      health. The following are specific examples of just some of the potential hazards associated with
      modern development that degrade the quality of the natural environment and also impact public
      health.
      •   Urban air pollution from vehicles, power plants, and industrial facilities can trigger respiratory
      health problems such as asthma2.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 27 of 399
      •    Increased greenhouse gases contribute to global climate change which can have significant
      effects on human health. Rising sea levels can displace populations in low-lying coastal areas and
      taint drinking water supplies as saltwater intrudes into the groundwater aquifer; rising temperatures
      can lead to droughts, heat-related deaths, decreases in crop yields, and increased risks for
      wildfires; and heavy rains can lead to catastrophic flooding3.
      •    Stratospheric ozone depletion from manmade chemicals can cause increased amounts of ultra-
      violet (UV) radiation to reach the Earth leading to more cases of skin cancer, cataracts, and
      impaired immune systems 4. Even though the use of many ozone depleting substances such as
      chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have been reduced or eliminated, their use in the past is still affecting
      the ozone layer because such substances degrade very slowly.
      •    Storm water runoff that picks up trash, animal waste, cigarette butts, motor oil, pesticides, and
      other pollutants flows untreated into local creeks, rivers, and the ocean, thereby contaminating sea
      life and habitats and leading to increased risk of viral infections, earaches, sinus problems, fever,
      flu, skin rashes, and viral diseases for humans swimming in these water bodies 5.
      •    A development pattern that relies heavily on automobiles further contributes to urban air
      pollution and reduces opportunities for physical activity, which in turn can increase risks for
      developing heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, colon and breast cancer, obesity, and
      depression and anxiety 6.
      Sustainable development refers to a mode of human development in which resources are used in
      such a manner as to meet current human needs while also preserving the environment to ensure
      the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Solana Beach is motivated to ensure that
      future development takes steps to meet public and environmental health objectives through
      measures such as encouraging new development to be designed in a manner that promotes use of
      other forms of transportation besides the private automobile; providing enhanced infrastructure and
      recreational opportunities to promote physical activity; implementing green building practices;
      maximizing water and energy efficiency and waste reduction; improving water quality; and
      encouraging the use of renewable energy sources. An emphasis has been placed on public health
      in this Land Use Element and throughout the General Plan.
      C.     Physical Constraints
      The potential for new development in the city may be constrained by small and/or irregular parcel
      configurations. For example, the extent of new commercial development along Highway 101 or
      Cedros Avenue is contingent upon the availability of lots with adequate depth and width to
      accommodate proposed developments that meet municipal code requirements.
      A variety of environmental constraints affects potential land development in Solana Beach. For
      example, slope stability problems along the entire coastal bluff area pose a significant constraint to
      bluff top development. Similarly, steep slopes limit the extent of potential development in hillside
      areas. The potential for new development along the northwestern edge of the city is limited by the
      presence of the San Elijo Lagoon and concerns involving the sensitivity of the lagoon’s biological
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 28 of 399
      resources.
      D.    Public Service Constraints
      The potential for land use intensification and new development in Solana Beach is subject to
      constraints imposed by the ability of public service agencies and utilities to provide adequate levels
      of service to such development. For example, new development can place additional demands upon
      the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department, the Solana Beach Fire Department, the Solana Beach
      School District, and the San Dieguito High School District. Further, such developments could
      necessitate the extension of, or improvements to, water lines, electrical lines, natural gas lines, and
      possibly sewer lines from existing facilities.
      It should be noted that public service agencies and utilities typically incorporate city and regional
      growth projections into their planning for potential service requirements. In addition, infill
      development generally results in a more efficient use of land and existing infrastructure. Maximizing
      the use of existing public facilities can also lower the per capita costs of providing and maintaining
      services. However, it is important to ensure that growth in the city does not accelerate to a degree
      that precludes the provision of adequate service levels due to fiscal limitations.
      E.    Regional Planning Issues
      SANDAG has developed a Regional Comprehensive Plan (RCP) referred to as San Diego Forward
      – The Regional Plan to serve as the long-term planning framework for the San Diego region. The
      RCP balances regional population, housing, and employment growth with habitat preservation,
      agriculture, open space, and infrastructure needs. It directs SANDAG to use regional transportation
      funding as an incentive for local agencies and service providers to make land use decisions and
      infrastructure investments that direct growth towards areas where compact, mixed-use, and
      pedestrian-oriented development exists now, is currently planned, or has the potential to occur in
      the future. The intent is to encourage sustainable development that improves connections between
      land uses and multimodal transportation options. The RCP is closely tied to the Regional
      Transportation Plan (RTP) and the Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS), which demonstrates
      how regional greenhouse gas emission reduction targets will be achieved through sustainable
      development patterns, infrastructure investments, and transportation measures that offer more
      travel options.
      This Land Use Element is intended to complement and maintain consistency with these regional
      plans. The majority of redevelopment, infill, and new growth is expected to occur within the
      “downtown” or “town center” area of Solana Beach, generally located along Highway 101 and North
      and South Cedros. These areas are intended to accommodate compact, mixed-use, and walkable
      areas that are connected to the regional transportation system. Regional coordination will be a key
      to effectively guiding transportation funding and investment to these areas.
      This land use pattern will also help the City to address global climate change issues by making
      bicycling, walking, and public transit more viable options for everyday travel. Decreasing reliance
      on automobiles can significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 29 of 399
      F.    Relationship to the Circulation and Housing Elements
      All elements of a General Plan, whether mandatory or optional, must be consistent with one
      another. In addition, there must be internal consistency within each element meaning that each
      element’s data, analyses, goals, policies, and implementation programs must be consistent with
      and complement one another. All elements of a General Plan also have equal weight and equal
      status – no one element is more important than another.
      Although there are relationships among all of the General Plan elements, there are three elements
      that are intrinsically linked: Land Use, Circulation, and Housing. Government Code Section
      65302(b) requires that the Circulation Element is correlated with the Land Use Element. This is
      because land use patterns have a significant impact on the effectiveness of a multimodal
      transportation network. Trip distance is a determinant of whether people walk, ride a bike, drive, or
      take public transit to various destinations. Therefore, the land use plan and transportation network
      should be complementary. The close proximity of land uses can help facilitate effective multi-modal
      transportation services and provide the ridership necessary to support high quality public transit. In
      Solana Beach, compact infill and mixed-use development is most likely to occur west of I-5, mainly
      within the vicinity of existing commercial areas along Highway 101, Stevens Avenue, and Lomas
      Santa Fe Drive. The circulation network has been designed to concentrate the multimodal street
      typologies in these areas with enhanced bicycle and pedestrian connections to surrounding
      neighborhoods. The Land Use Element also includes goals and policies to ensure that new
      development enhances community character and leads to the creation of a high quality visual
      environment that is attractive to non-motorized travel.
      Housing element law requires local governments to adequately plan to meet their existing and
      projected housing needs including their share of the regional housing need. A regional housing
      needs allocation (RHNA) process quantifies the number of additional housing units that are
      projected to be needed for each income level during an eight year planning cycle. To accommodate
      the RHNA numbers, the Housing Element must demonstrate site development capacity equivalent
      to, or exceeding, the projected housing need to facilitate development of a variety of types of
      housing for all income groups. If a jurisdiction lacks adequate housing sites, then the Land Use
      Element must be amended to designate additional land for residential uses at densities appropriate
      to encourage and facilitate a variety of housing types to accommodate all income levels. High
      density residential and commercial zones are the most suitable for development of housing
      affordable to very low- and low-income households because they accommodate up to 20 dwelling
      units per acre creating economies of scale and potentially lowering construction costs. In addition,
      these sites are generally located in close proximity to public transit and commercial land uses
      thereby decreasing reliance on the automobile and lowering household costs associated with
      driving. This Land Use Element contains adequate residential and mixed-use land use designations
      to accommodate the RHNA numbers for Solana Beach. Residential development is permitted within
      the commercial areas that are anticipated to accommodate infill and redevelopment opportunities.
      Higher density residential designations are also located within close proximity to these commercial
      hubs.
      G.    Consistency between the General Plan and Zoning
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                          Page 30 of 399
      Pursuant to Government Code Section 65860, consistency must be maintained between the
      General Plan and zoning designations. For example, areas designated exclusively for residential
      use in the General Plan cannot be zoned and developed with commercial uses or vice versa.
      Zoning is one of the key tools used to implement the General Plan.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 31 of 399
                                              V. Goals and Policies
      The following goals and policies are responsive to the key issues and land use considerations
      affecting Solana Beach and are intended to guide future development within the city.
      Goal LU-1.0: A well-balanced and functional mix of residential, commercial, mixed-use, industrial,
      agricultural, open space, recreational, and institutional land uses.
      Residential Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.1 Encourage the development and protection of healthy residential neighborhoods by
      ensuring sensitive transitions between those neighborhoods and adjoining areas and preventing
      deterioration through rehabilitation and maintenance efforts.
      Policy LU-1.2 The City’s land use plan shall include residential land uses comprising a range of
      housing types, locations, and densities.
      Policy LU-1.3 In order to protect the rental housing stock, protect purchasers of dwelling units,
      assure consistency with the General Plan density requirements, assure adequate parking, and
      assure adequate public facilities, conversion of existing apartments to condominiums or other
      similar forms of subdivision shall be regulated pursuant to City zoning and subdivision ordinances.
      The regulations shall ensure that conversion of apartments to condominiums or other similar types
      of subdivisions will meet current standards for the construction of new condominiums or other
      similar types of multi-family dwellings within the city.
      Policy LU-1.4 Pursue opportunities to improve and protect existing residential neighborhoods by
      enhancing the pedestrian and bicycle experience, implementing traffic calming measures where
      appropriate, and providing convenient access to schools, parks, beaches, and other amenities and
      services.
      Commercial Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.5 Encourage the development of commercial land uses which strengthen the city’s
      economic base and offer a range of commercial enterprises to meet the needs of residents and
      visitors by:
      •   Maintaining an adequate amount of acreage designated for a range of commercial land uses.
      •   Maintaining an adequate amount of acreage to be used for visitor-serving commercial land uses
      along Highway 101.
      •   Continuing to develop special commercial land uses along the north side of Genevieve pursuant
      to specific design controls established by the City to allow for limited light industrial development.
      •   Pursuing available methods, including new state redevelopment law, in order to provide
      infrastructure, land, and other incentives needed to provide opportunities for the redevelopment of
      commercial areas.
      •   Continuing to implement the specific development standards established for Highway 101 and
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 32 of 399
      Cedros Avenue.
      •   Considering the creation of development standards and/or design guidelines for other areas of
      the community as appropriate, in collaboration with residents, businesses, and property owners.
      Mixed-Use Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.6 Encourage the establishment of mixed-uses that provide for housing and jobs near
      transit routes, shopping areas, and recreational uses to promote public transit use, walking, and
      biking.
      Policy LU-1.7 Encourage and facilitate neighborhood serving restaurants, including outdoor
      dining/sidewalk cafes, in mixed-use areas and along the Highway 101 corridor.
      Policy LU-1.8 Within mixed-use areas, encourage an overall high quality streetscape design, where
      feasible and appropriate, that includes bike lanes; on-street parking; minimal curb cuts; enhanced
      crosswalks; appropriate sidewalk widths; parkways; street trees, planters, and wells; street
      lighting; street furniture; wayfinding; kiosks; enhanced paving; public art; and other features that
      contribute to the character of Solana Beach.
      Industrial Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.9 Allow for light industrial land uses to diversify Solana Beach’s economic base and
      provide additional local employment opportunities.
      Agricultural Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.10 Encourage the establishment of organic private and community gardens and other
      edible landscapes that provide local and sustainable fruits and vegetables.
      Open Space and Recreational Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.11 Provide an adequate amount of open space and recreational land uses to meet the
      needs of the entire community by:
      •   Providing for open space along the city’s beaches, within parks, lagoons, scenic overlooks, and
      other appropriate locations.
      •   Providing adequate access to public open space and recreational areas.
      •   Seeking additional opportunities to increase the amount of public open space and recreational
      land uses within the city through means such as, but not limited to, land acquisition, conversion of
      public rights of way to parks, and the establishment of public recreational opportunities within
      buildings, where feasible.
      Institutional Land Uses
      Policy LU-1.12 Provide for the development of an adequate amount of institutional land uses to
      meet the social, economic, cultural, spiritual, and educational needs of the community by:
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                               Page 33 of 399
      •    Including areas designated for institutional land uses on the City’s land use plan.
      •    Permitting the development of publicly owned facilities and schools, churches and synagogues,
      hospitals and medical centers, and retirement care facilities and convalescent homes within areas
      designated as institutional.
      Goal LU-2.0: Regional coordination and collaboration in the development of land use plans and
      projects.
      Policy LU-2.1 Consider local development plans within the context of regional land use and
      transportation patterns and utilize SANDAG’s Regional Transportation Plan, Regional
      Comprehensive Plan, and Sustainable Communities Strategy to inform land use and transportation
      planning and policy development.
      Policy LU-2.2 Encourage appropriate smart growth, transit, residential, or mixed-use projects.
      Policy LU-2.3 Work with and understand the planning efforts of the adjacent cities of Encinitas, Del
      Mar, and San Diego, special districts, service providers, and San Diego County, as well as
      regional, state, and federal agencies when implementing the General Plan.
      Policy LU-2.4 Participate in the development of federal, state, and regional plans and projects that
      have the potential to impact Solana Beach, such as the expansion of Interstate 5, the Los
      Angeles/San Diego Railway Corridor, and the future of the Del Mar Fairgrounds.
      Goal LU-3.0: To be a leader in efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
      Policy LU-3.1 Concentrate commercial, mixed-use, and medium to high density residential
      development along transit corridors and near activity centers that can be served efficiently by
      public transit and alternative transportation modes.
      Policy LU-3.2 Enable residents to reduce their commutes by allowing and encouraging the creation
      of live/work units for artists, craftspeople, and other professions, promoting home occupations and
      telecommuting, and supporting other means of achieving a jobs/housing balance.
      Policy LU-3.3 Identify and prioritize infrastructure improvements needed to support increased use
      of alternatives to private vehicle travel, including transit, bicycle, and pedestrian modes.
      Policy LU-3.4 To reduce energy consumption and emissions from new buildings and significant
      remodels, encourage building placement, design, and construction techniques that minimize energy
      consumption; require the installation of EnergyStar® appliances and/or other high efficiency
      facilities; and promote other green building practices, including obtaining LEED (Leadership in
      Energy and Environmental Design) certification, where feasible.
      Policy LU-3.5 Reduce the urban heat island effect through sustainable design and building
      practices, cool roofs, green roofs, light colored pavement, shade trees, shading, and other means.
      Policy LU-3.6 Promote the use of solar panels, solar hot water heaters, and other green energy
      sources in conjunction with new development and retrofits to existing structures.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                Page 34 of 399
      Policy LU-3.7 Consistent with the California Public Utilities Commission’s California Long Term
      Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan, strive to achieve zero net energy use for new residential
      development by 2020 and zero net energy use for new commercial development by 2030.
      Policy LU-3.8 Conserve natural lands for carbon sequestration and promote urban forestry,
      emphasizing the use of native, drought tolerant trees and vegetation.
      Policy LU-3.9 Continue to evaluate and manage the City’s facilities (including its vehicle fleet) and
      operations to reduce emissions.
      Policy LU-3.10 Encourage community involvement and promote public education information
      programs and public-private partnerships to address and adapt to climate change to the extent
      possible.
      Policy LU-3.11 Maintain and implement a Climate Action Plan.
      Goal LU-4.0: To be prepared for the potential effects of climate change including increased flooding,
      reduced water supply, higher fire danger, and greater energy demands.
      Policy LU-4.1 Work to establish adaptive management strategies that respond to the changing
      environment associated with global warming.
      Policy LU-4.2 Inform the public about potential changes in the climate and strategies for adaptation.
      Policy LU-4.3 Work with appropriate responsible and regional agencies to track environmental
      indicators of climate change, such as: sea level; minimum and maximum temperature; precipitation;
      timing and volume of river flow; river temperatures; sea surface temperatures; and diversity and
      abundance of fish stocks and sea birds.
      Goal LU-5.0: To ensure that long-term protection of the environment is given the highest priority in
      the consideration of development proposals and in the implementation of this General Plan.
      Restrictions on Land with Sensitive Environmental, Geographic, or Geologic Features
      Policy LU-5.1 To ensure that development does not create adverse environmental, geographic, or
      geologic impacts, the City Council shall maintain ordinances for the preservation of hillsides,
      floodplains, sensitive biological areas, canyons, wetlands, coastal lands, scenic public views and,
      where feasible, private views. The Council shall also continue to regulate development of property
      within special hazard areas, including floodplains, coastal bluffs, and steep hillside areas.
      Policy LU-5.2 For purposes of determining residential land use intensity, the following general rules
      shall apply:
            a.   Public rights-of-way for streets, railroad rights-of-way, and utility easements for high
            voltage electrical transmission lines shall be considered to be undevelopable except for
            appropriate street, railroad or utility uses.
            b.   For the purposes of determining General Plan compatibility of subdivisions and multi-
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 35 of 399
            dwelling unit projects, the total number of residential dwellings that may be permitted on
            property shall be established by applying the following slope density guidelines: slopes with a
            grade of less than 25 percent shall be considered fully developable; slopes with a grade of 25
            percent to 40 percent shall be considered developable at the full residential density, but 1/2
            the floor area ratio (FAR) otherwise designated for the site; slopes with a grade of 40 percent
            or more shall be considered undevelopable; and for those areas along the coastal bluff and
            lands adjoining the San Elijo Lagoon, slopes with a grade of greater than 25 percent shall be
            considered undevelopable.
            c.   The density established by this General Plan shall not be construed to establish a
            “guaranteed” or “vested” right to a specific number of dwelling units, but as a guideline for
            determining appropriate zoning and for making land use permit decisions consistent with
            environmental planning, public facilities, geologic and other sound land use planning concerns.
            When determining the appropriate zoning applicable to a site, the City Council shall consider
            the topographic, environmental, geographic, and public facilities constraints applicable to the
            site. Whenever density is expressed in terms of a density range, zoning, subdivision, and
            other land use decisions establishing density for a site at a number which is greater than the
            lowest number established by the density range shall be justified by consideration of such
            matters as: superior project design; public facility availability; availability of public
            transportation; proximity to public recreation; provision of public facilities or community
            amenities by the developer of the site; views; traffic; surrounding land uses; whether the
            increased density will assist the City in meeting its regional housing obligations and local
            housing goals; whether the increased density will adversely affect the neighborhood; or
            whether the increased density will assist the City in meeting other General Plan goals and
            objectives. Whenever application of the density established for a site results in a fractional
            density, the decision making authority may deem a fractional density of .7 of a dwelling unit or
            greater to be one dwelling.
            d.   The density regulations of this General Plan shall not be construed to prohibit the
            development or redevelopment of one single family residential dwelling on any residentially
            zoned lot legally existing on the date of the adoption of the General Plan, provided the
            structure complies with the minimum requirements established for the development of single-
            family residential structures in the zoning ordinance other than density or lot size
            requirements.
            e.   Density bonuses shall be permitted consistent with California’s density bonus law
            (Government Code Section 65915-65918).
            f.   An accessory living unit shall be permitted regardless of maximum density or minimum lot
            size on any parcel containing a single-family detached primary unit within a residential land
            use designation.
      Policy LU-5.3 Except where necessary to prevent the denial of all reasonable economic use of
      property as determined by the City Council after hearing, grading on natural slopes with an average
      inclination in excess of 25 percent shall be restricted. This policy shall be used to maintain as much
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 36 of 399
      of the natural terrain as possible, while allowing reasonable use of property. The City Council may
      allow minor grading for the construction of one single family dwelling unit and driveway for up to 20
      percent of a legal lot consisting entirely of slopes of 25 percent or more if other non-grading
      approaches to development are not feasible.
      Policy LU-5.4 Ensure that potential impacts to biological resources are carefully evaluated prior to
      approval of development projects.
      Water Quality and Conservation
      Policy LU-5.5 Encourage the use of “green” storm water management and low impact development
      practices, including green roofs, landscape-based treatment measures, bioswales, tree wells,
      pervious materials for hardscape, and other techniques that allow for filtering, infiltration, storage
      and reuse or evaporation of storm water runoff onsite.
      Policy LU-5.6 Promote watershed awareness programs that address the discharge of preventable
      contaminants into the sanitary sewer and drainage systems and support water quality educational
      programs for City staff and the community.
      Policy LU-5.7 Work with the Santa Fe Irrigation District regarding the demands of new development
      within the capacity of the water system.
      Policy LU-5.8 Promote the use of cisterns, rain barrels, and other means of capturing rainwater to
      reuse onsite to augment the District’s water supplies.
      Policy LU-5.9 Encourage the use of native, drought tolerant plants and discourage the use of
      vegetative turf, unless recreation needs or other area functions specifically require turf.
      Policy LU-5.10 Utilize reclaimed/recycled water for irrigation and other purposes, as feasible.
      Policy LU-5.11 Encourage and promote methods to conserve water.
      Reduction, Reuse, and Recycling of Waste
      Policy LU-5.12 Require all projects with a valuation of $100,000 or more to salvage, recycle, or
      reuse at least 75% of demolition debris.
      Policy LU-5.13 Promote the use of recycled materials as part of new construction or renovations,
      including the reuse of existing building shells/elements.
      Policy LU-5.14 Encourage recycling by all sectors of the community including residents,
      businesses, and schools and inform residents and businesses about composting and “green
      purchasing”.
      Policy LU-5.15 Encourage residents to donate surplus furniture, old electronics, clothing and other
      household items rather than disposing of such materials in landfills.
      Environmental Protection and Improved Economic Health
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                Page 37 of 399
      Policy LU-5.16 Pursue the development of “clean” or “green” sector industries that benefit the
      environment and economy.
      Policy LU-5.17 Recognize exemplary individuals and businesses that have implemented
      sustainable practices.
      Policy LU-5.18 Demonstrate the cost savings of energy efficiency, water conservation, and other
      sustainable practices.
      Goal LU-6.0: Development that is consistent with the overall community character and contributes
      positively towards the city’s image.
      Policy LU-6.1 Distribute and develop land uses in a manner that minimizes the potential for
      conflicts involving adjacent land uses.
      Policy LU-6.2 Encourage the development of multiple-family residential land uses near non-
      residential uses (eg., commercial centers, light industrial uses, etc.) and provide for adequate
      buffers where single-family residential areas are already located adjacent to such non-residential
      uses.
      Policy LU-6.3 Maintain ordinances to encourage the preservation of private views.
      Policy LU-6.4 Preserve, protect, and enhance established residential neighborhoods by providing
      sensitive transitions and buffers between those neighborhoods and adjacent commercial or mixed-
      use areas to safeguard residences from the negative effects of increased traffic, noise, lighting,
      parking overflow, and other potential impacts.
      Policy LU-6.5 Require new development and additions to existing structures to respect and respond
      to those existing physical characteristics, buildings, streetscapes, open spaces, and urban form
      that contribute to the overall character and livability of the neighborhood or commercial district in
      which it is proposed.
      Policy LU-6.6 Promote infill development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and reuse efforts that
      protect and contribute positively to existing neighborhoods and surrounding areas.
      Policy LU-6.7 Promote appropriate transitions in building height and bulk which are sensitive to the
      visual and physical character of adjacent neighborhoods.
      Policy LU-6.8 Require that commercial and mixed-use development provide adequate access and
      parking to minimize the potential intrusion of commercial traffic into residential neighborhoods.
      Policy LU-6.9 Analyze the potential to re-designate areas along Stevens Avenue to mixed-use to
      promote redevelopment opportunities that contribute positively to the city’s unique character.
      Policy LU-6.10 Support the undergrounding of utilities to improve the visual quality of the
      community.
      GOAL LU-7.0: Effective plans, codes, resolutions, ordinances, and zoning to implement this
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                         Page 38 of 399
      General Plan.
      Policy LU-7.1 Ensure that the Capital Improvement Program is consistent with the General Plan.
      Policy LU-7.2 Ensure that the zoning ordinance, design guidelines, subdivision ordinance, and
      grading and improvement requirements are consistent with the General Plan.
      Policy LU-7.3 Implement the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan and Local Implementation Plan.
      Policy LU-7.4 Update specific and master plans as appropriate to reflect current trends and
      maintain consistency with the General Plan and other policy and implementation documents.
      Policy LU-7.5 Protect, maintain, and where feasible, enhance and restore coastal resources
      consistent with the Local Coastal Program.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 39 of 399
                                                  VI. Land Use Plan
      The Solana Beach land use plan has been formulated in response to the key issues and future
      development considerations discussed in Sections 1.C and IV (e.g., infill and redevelopment
      considerations, land use compatibility/community character, physical constraints, etc.) and in
      response to the community’s overall goals and policies concerning land use. The land use plan is
      very similar to existing development patterns. Realistic build-out projections are consistent with
      SANDAG population estimates and anticipate that an intensification of uses will occur as a result of
      infill and redevelopment or reuse of currently developed parcels. It is also anticipated that
      commercial/residential mixed-use development will occur within commercial zones consistent with
      existing regulations.
      Table LU-2 provides a statistical summary of the land uses provided for in this land use element as
      well as theoretical and realistic build-out projections. Maximum theoretical build-out assumes that
      every parcel is built to full capacity whereas realistic build-out recognizes that there are constraints
      to developing parcels to their maximum allowable densities and intensities. Such constraints
      include parking and access requirements, setbacks, height limitations, open space provisions,
      topography, current market conditions, etc.
      The predominant land uses in the city will continue to be residential uses (56 percent of total area),
      open space and recreation areas (10 percent), and commercial/office uses (8 percent). This does
      not represent a departure from relative proportions of existing land uses.
                                                      Table LU-2
                                         Land Use Plan Statistical Summary
                                       Maximum                 % of Total
                                                                            Theoretical     Realistic
               Land Use Category        Density       Acres       City
                                                                             Build-out     Build-out
                                     and/or FAR1                Acreage
               Estate Residential      0-2 du/ac      288.8      13.1%         577 du        432 du
               Low Density
                                         3 du/ac      234.6      10.7%         796 du        676 du
               Residential
               Low-Medium
                                         4 du/ac      327.8      14.9%        1,311 du      1,179 du
               Density Residential
               Medium-Density
                                       5-7 du/ac      164.3       7.5%        1,150 du      1,035 du
               Residential
               Medium-High
                                       8-12 du/ac      84.3       3.8%        1,011 du       909 du
               Density Residential
               High Density
                                      13-20 du/ac     130.3       5.9%        2,606 du      2,345 du
               Residential
                                        20 du/ac
               General                                                        2,164 du       324 du
                                        1.0 FAR2      108.2       4.9%
               Commercial                                                   5,655,830 sf 1,879,649 sf
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 40 of 399
              Commercial                                                    5,655,830 sf 1,879,649 sf
                                      1.2 FAR3
                                       12 du/ac
                                                                               26 du           2 du
              Light Commercial         1.0 FAR        2.2        0.1%
                                                                             114,998 sf      43,987 sf
                                      1.2 FAR3
                                       20 du/ac
              Special                                                          684 du          68 du
                                       1.0 FAR        34.2       1.6%
              Commercial                                                    1,787,702 sf    835,751 sf
                                      1.2 FAR3
              Office/Professional         1.0         28.2       1.3%       1,228,392 sf    859,874 sf
              Light Industrial            2.0         23.0       1.0%       2,003,760 sf    701,316 sf
              Public/Institutional        2.0         74.4       3.4%       6,481,728 sf 2,916,777 sf
              Open
                                          0.7        208.3       9.5%       6,351,483 sf     69,979 sf
              Space/Recreation
              Open
                                          n/a         21.2       1.0%        646,430 sf         n/a
              Space/Preservation
              Right-of-way                n/a        470.5      21.4%            n/a            n/a
                                                                             10,325 du
                                                                                             6,970 du
              Total                       n/a       2,200.3      100%        24,270,324
                                                                                           7,307,333 sf
                                                                                  sf
      1.   Maximum density is expressed in terms of the number of dwelling units per acre (du/ac).
        FAR stands for floor area ratio and refers to the ratio of a building’s total allowable floor area
        based on the size of the parcel of land upon which it is built. For example, if a parcel is 1,400
        square feet (sf) and the FAR is 2.0, then the maximum building size is 2,800 sf.
      2.   Commercial-only development within the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan is limited to a
        FAR of 1.0. General commercial development outside of the Specific Plan has an FAR of 1.2.
      3.   Within the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan, a FAR of 1.2 is permitted for mixed
        commercial/residential development. Commercial-only development is limited to a FAR of 1.0.
      Realistic build-out for the horizon year of 2035 for residential uses is based on existing unit counts
      and an assumption that lower density designations are more constrained than higher density
      designations and will experience less additional growth and change. The estate density residential
      designation is assumed to build-out at 75 percent of the maximum theoretical capacity. The low
      density designation is assumed to build-out at 85 percent of the maximum theoretical capacity. All
      other residential zones are assumed to build-out at 90 percent of the maximum theoretical capacity.
      In the commercial zones, mixed commercial/residential development is expected to constitute
      approximately 10 percent of the total development capacity.
      The total number of housing units estimated at build-out was compared to SANDAG projections to
      ensure consistency. SANDAG estimates that Solana Beach will contain a total of 6,869 housing
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 41 of 399
      units in 2030 and 6,997 housing units in 20407. The General Plan 2035 build-out of 6,970 housing
      units fits within this range.
      Realistic build-out for square footages was estimated based on an analysis of the existing square
      footages on currently developed parcels compared to the maximum square footage allowed under
      the City’s development regulations. In the light and special commercial designations, it was
      assumed that approximately 10 percent of total development area would be developed with mixed
      commercial/residential development at the higher FAR of 1.2. In general, general commercial
      parcels tend to build out at 35 percent of maximum capacity, special commercial parcels tend to
      build out at approximately 55 percent of maximum capacity, office professional parcels tend to build
      out at approximately 70 percent maximum capacity, and industrial parcels tend to build out at
      approximately 35 percent maximum capacity. No data is available for light commercial or public
      institutional properties, so it was estimated that they would build out at around 45 percent of
      maximum capacity. Recreational facilities on land designated as open space/recreation are
      estimated to build out at approximately one percent of maximum capacity.
      The individual General Plan land use categories are described below and identified on Figure LU-2,
      General Plan Land Use Map. Consistent with the State Density Bonus Law (California Government
      Code Section 65915 et seq.), a developer, upon request, shall be granted a density bonus,
      incentive(s), concession(s), and/or modification of development standard(s) if the developer
      proposes to build a qualified project satisfying criteria set forth in the City’s Density Bonus
      Ordinance. This applies to both the residential and commercial/mixed-use designations.
      To determine the population density, an average household size of 2.4 persons per unit has been
      utilized based on SANDAG’s Regional Growth Forecast estimates for Solana Beach.
      Residential Land Use Designations
      Estate Residential: This category involves estate types of residences developed at a maximum
      density of two dwelling units per acre. Other compatible uses such as accessory dwelling units,
      home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks and recreation facilities, and
      public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. Assuming an average household size of 2.4
      persons per unit, the population density for this category would be approximately four persons per
      acre. All of the city’s estate residential development is located east of I-5 in the Marine View
      Gardens and Isla Verde neighborhoods.
      Low Density Residential: This category is for single-family residences developed at a maximum
      density of three dwelling units per acre. Other compatible uses such as accessory dwelling units,
      home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks and recreation facilities, and
      public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. With an average household size of 2.4
      persons per unit, the population density would be approximately seven persons per acre. Most of
      Solana Beach’s low density residential development is located around Nardo Avenue and Rios in
      the southwest and in the northwest in the Canyon Drive area.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 42 of 399
      Low-Medium Density Residential: Under this category, single-family residences are to be
      developed at a maximum density of four dwelling units per acre. Other compatible uses such as
      accessory dwelling units, home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks
      and recreation facilities, and public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. The population
      density in these areas would be approximately nine persons per acre based on an average
      household size of 2.4 persons per unit. Most of the residential area in the northeast near Santa
      Helena and in the northwest near Seabright, Glenmont and Sonrisa are low-medium density.
      Medium Density Residential: This category provides for single- and multi-family residential
      development within a density range of five to seven units per acre. Other compatible uses such as
      accessory dwelling units, home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks
      and recreation facilities, and public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. Population
      densities in these areas would be approximately 16 persons per acre assuming the maximum
      density of seven units per acre and an average household size of 2.4 persons per unit. This type of
      residential development is located along the south side of Lomas Santa Fe Drive (east of Los
      Banderos Road), along the coastal bluffs north of the Plaza, and in the Eden Gardens
      neighborhood.
      Medium-High Density Residential: This category is for multi-family residential development within
      a density range of eight to twelve units per acre. Other compatible uses such as accessory
      dwelling units, home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks and
      recreation facilities, and public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. With an average
      household size of 2.4 persons per unit, population densities in these areas would be maximum of
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                      Page 43 of 399
      about 28 persons per acre assuming maximum development at twelve units per acre. Most of this
      type of residential development is located in the Eden Gardens neighborhood, and on the north end
      of Cedros Avenue.
      High Density Residential: Multi-family residential development under this category will range
      between 13 and 20 dwelling units per acre. Other compatible uses such as accessory dwelling
      units, home occupations, religious institutions, educational institutions, parks and recreation
      facilities, and public utilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. Assuming maximum
      development and an average household size of 2.4 persons per unit, population densities in these
      areas could be as high as approximately 48 persons per acre. Most of Solana Beach’s high density
      residential development is located in the southwestern portion of the city (i.e., along the coastal
      bluffs south of the Plaza and in the area generally bounded by Via de la Valle, Solana Circle, Nardo
      Avenue, and Stevens Avenue).
      Commercial/Mixed-Use Land Use Designations
      Light Commercial: This category provides for a range of commercial uses that have minimal
      disturbance to nearby single-family residential neighborhoods. Residential uses are allowed as a
      secondary use in conjunction with permitted commercial uses at a maximum density of 12 units per
      acre. This equates to a population density of approximately 28 persons per acre assuming an
      average household size of 2.4 persons per unit. Other compatible uses such as religious
      institutions, educational institutions, public utilities, and parks and recreation facilities are permitted
      or conditionally permitted. Areas designated for light commercial are north of Lomas Santa Fe Drive
      between Rios Avenue and Granados Avenue, and north of Cliff Street between Cedros Avenue and
      Seabright Lane.
      Special Commercial: Commercial development in this area would involve primarily a range of
      commercial and light industrial uses that have a minimal disturbance to nearby single-family
      residential neighborhoods. Residential uses are allowed as a secondary use in conjunction with
      permitted commercial uses at a maximum density of 20 units per acre. This equates to a population
      density of approximately 48 persons per acre assuming an average household size of 2.4 persons
      per unit. Other compatible uses such as religious institutions, educational institutions, public
      utilities, and parks and recreation facilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. The only
      locations in the city designated as Special Commercial include the area along Cedros Avenue and a
      site at the northeast corner of Stevens Avenue and Genevieve Street.
      General Commercial: This category involves the development of resident and visitor serving
      commercial uses and retail uses of a larger scale than those permitted in Special Commercial
      areas such as grocery stores, drug stores, etc., but which still have a minimal disturbance to
      nearby residential neighborhoods. Residential uses are allowed as a secondary use in conjunction
      with permitted commercial uses at a maximum density of 20 units per acre. This equates to a
      population density of approximately 48 persons per acre assuming an average household size of
      2.4 persons per unit. Other compatible uses such as religious institutions, educational institutions,
      public utilities, and parks and recreation facilities are permitted or conditionally permitted. The
      City’s General Commercial areas are located primarily along Highway 101 and along Lomas Santa
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 44 of 399
      Fe Drive.
      Industrial Land Use Designation
      Light Industry: This category provides for light manufacturing, mini-warehousing, and research
      and development uses. Other compatible uses such as public safety facilities, religious facilities,
      and public utilities and parking lots are also permitted or conditionally permitted. The only areas
      designated for light industrial use are along Stevens Avenue West and a site at the southeast
      corner of Valley Avenue and Hernandez Street.
      Public/Institutional Land Use Designation
      Public/Institutional: This category includes educational institutions, religious facilities, civic
      centers, public utilities, and other public uses. Most of these uses are located in the vicinity of the
      Lomas Santa Fe Drive/Stevens Avenue intersection.
      Office/Professional Land Use Designation
      Office/Professional: This category provides for professional offices (eg., medical and dental
      centers, financial services, etc.) and general office uses. Other compatible uses such as religious
      facilities, educational institutions, parks and recreation facilities, and public utilities are also
      permitted or conditionally permitted. Such uses are designated at sites along Lomas Santa Fe
      Drive, Stevens Avenue, Marine View Avenue, Santa Helena, and Pimlico Drive.
      Open Space Land Use Designations
      Open Space/Recreation: This category includes open space areas that are primarily designated
      for use by outdoor recreational activities (e.g., public parks, Lomas Santa Fe golf courses, etc.).
      Any structures constructed on land in this land use category shall be integral components of the
      recreational uses for the area and shall be at a scale that is compatible with the recreational site.
      Open Space/Recreation areas include beaches, beach [parks], City parks, and the golf courses
      located east of I-5. Owners of existing privately owned legal lots within this land use category may
      construct or alter one single family residential structure in accordance with the City’s zoning and
      other land use standards.
      Open Space/Preserve: This land use category includes open space areas that are in natural
      condition or are restored or may be restored to natural condition, natural habitat for native
      vegetation or wildlife, or otherwise not developed. These areas shall remain undeveloped. The
      purpose of these Open Space/Preserve areas is to preserve and protect open space, scenic views,
      the natural environment, and habitat for aesthetic, conservation, and ecological purposes. Any use,
      activity, or improvement that is inconsistent or incompatible with or may impair or interfere with the
      purpose of this land use category to preserve and protect the value, desirability, attractiveness, and
      use of the land as open space, scenic views, and natural habitat is prohibited. No buildings,
      structures, facilities, or other improvements shall be constructed in Open Space/Preserve areas,
      including but not limited to any parking area and bathrooms, except the limited improvements set
      forth in the zoning regulations.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                Page 45 of 399
      Other Land Use Considerations
      Right-of-Way: This category provides for land uses that are limited to transportation, public
      utilities, recreation and other similar uses. It includes I-5, the railroad, and city roadways.
      Floodplain: This designation identifies the 100-year floodplain limits as identified by the Federal
      Emergency Management Agency. These areas are subject to annual review.
      Visitor Serving Commercial Overlays (VSCO) I and II: The purpose of the VSCO is to identify
      areas that are prime locations for tourist and visitor serving commercial uses, which must be
      redeveloped exclusively with visitor serving commercial uses (VSCO I) and primarily visitor-
      serving commercial uses (VSCO II). These overlay zones are implementation measures for the
      Local Coastal Program.
      VSCO I: This land use overlay is intended to reserve sufficient land in appropriate locations
      exclusively for high-priority commercial recreation and visitor serving uses. The designation
      provides land to meet the demand for goods and services required primarily by the tourist
      population, as well as local residents who visit and recreate at the coast. Allowable uses include
      hotels, motels, restaurants, music venues, entertainment attractions, retail, and specialty/artisan
      retail commercial uses. Mixed-use development with office or residential above the ground level is
      also permitted. Existing uses may remain and any future redevelopment shall be consistent with the
      VSCO I overlay requirements. In addition to the above-listed uses, this site may also be developed
      with open space or public park uses compatible with the adjacent resources. The VSCO I
      designation applies to the following areas: the lots fronting Plaza Street from Highway 101 to Acacia
      Avenue; 717 South Highway 101; 621 South Highway 101; and at the triangle-shaped lot on the
      northern border of the city, located north of Ocean Street, on the east side of Highway 101. This
      triangle-shaped lot is adjacent to the San Elijo Lagoon Ecological Reserve.
      VSCO II: This land use overlay identifies areas that are currently developed with visitor serving
      commercial uses that should be encouraged and promoted, but are not specifically restricted to
      these uses, as in the VSCO I land use designation. The uses include hotels, motels, restaurants,
      music venues, entertainment attractions, and specialty/artisan retail commercial uses. Mixed-use
      development with residential above the ground level is also permitted. Existing non-visitor serving
      uses such as light industrial uses, offices, and residential loft apartments may remain, but
      redevelopment of these sites should be for tourist and visitor-serving uses. The VSCO II
      designation applies to the following areas: the North and South Cedros Avenue Business Districts,
      the timeshare developments located at 535 South Highway 101 and north of Via de la Valle, west of
      Interstate 5; and the two commercially-zoned shopping plazas located east and west of Interstate 5
      and south of Lomas Santa Fe Drive.
      Scenic Area Overlay Zone: The Scenic Area Overlay Zone is intended to regulate development in
      areas with high scenic value. This Overlay Zone applies to areas of unique scenic value such as
      state scenic highways, scenic highway corridors, viewshed areas, and areas within 100 feet of
      significant recreational, historic, or scenic resources.
      Hillside Overlay Zone: This Overlay Zone is intended to restrict the grading of natural slopes with
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 46 of 399
      a gradient of 25 percent or higher in order to preserve the natural topography and scenic qualities of
      Solana Beach, protect native coastal sage/chaparral and grassland habitat, preserve existing
      watersheds, and reduce potential environmental hazards such as soil erosion.
      Floodplain Overlay Zone: The Floodplain Overlay Zone applies to all areas within the 100-year
      floodplain and is intended to ensure that development will not constitute an unreasonable,
      undesirable, or unnecessary obstruction to flood flow and that such development will not adversely
      impact coastal wetlands, riparian areas, or other sensitive habitat areas.
      Scaled Residential Overlay Zone: This Overlay Zone is intended to preserve and enhance the
      existing community character and aesthetic quality of Solana Beach by protecting the traditional
      scale and seaside orientation of established residential neighborhoods.
      Dark Sky Area Overlay Zone: The Dark Sky Overlay Zone establishes special lighting regulations
      to control excessive or unnecessary outdoor light emissions to preserve the traditional semi-rural
      character of designated “dark sky” neighborhoods.
      Specific Plan Areas: This designation denotes areas that are covered by an adopted specific plan.
      Special land use and development regulations are identified within the applicable specific plan. As
      of the preparation of this General Plan, there are three adopted specific plans: the Highway 101
      Corridor Specific Plan, the North Rios Specific Plan, and the Tangaroa Estates Specific Plan.
      Additional specific plans may be prepared and adopted in compliance with Section 65451 of the
      California Government Code.
      1
       Solana Beach School District. (2002-2012). About us. Retrieved December 13, 2012 from
        http://www.sbsd.k12.ca.us/domain/320.
      2
      Air Resources Board (2010). The Children’s Health Study. Retrieved December 12, 2012 from
        http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/chs/chs.htm#new.
      3
      Harvard School of Public Health. (2011). Greenhouse Gases Pose Threat to Public Health.
        Retrieved December 12, 2012 from
        http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/features/features/bernstein-greenhouse-gases-health-
        threat.html.
      4
      Environmental Protection Agency. (2011). Ozone - Good up high, bad nearby. Retrieved
        December 12, 2012 from
        http://www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/gooduphigh/good.html#3.
      5
      State Water Resources Control Board. (2009). Storm Water Pollution. Retrieved December 12,
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code LAND USE ELEMENT                                                           Page 47 of 399
        2012 from
        http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/outreach/erase_waste/swpollution.shtml.
      6
      Jackson, Richard. (n.d.). Creating a healthy environment: The Impact of the built environment on
        the public health. Sprawl Watch Clearinghouse Monograph Series. Retrieved December 12,
        2012 from http://www.sprawlwatch.org/health.pdf.
      7
      San Diego Association of Governments (2010). 2050 Regional Growth Forecast.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                  Page 48 of 399
                            CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                               Page 49 of 399
                                                   1.0 Introduction
      1.1 Overview
      1.1.1 Contents of Element
      The Government Code requirements concerning topics to be addressed in conservation elements
      overlap many of the Government Code requirements for topics to be addressed in open space
      elements. For example, considerations regarding open space for the preservation of natural
      resources and open space used for the managed production of resources encompass the concerns
      of the conservation element. Therefore, this Conservation and Open Space Element of the Solana
      Beach General Plan is a combined element which describes existing conditions and issues related
      to water resources, floricultural resources, air resources, cultural resources, energy resources, and
      open space/visual resources. This element also contains goals, objectives, and policies established
      to ensure that natural resources within Solana Beach are managed wisely.
      1.1.2 Key Issues
      Conservation and open space issues in Solana Beach are many and diverse. The key issues
      involve the potential effects of general plan buildout upon natural resources such as biological
      systems and air resources, as well as cultural/scientific resources. Further, the scenic quality of
      Solana Beach’s open spaces and visual features is important, particularly in residential and park
      areas, and needs to be protected from potentially adverse effects of future development.
      1.1.3 Overview of Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      The overall goals set forth in this element are to protect and conserve the city’s natural and cultural
      resources, and to protect sensitive open space areas and viewsheds. The objectives and policies
      articulate the city’s role and responsibilities involving the management of natural and cultural
      resources, including open space.
      1.2 Purpose
      This element is mandated by state law to promote the protection, maintenance, and use of natural
      resources. These resources may include those that are economically productive or have intrinsic
      ecological/historical/archaeological value. A key purpose of this element is to guide city
      decisionmaking to prevent the wasteful exploitation, destruction, and neglect of natural resources.
      Another key purpose of this element is to inventory existing open space land within the city and to
      establish a program for preserving and managing open space areas appropriately.
      1.3 Authorization
      As stated below, a conservation element is required pursuant to Government Code Section
      65302(d):
            A conservation element for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural
            resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters,
            harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. That portion of the
            conservation element including waters shall be developed in coordination with any
            countywide water agency and with all district and city agencies which have developed,
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                          Page 50 of 399
            served, controlled or conserved water for any purpose for the county or city for which the
            plan is prepared. The conservation element may also cover:
            (1) The reclamation of land and waters.
            (2) Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters.
            (3) Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas required for the
            accomplishment of the conservation plan.
            (4) Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches, and shores.
            (5) Protection of watersheds.
            (6) The location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand and gravel resources.
            (7) Flood control.
      Government Code Sections 65302(e) and 65560 through 65567 set forth the requirements for and
      the intent of an open space element. As stated in Section 65560(b):
            “Open space land” is any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved
            and devoted to an open space use as defined in this section, and which is designated on
            a local, regional or state open space plan as any of the following:
            (1) Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to,
            areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish and
            wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and other scientific study purposes; rivers,
            streams, bays and estuaries; and coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks or rivers and
            streams, and watershed lands.
            (2) Open space used for the managed production of resources, including but not limited
            to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the
            production of food or fiber; areas required for recharge of groundwater basins; bays,
            estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams which are important for the management of
            commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in
            short supply.
            (3) Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas of outstanding
            scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation
            purposes, including access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas
            which serve as links between major recreation and open space reservations, including
            utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
            (4) Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas which
            require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions
            such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, floodplains, watersheds, areas
            presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                        Page 51 of 399
           reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality.
      This combined conservation and open space element fulfills the statutory requirements related to
      those issues that are applicable to Solana Beach.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                               Page 52 of 399
                                      2.0 Existing Conditions/Issue Analysis
      2.1 Water Resources
      2.1.1 Watershed and Hydrology
      As shown on Exhibit 1, drainage from the central and south portions of Solana Beach generally
      flows in a southern direction to the San Dieguito River. The north and northwest portions of the city
      drain into the San Elijo Lagoon. As described in Section 2.4 of this element, the lagoon is a highly
      sensitive wetlands area. Therefore, it is very important that Solana Beach minimizes its flow of
      water pollutants resulting from urbanization. Such pollutants may include automobile residue, heavy
      metals, eroded soil, nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), and coliform organisms.1 Common
      methods that cities can use to minimize water pollutant loads involve requiring erosion control
      measures at construction sites and implementing periodic street sweeping programs.
      2.1.2 Domestic Water Supply
      The city of Solana Beach is served water by the Santa Fe Irrigation District (SFID) and the
      Olivenhain Water District, which obtain most of their water from the San Diego County Water
      Authority (SDCWA) – Metropolitan Water District (MWD) system. The SDCWA imports water and
      sells it to member agencies such as SFID. More than 90 percent of the SDCWA water supply
      consists of water imported from the Colorado River and northern California sources.
      The SFID purchases unfiltered water from the SDCWA system and treats it in the 36 mgd (million
      gallons per day) Badger Filtration Plant owned jointly with the San Dieguito Water District. The plant
      is connected to the SDCWA filtered water aqueducts in the event of shutdown of the SDCWA
      unfiltered water pipelines or the Badger Filtration Plant.
      The SFID also purchases water from the city of San Diego when runoff is available in Lake Hodges.
      The water, when available, is low priced. The existence of Lake Hodges and its delivery system
      provides a supply which is available in case of failure of the imported water system. The contract
      with San Diego extends until 2019.
      It is the policy of MWD that it will supply the water needs within its service area. A firm supply
      through the year 2010 does not now exist, but it is the belief of the MWD that it will meet the water
      needs of the area.
      Based on the SFID’s 1972 master plan,2 future water consumption will occur at a rate of
      approximately 0.22 acre-feet per capita per year. Solana Beach is expected to reach a population of
      approximately 18,317 at buildout of the general plan.3 Thus, the annual demand for water following
      buildout would be approximately 4,030 acre-feet. This is well within the SFID master plan projection
      for ultimate annual water demand in Solana Beach of approximately 6,116 acre-feet annually.4
      Therefore, it is anticipated that Solana Beach’s ultimate demand for water will be met by the SFID.
      2.2 Floriculture
      2.2.1 Existing Operations
      The principal existing “agricultural” activity in the city is the Matsumoto Floricultural Fields. These
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                               Page 53 of 399
      operations involve the cultivation of a variety of flowers on an approximately 15-acre site located
      north of Patty Hill Drive between Rios Avenue and Barbara Avenue. These flowers include
      carnations, tiger lilies, and iris.
      The only other agricultural activity in the city is in a residentially zoned area located along Nardo
      Avenue and north of Nardito Lane. This site has been used historically for agricultural activities pre-
      dating existing zoning regulations.
      Although gardens and greenhouses are allowed in residential neighborhoods under existing San
      Diego County zoning, they are not considered as existing “agricultural” uses since they are merely
      accessory uses on sites designated for residential use.
      2.2.2 Future Operations
      The general plan designates the Matsumoto site for agricultural use to provide for the continuation
      of floricultural activities. Further, such designation will preclude adverse impacts upon San Elijo
      Lagoon that could otherwise occur from development of the site.
      The general plan does not provide for agricultural land uses at any other site within the city. The
      area being used for agriculture east of Nardo Avenue is designated in the land use element as low-
      medium residential (four dwelling units per acre).
      2.3 Air Resources
      2.3.1 Types of Pollutants, Pollutant Sources, and Air Quality Standards
      Air pollution is generally defined as the contamination of the outdoor atmosphere resulting from
      human activities. In its so-called pure state, air is a gaseous mixture of nitrogen (78 percent),
      oxygen (21 percent), carbon dioxide (0.03 percent), inert gases such as argon (less than one
      percent) and traces of water vapor.
      Air contaminants may be associated with natural occurrences such as volcanic eruptions, forest
      fires, etc. The air pollutants associated with human activities are generally classified as primary
      and secondary contaminants. Primary contaminants are those emitted directly by a source into the
      atmosphere. Secondary contaminants are formed in the atmosphere by chemical reactions of
      primary contaminants. The key primary and secondary air pollutants of concern are described
      below.
      Ozone (O3) is a colorless gas with a sharp odor. It is formed in the atmosphere by a complex
      series of sunlight-induced chemical reactions involving oxides of nitrogen and hydrocarbons. Peak
      concentrations generally occur during the middle of the day since the reaction rate is directly
      related to the intensity of sunlight.
      Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas formed by the incomplete combustion of fossil
      fuels. Approximately 92 percent of CO in the atmosphere is emitted by mobile sources such as
      trucks and automobiles. Thus, CO concentrations are generally highest in or near areas of high
      traffic volumes.
      Oxides of nitrogen (NOx ) are composed of nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). NO is a
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                             Page 54 of 399
      colorless gas emitted from mobile sources and stationary sources. NO2 is a brownish gas formed
      in the atmosphere by the oxidation of NO emissions.
      Sulfur oxides (SOx ) are byproducts of fossil fuel combustion. The principal oxide of sulfur produced
      in combustion is sulfur dioxide (SO2), a colorless gas with a pungent odor. Stationary sources such
      as power plants and petroleum refineries are primary sources of SO2 emissions. SO2 readily
      combines with oxygen to form sulfur trioxide (SO3), which reacts quickly with water vapor to form
      sulfuric acid.
      Total suspended particulate (TSP) is a complex mixture of materials suspended in the atmosphere
      such as soil particles, sea salt, sulfates, nitrates, lead, and a variety of organic compounds. Table
      1 summarizes the principal sources and effects of air pollutants.
                                                       TABLE 1
                                   AIR POLLUTANT SOURCES AND EFFECTS
                              POLLUTANT AND                 GENERAL INFORMATION ON
                                   SOURCES                      POLLUTANT EFFECTS
                        NO2 (Nitrogen Dioxide)            Produces distinctive brownish
                        Mobile sources, combustion        atmospheric discoloration.
                        of fossil fuels.                  Causes eye, nose and throat
                                                          irritation in humans and affects
                                                          the lungs, causing increased
                                                          susceptibility to respiratory
                                                          infection. Can cause suppression
                                                          of plant growth.
                        CO (Carbon Monoxide)              Harmful effects are headaches,
                        Mobile sources, incineration      slowed reactions and fatigue. Can
                        petroleum production, power       cause interference with oxygen
                        generation plants.                transport in blood.
                        SO2 (Sulfur Dioxide)              Forms sulfuric acid aerosols
                        Mobile sources, petroleum         which corrode building materials,
                        production. Burning of fossil     boat and car finishes, etc. These
                        fuels with high sulfur content.   acid aerosols penetrate the lungs
                                                          and damage tissues. Rapidly
                                                          converts to SO4 (particulate
                                                          aerosols) in the atmosphere.
                        O3 (Ozone)                        From mild eye irritation to
                        Secondary photochemical           possible impairment of lung
                        product from HC + NOx             function. Aggravation of
                        reacting in the presence of       respiratory and cardiac diseases,
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                           Page 55 of 399
                        sunlight and critical             pulmonary dysfunction. Damage
                        temperatures.                     to vegetation: from ornamental
                                                          plants to commercial food crops.
                        TSP (Particulate Matter)          Reduces visibility, and if in small
                        Mineral Extraction &              enough particles, can be carried
                        production,                       to the lungs. Many of the
                        demolition/construction,          suspended particulates are toxic
                        agricultural practices, natural   and are deposited on the food
                        sources (wind blown), fire,       stuffs of animals and people.
                        paved and unpaved roads.
                        SO4 (Sulfates)                    Aggravation of respiratory and
                        Due to conversion of SO2          pulmonary disease. Produces
                        from stationary and mobile        significant reduction in visibility.
                        sources.                          Damage to vegetation.
      SOURCE: SANTA BARBARA COUNTY AIR POLLUTION CONTROL DISTRICT. 1985 ANNUAL
      REPORT.
      2.3.2 Existing Air Quality Conditions
      Ambient air quality in San Diego County is measured through a system of monitoring stations
      established at various locations throughout the county. These stations are operated by the San
      Diego Air Pollution Control District.
      The station nearest to Solana Beach is in Del Mar. However, the only air pollutant measured at this
      station is ozone. The Oceanside monitoring station is considered most representative of Solana
      Beach’s ambient air quality for other pollutants. Annual air quality data for 1984 through 1986 for
      these stations are provided in Table 2.
                                                       Table 2
                                              AMBIENT AIR QUALITY1
                                                          Number of Days State/Federal
                                                          Standard Exceeded; [Maximum
                                                                   Concentration]2
                        Pollutant                           Locally3           Countywide
                        Ozone (O3)             1984     43/8       [.26]    146/51     [.28]
                                               1985     48/12      [.18]    148/50     [.22]
                                               1986     43/13      [.19]    131/42     [.19]
                        Carbon monoxide        1984     0/0        [7.0]    0/0        [16.0]
                        (CO)
                                               1985     0/0        [8.0]    0/5        [17.0]
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                             Page 56 of 399
                                              1986    0/0       [6.0]   0/2        [16.0]
                         Nitrogen dioxide     1984    0/NA      [.23]   0/NA       [.23]
                         (NO2)
                                              1985    0/NA      [.19]   0/NA       [.21]
                                              1986    0/NA      [.21]   0/NA       [.22]
                         Sulfur dioxide (SO2) 1984    0/0       [.02]   0/0        [.09]
                                              1985    0/0       [.06]   0/0        [.08]
                                              1986    0/0       [.02]   0/0        [.06]
                         Particulates 4       1984    1.7/0     [102]   14.1/0     [164]
                                              1985    6.6/0     [124]   23.8/0     [176]
                                              1986    0/0       [98]    17.0/0     [214]
      1   Air Resources Board, California Air Quality Data, 1984-1986, Vols. XVI-XVIII.
      2   Particulates indicated in micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3). All other concentrations indicated
      in parts per million (ppm).
      3   Data from Del Mar monitoring station (ozone) and Oceanside monitoring station.
      4   Expressed as percentage of samples taken.
      As shown on Table 2, existing air quality in the Solana Beach area is generally good. Ozone and
      particulates are the only pollutants that have consistently reached levels exceeding state or federal
      standards during recent years.
      2.3.3 Impacts Resulting from General Plan Buildout
      Pursuant to the land use element, the land use mix established for this general plan program is
      summarized in Table 3.
                                                      Table 3
                                 LAND USE MIX AT GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
                                 Land Use                                Acreage
                                 Estate Residential                          280.5
                                 Low Density Residential                     253.2
                                 Low/Medium Density Residential              375.5
                                 Medium Density Residential                  147.0
                                 Medium/High Residential                      80.5
                                 High Density Residential                    139.8
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                              Page 57 of 399
                                 Subtotal                                     1,276.5
                                 General Commercial                             114.8
                                 Light Commercial                                 1.9
                                 Special Commercial                              33.7
                                 Light Industry                                  13.1
                                 Public/Institutional                            79.3
                                 Office/Professional                             22.4
                                 Open Space/Recreation                          231.1
                                 Agriculture                                     12.8
                                 Right-of-Way                                    88.5
                                 Subtotal                                     1,874.1
                                 Roads                                          337.4
                                 TOTAL                                        2,211.5
      Table 4 provides a summary comparison of total annual emissions for the city’s existing land use
      mix versus total annual emissions for the city’s future land use mix. As shown, buildout under the
      adopted Land Use Plan would lead to a slight increase in annual stationary source emissions and a
      decrease in mobile source emissions. The projected decrease in mobile source emissions may be
      attributable to two factors. First, slight changes in the mix of land uses provided for in the general
      plan will result in a decrease in home-based vehicle trips. Thus, fewer vehicle miles of travel will
      occur thereby leading to a decrease in air pollutant emissions originating from automobiles. The
      second factor is that anticipated improvements in the automobile emission control technology would
      lead to fewer emissions per vehicle mile of travel. In summary, the projected decrease in mobile
      source emissions will more than offset the minor increase in stationary source emissions and will
      ultimately yield an overall decrease in total air pollutant emissions.
                                                       Table 4
                              EXISTING VERSUS FUTURE EMISSIONS1 (Tons/Year)
                                          Stationary
                                            Sources       Mobile Sources Total Emissions
                       Pollutant       Existing Future Existing Future Existing Future
                       Carbon              11.93   12.83     7,713   5,957 7,724.93 5,969.83
                       monoxide
                       Oxides of           64.02   67.16        464     337    528.02   404.16
                       nitrogen
                       Hydrocarbons         1.47    1.66     1,006      749 1,007.47    750.66
                       Particulates         1.61    1.65      –        –         1.61     1.65
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                              Page 58 of 399
                       Oxides of           4.72     4.86       –       –         4.72     4.86
                       sulfur
      1    Based upon South Coast Air Quality Management energy consumption factors and the
      California Air Resources Board’s URBEMIS #1 Air Quality computer model (which does not model
      particulate and SOx emissions).
      The county of San Diego is an area which exceeds ambient air quality standards for ozone and total
      suspended particulates and is therefore considered a “non-attainment” area with respect to meeting
      air quality goals established pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977. The San
      Diego portion of the 1982 “State Implementation Plan Revision” outlines a program designed to
      achieve healthful levels of air quality in the region. The program takes into account the additional
      sources of pollution likely to accompany anticipated growth and development in the county pursuant
      to demographic projections established by the San Diego Association of Governments.
      It is therefore important to ensure that the city of Solana Beach’s projected growth does not
      contribute substantially to adverse long-term effects upon air quality associated with cumulative
      growth in the county. It is also important to ensure that Solana Beach’s local air quality environment
      retains its good quality.
      Given the fact that automobile emissions represent the predominant source of emissions in the
      region, land use policies which provide for reduced automobile use are essential for the region’s
      ability to attain and maintain healthful air quality levels. Examples of such measures are outlined
      below.
      1. Encourage the mixture of residential and commercial uses in and around commercial areas.
      2. Encourage development which maintains a balanced relationship between jobs and housing to
      minimize the extent of commuter travel.
      3. Establish a network of bicycle trails to facilitate non-automobile transportation.
      4. Encourage new developments to provide convenient access from bikeways and public transit
      stops.
      5. Restrict the development of auto-dependent facilities such as drive-through restaurants.
      6. Integrate long-range planning and project approval procedures with air quality planning
      requirements.
      7. Implement traffic circulation system improvements to improve traffic flow to minimize increased
      emissions resulting from inefficient automobile operations.
      Implementing measures such as those listed above are key ways that the city of Solana Beach
      could contribute to minimizing the potential adverse air quality effects associated with future growth
      and development in the city.
      2.4 Biological Resources
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                             Page 59 of 399
      2.4.1 Introduction
      A commitment to the conservation of biological resources begins with the recognition that human
      beings are part of our environment rather than apart from it. Our well being, if not our ultimate
      survival, depends upon our ability to minimize the degree to which human activities upset the fragile
      balance of natural systems. Given our incomplete understanding of the intricate web of
      relationships within our biosphere, a conservative approach is necessary in weighing pressures for
      increased urbanization with the need to preserve sensitive ecosystems.
      To facilitate efforts to minimize the destruction of important biological resources due to
      development, this subsection of the conservation and open space element provides an inventory of
      sensitive resources in the Solana Beach area and a description of key considerations related to
      buildout of Solana Beach pursuant to the land use element of the general plan.
      2.4.2 Effects of General Plan Buildout
      Buildout of the general plan is expected to involve the development of existing vacant parcels and
      the recycling of some areas that are already developed. Such activity is not expected to affect any
      sensitive biological resources within the city.
      The general plan provides for the retention of open space and floricultural land uses within the
      northwestern portion of the city adjoining San Elijo Lagoon. By limiting possibilities for new
      development in this area, the city expects to minimize the potential for adverse effects upon the
      lagoon resulting from general plan buildout.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                           Page 60 of 399
      2.4.2 Effects of General Plan Buildout
      Buildout of the general plan is expected to involve the development of existing vacant parcels and
      the recycling of some areas that are already developed. Such activity is not expected to affect any
      sensitive biological resources within the city.
      The general plan provides for the retention of open space and floricultural land uses within the
      northwestern portion of the city adjoining San Elijo Lagoon. By limiting possibilities for new
      development in this area, the city expects to minimize the potential for adverse effects upon the
      lagoon resulting from general plan buildout.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                             Page 61 of 399
      2.5 Cultural/Scientific Resources
      Introduction
      Cultural resources generally consist of archaeological sites and historic sites that offer important
      links to our prehistoric and historic heritage. Although the California Government Code does not
      require consideration of cultural resources in general plans, the city of Solana Beach has chosen to
      include such considerations in the general plan because of their inherent importance to the Solana
      Beach community. It should also be noted that the preservation of these resources is mandated by
      the California Environmental Quality Act and is important for two basic reasons. One reason is
      respect for the values of Native Americans and their concern that the remains of their ancestors
      are left undisturbed. The second reason involves the value of these resources for anthropological
      and historical research. Historic structures are also a major concern since they represent important
      links to the heritage of Solana Beach.
      A related concern is the scientific value of paleontological resources. These resources consist of
      subsurface prehistoric fossils. They are important for their value as specimens used in the study of
      the Earth’s natural history.
      The following subsections briefly describe cultural and scientific resources as they relate to Solana
      Beach.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                               Page 62 of 399
      2.5.1 Archaeological Resources
      An October 1987 records search was conducted by San Diego State University’s (SDSU) Institute
      for Public and Community History. The search indicates the presence of six known
      archaeological/historical sites within the city and 45 such sites within one mile of the city. The
      precise location and nature of these sites is not released to the general public in the interest of
      preventing disturbance of the sites. Such information is maintained on file with the city for use in
      identifying potential effects associated with future land development. The SDSU Institute for Public
      and Community History recommends that cultural resource surveys be conducted prior to any
      ground-disturbing activities to determine the presence of any significant cultural resources.
      2.5.2 Historic Resources
      Historic resources generally consist of buildings or landmarks that are significant either in terms of
      their relationship to local history or in terms of their unique architectural character. Solana Beach’s
      history dates back to the early 20th century. The area was originally settled around 1908 by George
      Jones. Although this area was known as Lockwood Mesa until Colonel Ed Fletcher of the Santa Fe
      Land and Improvement Company purchased the townsite in 1922, there exists a house at the top of
      Del Mar Downs Road that dates to as early as the turn of the century. On March 5, 1923, Fletcher
      filed the original subdivision map of Solana Beach. The community has grown from an agricultural
      community to a highly developed urban area.
      According to long-time residents of the city, nearly all of the city’s earliest structures have given
      way to new development. The oldest remaining structure is generally believed to be the Gonzales
      House on the 700 block of Ida Street in the Eden Gardens area. This house was constructed prior
      to 1925 and has been well maintained. As a link to the earliest days of Solana Beach, the Gonzales
      House is considered an an important local historic resource.
      2.5.3 Paleontological Resources
      Paleontological resources are prehistoric plant and animal fossils embedded in subsurface geologic
      materials. They are important resources used in the conduct of natural history research in that they
      help to reveal the nature of biological evolution and geologic changes. The geologic formations in
      Solana Beach consist of marine sedimentary deposits which are expected to contain fossils.
      However, no significant fossil localities have been identified within the city. The localities found
      nearest to Solana Beach are situated along the coast between Del Mar and La Jolla.7
      These resources include fossil mollusk localities, fossil calcereous nannoplankton localties, and
      fossil mammal localities. Aquatic shell fossils have also been found at the northwest corner of the
      city of Solana Beach, and they may extend into the city in very small areas.
      A method to identify potentially significant paleontological resources in the city is to require a
      paleontological survey in conjunction with any future ground-disturbing construction activity. Should
      any such resources be unearthed, a paleontologist could be empowered to halt grading activities
      until the resources are sufficiently retrieved.
      2.6 Energy Resources
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                           Page 63 of 399
      2.6.1 Available Energy Supply
      Solana Beach’s non-transportation energy supply consists of natural gas and electricity supplied by
      the San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E) company. The city’s electrical needs are served by
      SDG&E’s substations in Del Mar, Encinitas, and Rancho Santa Fe. SDG&E provides electrical
      power flow using an integrated mix of primary energy resources – oil, natural gas, hydropower,
      coal, geothermal, co-generation and nuclear. A substantial portion of SDG&E’s electrical supply is
      purchased from other utilities. Similarly, SDG&E purchases its entire natural gas supply from
      Southern California Gas Company.
      2.6.2 Existing Energy Demand
      Tables 5 and 6 below provide specific energy consumption factors considered applicable to land
      uses in Solana Beach.
                                                     Table 5
                           AVERAGE MONTHLY CONSUMPTION OF NATURAL GAS1
                                    Land Use                         Quantity
                         Single Family Residential      6,665 cubic feet per unit
                         Multi-Family Residential       3,918 cubic feet per unit
                         Office                         2.0 cubic feet per square foot
                         Commercial                     2.9 cubic feet per square foot
                         Public/Institutional           2.0 cubic feet per square foot
                         Industrial                     3.3 cubic feet per square foot
      1   Source: Southern California Gas Company, 1986.
                                                     Table 6
                                      ANNUAL ELECTRIC ENERGY USAGE1
                                    Land Use                         Quantity
                         Residential                    6,081 kilowatt hours per dwelling
                                                        unit
                         Office                         8.8 kilowatt hours per square foot
                         Retail                         11.8 kilowatt hours per square
                                                        foot
                         Public/Institutional           8.8 kilowatt hours per square foot
                         Industrial                     8.8 kilowatt hours per square foot
      1   Source: Southern California Edison, 1985.
      Based on the energy consumption factors identified above and existing land use characteristics (as
      of 1988), it is estimated that approximately 78,731.6 megawatt hours of electricity are consumed
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                            Page 64 of 399
      of 1988), it is estimated that approximately 78,731.6 megawatt hours of electricity are consumed
      annually in Solana Beach. Annual natural gas consumption is approximately 406.1 million cubic
      feet.
      2.6.3 Impacts Resulting from General Plan Buildout
      The Solana Beach General Plan Land Use Element identifies the mix and quantity of land uses to
      be developed in Solana Beach. Based upon the energy consumption factors provided in Section
      2.6.2 and the maximum general plan buildout scenario, Solana Beach’s ultimate natural gas
      consumption is projected at approximately 442.8 million cubic feet annually while electrical
      consumption is projected at approximately 84,657.2 megawatt hours annually. These consumption
      levels represent increases of approximately 9.0 percent for natural gas and 7.5 percent for
      electricity. These increases are not significant and are within the parameters of SDG&E’s projected
      load growth for the Solana Beach area.
      As new development occurs and older structures are refurbished, opportunities to implement
      energy conservation measures should be taken. Appropriate planning and structural design
      techniques will serve to minimize increasing demands for non-renewable resources and will reduce
      Solana Beach’s vulnerability to future energy supply shortages. Further, such measures will serve
      larger regional and national interests in terms of minimizing Solana Beach’s dependency on non-
      renewable energy supplies.
      Energy savings also can be achieved through land planning that encourages a balance between
      residents and employees (ie., reducing the need for long commutes from home to work) and
      planning that maximizes opportunities for the use of non-automobile or public transportation.
      Title 24 of the California Administrative Code contains building code provisions regarding energy
      conservation measures to be used in structural design. These measures involve proven
      technologies such as building insulation, weatherstripping, insulation of water heaters and pipes,
      water flow restrictors, and energy-efficient lighting systems. By incorporating Title 24
      considerations into the design review process, the city can contribute to the goal of minimizing
      increased energy consumption levels.
      In addition to conservation measures, the city can encourage the exploitation of renewable energy
      resources such as solar energy. For example, land use planning that facilitates solar access
      serves to encourage the use of renewable solar energy for space heating and water heating rather
      than continued use of fossil fuels.
      2.7 Open Space and Visual Resources
      2.7.1 Importance of Open Space
      As stated in Government Code Section 65561, “...the preservation of open space land...is
      necessary not only for the maintenance of the economy of the state, but also for the assurance of
      the continued availability of land for the production of food and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic
      beauty, for recreation and for the use of natural resources.”
      The inherent importance of providing for adequate open space is to supply breaks in the pattern of
      development which offer visual relief from intense urban environments. Further, the provision of
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                            Page 65 of 399
      open space is important to facilitate the wise use of natural resources and to protect public health
      and safety. Section 1.3 of this element cites Government Code Section 65560(b), which identifies
      four basic categories of open space considered necessary and appropriate for the provision of a
      balanced urban development pattern. These categories are described below in relation to conditions
      in Solana Beach.
      First, open space for the preservation of natural resources is important to protect sensitive
      ecological systems. For example, wetlands habitat areas and rare and endangered plant and wildlife
      communities are often designated as open space to preclude development activities that might
      destroy significant biological resources. As discussed previously in Section 2.4, the San Elijo
      Lagoon located immediately northwest of the city represents a significant wetlands area of concern.
      The Solana Beach General Plan designates open space along the area north of Canyon Drive to
      protect the lagoon from adverse effects that might otherwise occur with urbanization of these areas.
      Second, open space used for the managed production of resources is important to maintain
      adequate supplies of food and fiber. Thus, agricultural lands and mineral resource zones are often
      designated as open space to ensure their continued productivity. In Solana Beach, the area located
      north of Patty Hill Drive (between Rios Avenue and Barbara Avenue) is designated for agricultural
      use to provide for the continuation of existing floricultural operations.
      Third, open space used for outdoor recreation is important to meet the community’s recreational
      and cultural needs. Parkland and beaches are examples of this type of open space. Solana Beach
      offers approximately 1.26 miles of coastline used for beach recreation, the four-acre La Colonia
      Park, and the Lomas Santa Fe Golf Courses. In addition, the city is adjacent to major regional open
      space areas in the form of San Dieguito Park, Holmwood Canyon and San Elijo Lagoon. The
      provision of an adequate level of parks and recreational opportunities is important to maintaining a
      well-balanced community.
      Fourth, open space for public health and safety is important to preclude or minimize potential
      hazards associated with floods, fires, slope stability, and earthquakes. Further, public health and
      safety interests may necessitate the designation of open space areas to protect the quality of water
      resources. In Solana Beach, open space is designated in the Holmwood Canyon area partly as a
      measure to manage potential fire hazards. Similarly, open space designated on the coastal bluff
      overlooking Fletcher Cove is partly intended to ensure that safety hazards involving bluff stability
      are minimized.
      2.7.2 Types of Open Space
      PERMANENT OPEN SPACE
      In general, land uses expected to remain committed to open space usage during the life of a
      general plan are regarded as permanent open space. For example, Solana Beach Park (also known
      as Fletcher Cove), Tide Park Beach, La Colonia Park, Lomas Santa Fe Country Club, and Lomas
      Santa Fe Executive Golf Course are typical of permanent open space uses (Exhibit 3). Other types
      of permanent open space areas include school playgrounds and the Holmwood Canyon area.
      INTERIM OPEN SPACE
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                              Page 66 of 399
      Interim open space areas are typically private properties that are currently vacant or used for
      agriculture. Unlike permanent open space uses, which are usually publicly owned sites, vacant
      lands can be expected to be developed sometime during the life of the general plan. Until such time
      as development occurs, these land uses offer temporary open space values. In Solana Beach, the
      vacant land located southeast of the Lomas Santa Fe Drive/Granados Avenue is an example of
      interim open space since it is designated for future residential development.
      2.7.3 Unique/Significant Open Space and Visual Features
      The city of Solana Beach offers several open space features within and around the community. The
      key open spaces within the city include beaches, parks, and golf courses described previously and
      shown on Exhibit 3 as well as the Holmwood Canyon area adjoining San Elijo Lagoon. The lagoon
      and San Dieguito Park are significant open space features adjacent to the northwestern and eastern
      portions of the city, respectively.
      The most significant visual feature in Solana Beach is the Pacific Ocean. Scenic ocean views are
      available from several vantage points due to the city’s hilly terrain. As shown on Exhibit 4, the most
      scenic viewpoints are found at Las Brisas Viewpoint (a small clifftop area south of Solana Beach
      Park), along Solana Circle, and in the vicinity of the Avocado Place/Jeffrey Road intersection.
      Further, motorists heading west on Lomas Santa Fe Drive west of Nardo Avenue are afforded
      particularly scenic views of the ocean. Other scenic views are available to residents overlooking
      the golf courses in the eastern portion of the city and to residents overlooking the Holmwood
      Canyon/San Elijo Lagoon area.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                  Page 67 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                  Page 68 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                              Page 69 of 399
                                        3.0 Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      GOAL 3.1
      TO PROTECT AND CONSERVE THE CITY’S NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
      Objective 1.0
      Ensure that the quality of water resources do not violate state and federal water quality
      standards as a result of development within the city of Solana Beach.
      Policy 1.a    The city shall cooperate with District 15 of the Regional Water Quality Control Board
      and other agencies within San Diego County in the implementation of the 208 water quality program.
      Policy 1.b    The city shall require the incorporation of adequate erosion control measures into
      development projects that may otherwise impact water resources adversely. Such measures shall
      be reviewed by the Planning and Engineering Departments and shall include sandbagging of newly
      graded slopes, prompt planting of disturbed areas, phasing of grading and construction activities to
      minimize exposed areas susceptible to erosion, and the routing of runoff flows through desilting
      basins prior to discharge into any watercourse.
      Policy 1.c    The city shall continue its street sweeping program to minimize the urban pollutant load
      which enters the city’s drainage system.
      Policy 1.d    The city shall encourage the use of minor natural watercourses as local open spaces.
      Policy 1.f   The city shall participate in cooperative agreements with other agencies in programs
      which encourage research and establishment of innovative sewage treatment methods as
      alternatives to ocean outfall and septic tanks.
      Objective 2.0
      Maintain adequate domestic water supplies for all residents and uses within the city.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall require all new developments to incorporate water conservation
      measures into project design to the greatest extent possible. Such measures may include, but are
      not limited to, the use of plumbing fixtures which reduce water usage (in accordance with Title 24 of
      the California Administrative Code) and xeriscape landscaping which maximizes the use of drought-
      tolerant plant species and drip irrigation systems.
      Policy 2.b    The city shall support projects involving water reclamation (such as the San Elijo
      treatment plant) by using reclaimed water for irrigation of public landscaped areas to the greatest
      feasible extent. Further, the city shall encourage the use of such water in privately owned areas.
      Policy 2.c    The city shall cooperate with the San Diego County Water Authority, the Metropolitan
      Water District of Southern California, and the Santa Fe Irrigation District by providing the agencies
      with general plan buildout projections and by keeping the agencies fully informed of amendments to
      the general plan which may affect the district’s planning for the provision of adequate water
      supplies.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                               Page 70 of 399
      Objective 3.0
      Conserve and recycle important resources.
      Policy 3.a    The city shall participate in the county’s efforts to recycle waste products such as
      glass, broken concrete, asphalt, etc. for use as construction materials.
      Policy 3.b    The city shall encourage efforts to increase public participation in recycling.
      Objective 4.0
      Encourage sound environmental planning practices in all developments.
      Policy 4.a    The city shall use the environmental review procedures established by the California
      Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to ensure that potential adverse effects upon natural and cultural
      resources are identified.
      Policy 4.b    The city shall not permit land uses that would have unavoidable significant adverse
      impacts upon natural or cultural resources unless a statement of overriding considerations is
      adopted by the Solana Beach City Council.
      Policy 4.c    Technical reports made available to the public in conjunction with environmental
      documentation shall include summaries written for laypersons (e.g., soils and geology reports that
      minimize the use of technical jargon).
      Objective 5.0
      Preserve important biological habitat and protect sensitive, rare, and endangered species of
      flora and fauna.
      Policy 5.a    The city shall require that all development proposals provide adequate mitigation
      measures for identified significant biological resources, including selective preservation, replanting,
      sensitive site planning techniques, the provision of replacement habitat, and/or other appropriate
      measures.
      Policy 5.b    The city shall preserve sensitive habitat areas as permanent open space.
      Policy 5.c    The city shall establish a heritage tree program which identifies mature trees that are
      to be preserved and protected from public and private development activities. Further, this program
      shall set forth procedures to be followed by the city staff in the site plan review process to ensure
      compliance with the program and shall outline appropriate measures to preserve mature trees.
      Policy 5.d    Permanent open space preserves designated for the purpose of protecting biological
      resources shall be managed primarily for their inherent ecological value. Recreational uses shall be
      considered a secondary activity. The use of hiking and riding trails shall be monitored periodically
      by a qualified biologist to determine their impact and viability as uses compatible with the biological
      preserve.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                              Page 71 of 399
      Policy 5.e    The city shall cooperate with other appropriate agencies as necessary to preserve
      significant habitats in rapidly developing areas, including the acquisition of important habitats.
      Policy 5.f   The city shall enforce measures established elsewhere in this element to minimize
      existing and potential future impacts upon San Elijo Lagoon and other important marine
      ecosystems.
      Objective 6.0
      Prevent the loss of important historical, archaeological, and paleontological resources.
      Policy 6.a    The city shall complete an inventory of local historic resources and cultural landmarks
      and shall establish a list of significant resources to be preserved.
      Policy 6.b    The city shall require that sites proposed for future development are to be evaluated by
      certified archaeologists and/or paleontologists in accordance with the California Environmental
      Quality Act. Where potentially significant adverse impacts are identified, the city shall require
      appropriate mitigation measures such as in situ preservation or professional retrieval.
      Policy 6.c    The city shall implement the objectives and policies established in the community
      design element of the general plan which promote the preservation of historic landmarks, focal
      points, and special features.
      Policy 6.d    The city shall encourage and support the acquisition of significant cultural resources
      by private and/or public entities interested in preserving such resources.
      Policy 6.e    The city shall establish a historic preservation section within its zoning ordinance.
      Objective 7.0
      Reduce the city’s demands upon conventional, non-renewable sources of energy.
      Policy 7.a    The city shall require new developments to incorporate energy conservation measures
      and promote alternative energy systems.
      GOAL 3.2
      TO PROTECT AND ENHANCE SENSITIVE OPEN SPACE AREAS AND VIEWSHEDS
      Objective 1.0
      Preserve existing open spaces at appropriate locations throughout the city.
      Policy 1.a    The city shall restrict development along the bluffs overlooking Solana Beach and other
      areas such as the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe railroad right-of-way to those uses which retain
      the open space character of these areas (eg., parks, open space spines, trails, etc.) in accordance
      with the Open Space Plan.
      Policy 1.b    The city shall ensure the preservation of existing public beaches, parks, trails, open
      space areas, and golf courses pursuant to the adopted land use element of this general plan.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                             Page 72 of 399
      space areas, and golf courses pursuant to the adopted land use element of this general plan.
      Policy 1.c    The city shall implement the objectives and policies established in the community
      design element of the general plan which promote the preservation and enhancement of open space
      features.
      Objective 2.0
      Preserve the city’s hillside areas and natural landforms in their present state to the greatest
      extent possible.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall enact a hillside development ordinance which contains development
      standards to: 1) maintain the natural visual character of the hillsides to the maximum feasible
      extent, 2) integrate architecture and landscaping into the hillside setting, 3) preserve significant
      visual and environmental elements, 4) minimize grading impacts, 5) restrict development on slopes
      of greater than 25 percent, 6) preserve prominent ridgelines, 7) require the contouring of
      manufactured slopes to blend with natural slopes, 8) encourage the use of innovative structural
      designs which adapt to the natural topography, 9) discourage “stair-stepping” of building pads, 10)
      require the blending of colors and materials with the hillside environment, and 11) provide for the
      planting of slopes with fire-retardant, drought-tolerant materials.
      Objective 3.0
      Maintain the quality of scenic views in the city as well as the overall visual quality of the
      city’s landscape.
      Policy 3.a    The city shall require new developments to be subjected to visual impact analyses
      where potential impacts upon sensitive locations are identified.
      Policy 3.b    The city shall require that new structures and improvements be integrated with the
      surrounding environment to the greatest possible extent.
      Policy 3.c    The city shall enforce its adopted design guidelines as specified in the community
      design element of this general plan.
      Policy 3.d    The city shall encourage the preservation of private views, including policies for tree
      trimming and removal.
      Policy 3.e    The city shall designate areas that will be subject to a dark sky policy.
      GOAL 3.3
      TO MEET THE NEEDS OF THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY BY PROVIDING AN ADEQUATE LEVEL
      OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES.
      Objective 1.0
      Provide a minimum of three acres of public park and recreational facilities for every 1,000
      residents.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                                Page 73 of 399
      Policy 1.a    The city park land required shall be a combination of beaches, playlots, regional parks,
      neighborhood parks, community parks, and joint use of public school recreational areas.
      Policy 1.b    The city shall establish parks throughout the city. Such parks may include appropriate
      facilities such as tot lots, active play areas, passive open space areas, picnic facilities, and sports
      fields.
      Policy 1.c    The city shall evaluate the potential to purchase publicly owned land when it becomes
      available.
      Objective 2.0
      Establish a master plan of hiking/jogging, bicycle, and equestrian trails.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall adopt a master plan of trails and shall develop at least one mile of trails
      annually until completion of the planned system. This trail system shall link the city’s greenbelts,
      parks, and open space to the greatest extent possible.
      Objective 3.0
      Establish a park funding program to ensure that the costs of acquiring, improving, and
      maintaining city recreational facilities are consistent with the ability of residents to pay.
      Policy 3.a    The city shall adopt a park funding program by based on general revenue funds, user
      fees, state and federal grants, and developer contributions of land, facilities, and in lieu fees.
      Policy 3.b    The city shall require developers of residential land to dedicate land or fees for parks
      to ensure the continued provision of at least 3 acres of park land for every 1,000 residents.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                           Page 74 of 399
                                   4.0 The Conservation and Open Space Plan
      As discussed in Section 2.0 of this conservation and open space element, a wide variety of natural
      resources, cultural resources, and open space areas are subject to the effects of urban
      development. To ensure that these issues receive proper consideration, the implementation of the
      policies established in this conservation and open space element is primarily the responsibility of
      the city Planning Department. Through its site plan review process, the Planning Department takes
      into consideration the compatibility of proposed development activities with natural resources,
      cultural resources, and open space areas.
      The Planning Department is responsible for ensuring that proposed general plan amendments and
      land development proposals are processed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
      (CEQA). In keeping with this responsibility, the Planning Department is able to identify potential
      adverse effects associated with proposed actions as related to natural resources, cultural
      resources, and open space. Potential adverse effects that are deemed significant should be either
      avoided or mitigated unless a statement of overriding considerations is adopted by the city.
      As the ultimate authority in Solana Beach regarding land use policies, the City Council is
      responsible for approving or denying proposed general plan amendments and development
      proposals. The City Council has a related responsibility to certify that CEQA has been complied
      with adequately and, if necessary, to adopt statements of overriding considerations specifying why
      any significant impacts to natural resources, cultural resources, or open space are outweighed by
      other public interests.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                          Page 75 of 399
                                                  5.0 Glossary
      Coastal Bluff: Any bluff where the toe of slope is now, or within the past 200 years has been,
      subject to marine erosion.
      Conservation: The management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or neglect.
      Erosion: The process by which soil and rock are detached and moved by running water, wind, ice,
      and gravity.
      Lagoon: An area of shallow salt water separated from the sea by sand dunes.
      Non-renewable Natural Resources: Inanimate resources that do not increase significantly with
      time and whose use diminishes the total stock (eg., minerals, fossil fuels and fossil water).
      Renewable Natural Resources: Resources that can be replaced by natural ecological cycles or
      sound management practices (eg., forests and plants).
      Watershed: The total area above a given point on a watercourse that contributes water to the flow
      of the watercourse; the entire region drained by a watercourse.
      Wetlands: Areas that are permanently wet or periodically covered with shallow water, such as
      saltwater and freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish marshes, swamps, mud flats, and fens.
      1
       American Chemical Society, Cleaning Our Environment: A Chemical Perspective, 1978.
      2
      James M. Montgomery Consulting Engineers, Inc., Santa Fe Irrigation District: Updated Master
        Plan for Water System Development, October 1972.
      3
      Based upon an overall factor of 2.66 persons per dwelling unit and a total of 6,886 dwelling units
        at general plan buildout.
      4
      Ibid., p. 14.
      5
      County of San Diego, Conservation Element of the San Diego General Plan, revised May 1983, p.
        X-33.
      6
      Ibid., p. X-K-25.
      7
      California Division of Mines and Geology, Geology of San Diego Metropolitan Area, California –
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                   Page 76 of 399
        Bulletin 200, 1975.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                       Page 77 of 399
                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 78 of 399
                                                 1.0 Introduction
      1.1 Overview
      1.1.1 Contents of Element
      This safety element identifies existing conditions and issues involving potential hazards and public
      safety considerations affecting land development in Solana Beach. This element also sets forth
      goals, objectives, and policies to provide for public health, safety, and welfare.
      1.1.2 Key Issues
      The key issues affecting the health and safety of Solana Beach’s residents and visitors are hazards
      associated with seismicity, coastal bluff erosion and stability problems, flooding in the Stevens
      Avenue area south of Nardo Avenue, potential septic system problems, and potential fire hazards.
      These and other public safety issues are described in Section 2.0 of this element.
      1.1.3 Overview of Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      The goals of this element are to minimize potential hazards and to provide a safe and secure
      environment for the public. To achieve these goals, a comprehensive set of objectives and policies
      is established. These objectives and policies involve specific measures and programs to ensure
      that potential risks are minimized or avoided during the development process. Further, these
      objectives and policies provide the framework for ensuring the city’s ability to respond adequately
      to emergencies.
      1.2 Purpose
      This safety element is intended to document potential hazards that must be considered in planning
      the location, type, and density of development. By identifying the nature and location of potential
      hazards, the city of Solana Beach has been able to adopt a Land Use Plan that reflects such
      hazards and has been able to establish appropriate programs to prevent or minimize death, injuries,
      damage to property, and economic and social dislocation resulting from public safety hazards.
      1.3 Authorization
      Government Code Section 65302(g) requires the adoption of a safety element to protect the public
      from unreasonable risks associated with seismic hazards, geologic hazards, flooding, fire, and
      other public safety hazards.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                   Page 79 of 399
                                       2.0 Existing Conditions/Issue Analysis
      2.1 Geologic and Seismic Hazards
      2.1.1 Seismic Setting
      Solana Beach is located on the western edge of the Peninsular Range geologic province. The
      Peninsular Range province is a physiographic feature which includes the Laguna Mountains, the
      Agua Tibia Mountains, the Santa Rosa Mountains, the San Jacinto Mountains, and the Santa Ana
      Mountains. The formation of this province’s mountain ranges and other features is due to the
      relative movement of the Pacific and North American continental plates along the San Andreas fault
      system. The province is located immediately west of the San Andreas fault and is affected by a
      number of other faults.
      Solana Beach, like much of southern California, is located in a region of high seismic activity. Table
      1 summarizes the key features of faults located in the San Diego region that could affect Solana
      Beach.
                                                        Table 1
                                               REGIONAL SEISMICITY
                                                                             Estimated
                                                                           Magnitude of
                                                    Fault Length       Maximum Credible
                              Fault Name                (miles)             Earthquake
                         San Andreas                      650                   8.4
                         Elsinore                         135                   7.6
                         San Jacinto                      125                   7.8
                         San Clemente                     110                   7.7
      Source: County of San Diego, Seismic Safety Element – San Diego County General Plan, January
      1975.
      In addition to the faults listed on Table 1, an offshore extension of the Rose Canyon fault lies
      approximately two miles to the west of Solana Beach. This fault is considered to be potentially
      active, meaning that evidence exists for movement within this zone during the Pleistocene age (two
      million to 11,000± years ago) but not during the Holocene age (last 11,000± years). Events are
      much less likely to occur on potentially active faults as compared to active faults. However, given
      the close proximity of the Rose Canyon fault to Solana Beach, a strong earthquake on this fault
      could produce severe ground shaking in the city. In addition, recent offshore seismic activity has
      demonstrated that small magnitude earthquakes (less than 4.5 magnitude) can be generated on
      offshore faults, located approximately five miles offshore, and known as the South Coast Offshore
      Zone of Deformation.1
      Historically, earthquakes less than magnitude 4 have been common to the San Diego region.
      However, the probability of a magnitude 6 or greater earthquake being generated locally in the San
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 80 of 399
      Diego area is considered low based on present knowledge.2
      2.1.2 Geologic and Seismic Constraints to Development
      The suitability of land for development is influenced strongly by the presence of certain geologic
      and seismic hazards. These hazards range from the direct and indirect effects associated with
      earthquakes to problems associated with slope stability and soil conditions that are not conducive
      to development. The general nature of various geologic and seismic constraints to development and
      their applicability to Solana Beach are described below.
      SEISMIC SHAKING
      The energy released by movement along a fault travels through the earth’s crust as shock waves
      which cause the ground motion associated with earthquakes. The severity of ground motion at any
      given location is related to the total amount of energy released, the distance from the earthquake’s
      origin, and the character of surface and subsurface geologic conditions.
      A commonly used method of measuring the severity of ground motion involves estimating
      maximum ground acceleration. Acceleration is defined as the increased velocity given to the ground
      by shock waves passing through the geologic structure. Acceleration is typically described in terms
      of gravitational force where one unit of gravitational force (designated as “1g”) is equal to 9.8
      meters/sec 2.
      The degree of ground acceleration is a function of underlying geologic materials. As shock waves
      pass through loose, unconsolidated geologic materials, the amplitude of the waves is greater than
      that associated with dense, consolidated materials (e.g., hillside areas). Thus, the higher amplitude
      of shock waves results in greater ground acceleration in areas underlain by alluvial soils or water-
      saturated sediments.
      Virtually all of Solana Beach consists of well-consolidated geologic materials rather than poorly
      consolidated soils such as alluvial deposits. Nevertheless, it should be noted that ground shaking in
      hillside areas could induce the slumping of geologic structures or landslides in areas of slope
      instability.
      One method of measuring the effects of seismic shaking at specific locations is through use of the
      Modified Mercalli Scale. As shown on Table 2, this scale represents the classification of an
      earthquake’s effects according to 12 categories ranging from “not felt” to “damage nearly total.”
      This is a subjective scale in that an earthquake’s intensity is measured in relation to its effect on
      human life. According to the California Division of Mines and Geology, Solana Beach is within an
      area where the intensity of maximum expectable earthquakes would likely be moderate. Thus, the
      probable maximum intensity of an earthquake in the San Diego area would rank as a VII or VIII on
      the Modified Mercalli Scale.3
                                                       Table 2
                                    MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY SCALE
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                       Page 81 of 399
                     A subjective measure of the force of an earthquake at a particular
                     place as determined by its effects on persons, structures, and
                     earth materials. The principal scale used in the United States
                     today is the Modified Mercalli, 1956 verson as defined below
                     (modified from Richter, 1958).
                     I. Not felt.                       II. Felt by persons at rest, on
                                                        upper floors, or favorably
                                                        placed.
                     III. Felt indoors. Hanging         IV. Hanging objects swing.
                     objects swing. Vibration like      Vibration like passing of heavy
                     passing of light trucks. Duration trucks; or sensation of a jolt like
                     estimated. May not be              a heavy ball striking the walls.
                     recognized as an earthquake.       Standing automobiles rock.
                                                        Windows, dishes, doors rattle.
                                                        Wooden walls and frame may
                                                        creak.
                     V. Felt outdoors; direction        VI. Felt by all. Many frightened
                     estimated. Sleepers wakened.       and run outdoors. Persons walk
                     Liquids disturbed, some spilled. unsteadily. Windows, dishes,
                     Small unstable objects             glassware broken.
                     displaced or upset. Doors          Knickknacks, books, etc., off
                     swing. Shutters, pictures move. shelves. Pictures off walls.
                     Pendulum clocks stop, start,       Furniture moved or overturned.
                     change rate.                                                       1
                                                        Weak plaster and masonry D
                                                        cracked.
                     VII. Difficult to stand. Noticed   VIII. Steering of automobiles
                     by drivers of automobiles.         affected. Damage to masonry
                     Hanging objects quiver.            C; partial collapse. Some
                     Furniture broken. Weak             damage to masonry B; none to
                     chimneys broken at roof line.      masonry A. Fall of stucco and
                     Damage to masonry D,               some masonry walls. Twisting,
                     including cracks; fall of plaster, fall of chimneys, factory stacks,
                     loose bricks, stones, tiles, and   monuments, towers, elevated
                     unbraced parapets. Small slides tanks. Frame houses moved on
                     and carving in along sand or       foundations if not bolted down;
                     gravel banks. Large bells ring.    loose panel walls thrown out.
                                                        Decayed piling broken off.
                                                        Branches broken from trees.
                                                        Changes in flow or temperature
                                                        of springs and wells. Cracks in
                                                        wet ground and on steep slopes.
                     IX. General panic. Masonry D       X. Most masonry and frame
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 82 of 399
                        destroyed; masonry C heavily        structures destroyed with their
                        damaged, sometimes with             foundations. Some well-built
                        complete collapse; masonry B        wooden structures and bridges
                        seriously damaged. General          destroyed. Serious damage to
                        damage to foundations. Frame        dams, dikes, embankments.
                        structures, if not bolted, shifted Large landslides. Water thrown
                        off foundations. Frames racked. on banks of canals, rivers,
                        Serious damage to reservoirs.       lakes, etc. Sand and mud
                        Underground pipes broken.           shifted horizontally on beaches
                        Conspicuous cracks in ground        and flat land. Rails bent slightly.
                        and liquefaction.
                        XI. Rails bent greatly.             XII. Damage nearly total. Large
                        Underground pipelines               rock masses displaced. Lines of
                        completely out of service.          sight and level distorted.
                                                            Objects thrown in the air.
      1
        See Uniform Building Code for specifications on quality of masonry construction.
      Source: Seismic Hazards and Land Use Planning, USGS Circular 690, by D.R. Nichols and J.M.
      Buchanan-Banks, 1974.
      SURFACE RUPTURE
      The sudden horizontal or vertical displacement along an earthquake fault, which releases the
      energy associated with earthquakes, may occur far enough below the earth’s surface where such
      displacement is not visible.
      However, fault movement often extends to the earth’s surface where ground rupture or
      displacement occurs along the fault plane. The extent of surface rupture is dependent upon the
      fault’s length and the magnitude of the earthquake.
      Concern about the growing number of structures located on or near active and potentially active
      faults led the State of California to enact the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazards Zone Act of 1972,
      revised in 1975 and renamed the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act. This act requires that
      geologic studies must be undertaken prior to the approval of structures for human occupancy
      located within “special study zones.” Said studies are to determine the precise location and
      necessary setbacks from identified faults.
      “Special studies zones” are strips one-eighth of a mile or more wide along each side of faults
      recognized as active or potentially active by the State Geologist, within which the danger of fault
      rupture is presumed to exist until otherwise demonstrated by direct investigation. Active faults are
      those with known movement during the past 11,000 years. Potentially active faults are those with
      known movement during the past two-to-three million years.
      In addition to mandating geologic studies for public structures proposed for areas within “special
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                     Page 83 of 399
      studies zones,” the Alquist-Priolo Act prohibits the development of such structures within fifty feet
      of an active fault which has displaced the ground surface. The State Geologist has not designated
      any “special studies zones” in or near Solana Beach.4
      LIQUEFACTION
      Liquefaction is the substantial loss of strength of poorly consolidated and saturated soils due to the
      effects of seismic shaking. The passage of seismic waves through such soils can cause soil
      particles to be suspended temporarily in water, creating conditions very similar to quicksand. The
      resultant loss of strength can cause significant damage to structures as they settle, tilt, or collapse.
      The potential for liquefaction in a given area is dependent upon soil characteristics, groundwater
      conditions, and the intensity of seismic shaking. In the Solana Beach area, the potential for
      liquefaction is greatest in the area located generally between Stevens Avenue and Valley Avenue,
      and in the area north of Via de la Valle between Del Mar Downs and Stevens Avenue. These are the
      only areas in the city which are underlain by poorly consolidated alluvium and slope wash which
      could liquefy during an earthquake depending upon groundwater conditions.
      SEICHES
      Seiches are the oscillation of water in bodies of water sometimes caused by earthquakes. A
      common example is the “sloshing” of water in a swimming pool during an earthquake. Seiches are
      potentially hazardous when the wave action created in lakes or bays is strong enough to threaten
      human beings and structures nearby the body of water. The only area near Solana Beach where
      this is a potential concern is San Elijo Lagoon. However, this is a very minor concern since urban
      development in the city is not in close enough proximity to the lagoon to be exposed to seiches.
      LANDSLIDES
      Landslides are the downslope movement of geologic materials. Typically, such movement occurs
      as block glide (in which slope failure occurs along a planar surface and the mass of materials
      slides as a single block) or as a slump (in which slope failure occurs along single or multiple
      surfaces and the mass of materials slides in a rotational motion).
      In addition to landslides, other slope stability problems found in hillside areas must be considered in
      planning future land uses. These problems include soil creep, earthflows, and mudflows. Soil creep
      is the slow downslope movement of individual soil particles at varying rates. This type of movement
      does not involve sudden slippage such as that associated with landslides, but instead involves the
      gradual movement of soil particles which eventually changes the surface of affected hillsides.
      Earthflows involve the downslope movement of soils that have been saturated and form a viscous
      flow of material. The material typically slumps down the hillside in a relatively slow flow.
      Mudflows involve the rapid downslope flow of mud and debris. Mudflows are potentially more
      destructive than earthflows since they can form in a relatively short period of time, flow at a greater
      velocity, and are often more far-reaching in terms of affected area.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                       Page 84 of 399
      The stability of slopes is related to a variety of factors, including the slope’s steepness; the
      strength of geologic materials in terms of resistance to the downslope stress of gravity; the
      characteristics of bedding planes, joints, and faults; surface water and groundwater conditions;
      changes in loading (eg., building construction); changes in vegetation (eg., wildfire, grading, and
      overgrazing); exposure to weathering; and susceptibility to disturbances such as seismic shaking.
      In Solana Beach, the principal area of concern regarding slope stability is along the city’s coastal
      bluffs. This issue is discussed further in Section 2.2 of this element.
      SHRINK-SWELL POTENTIAL
      Certain soils which include clay materials tend to swell when their moisture content increases and
      shrink when moisture decreases. As moisture content varies, the resultant shrinking and swelling
      of these soils (known as expansive soils) can cause fairly extensive damage to structures built
      over such material. For example, floor slabs may be heaved or cracked, walls and ceilings may be
      cracked, and doors and windows may stick due to the structural movement caused by expansive
      soils. Shrink and swell is not considered to be a problem in Solana Beach.
      SUBSIDENCE
      Subsidence typically involves the gradual settlement and compaction of subsurface materials
      resulting from fluid withdrawl (eg., oil, natural gas, and groundwater extraction). As fluid withdrawal
      proceeds, subterranean hydraulic pressure decreases. Consequently, unconsolidated geologic
      materials are compacted under the burden of overlying geologic materials and urban development.
      The resulting subsidence of the ground surface may occur gradually over a wide area. Since it
      generally covers a fairly wide area, subsidence tends to affect continuous structures such as roads
      and utility lines. Further, subsidence can create drainage problems and lower ground levels near
      drainage courses, thereby exposing more area to potential flood hazards. There are no areas in or
      near Solana Beach where these types of subsidence hazards have been identified.
      2.2 Blufftop/Slope Stability
      Slope stability is a significant concern along Solana Beach’s entire coastal bluff area. These steep
      bluffs have experienced losses resulting from the combined effect of natural and man-made
      activities. Given the very steep, almost vertical orientation of the bluff, they receive the full force of
      waves. The wave action constantly weakens the base of the bluffs, particularly when high tides are
      combined with high waves originating from Pacific Ocean storms. Such storms commonly cause
      breakers of about 15 feet.
      Urban development on the blufftops has placed increased loads upon the geologic structure of the
      area. Further, saturation of bluff sands and increased groundwater flow resulting from urban run-off
      (ie., excessive irrigation of urban landscaping) contributes to the weakening of the bluffs.
      The combination of natural and man-made factors has resulted in blufftop erosion. This erosion is
      typically experienced as sudden slippage rather than as gradual movement. Although measures
      such as the placement of rip-rap or seawalls are commonly used to absorb the brunt of wave
      action, their effectiveness is limited. Further, such measures often involve high repair and
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 85 of 399
      maintenance requirements and result in bluff erosion at higher levels due to wave overtopping.5 Sea
      walls have been shown to increase the scouring action of waves, removing the sand. This makes
      the beach steeper and wave action against the bluffs more intense with time. This process results
      in a loss of public beach.
      All coastal blufftop areas are of concern to the city; areas of key concern in Solana Beach are
      blufftop problems in the vicinity of Pacific and Circle Drives and in the vicinity of Del Mar Shores
      Terrace. Structures in both of these areas are in danger of loss due to further erosion.
      A comprehensive approach to minimizing hazards associated with blufftop erosion would involve
      the installation of appropriate protection structures, the implementation of measures to reduce and,
      where appropriate, redirect groundwater flow (eg., installation of subdrains to collect and redirect
      groundwater), and land use controls such as restrictive setback requirements to minimize
      potentially catastrophic damage to new buildings.
      2.3 Flood Hazards
      2.3.1 Historic Problems
      Flooding problems in Solana Beach have historically involved coastal flooding and San Dieguito
      River flooding in the area of Stevens Avenue and Valley Avenue. With respect to coastal flooding,
      the occurrence of storm events in combination with high astronomical tides and strong winds can
      cause a significant wave runup and allow storm waves to attack higher than normal elevations
      along the coastline. When this occurs, shoreline erosion and coastal flooding frequently result in
      damage to inadequately protected structures and facilities located along low-lying portions of the
      shoreline.
      Examples of these conditions are storms which occurred on September 24, 1939; December 26,
      1940; and September 9 – 10, 1976. These storms were all of a nature which affected the coast of
      the city of Solana Beach in an adverse manner.
      The December 26, 1940, problem was caused by an offshore storm which combined with high tides.
      The other two storms were also tropical in nature and caused damage by wave action.
      Another period of severe weather during the winter of 1977 – 1978 drew attention to the fact that
      storms coupled with intensified rainfall and large waves may cause more erosion along the
      coastline in a shorter period of time than erosion during years of normal weathering.
      An additional major cause of flooding in the city of Solana Beach is long-duration, high-intensity
      storms in the San Dieguito Watershed. Large floods occurred in the San Dieguito drainage area in
      1939, 1940, 1977, 1978, 1980, and 1982.6
      In the Stevens Avenue/Valley Avenue area, Solana Beach’s drainage facilities are sized adequately
      to handle flood flows. However, capacity problems with downstream flood control facilities south of
      Via de la Valle (outside of Solana Beach) has sometimes caused floodwaters to back up into the
      Stevens Avenue/Valley Avenue area.
      2.3.2 Existing Flood Hazard Areas and Zone Designation
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 86 of 399
      Flood hazard areas in the Solana Beach area have been mapped through the National Flood
      Insurance Program administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
      (HUD) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Flood Insurance Rate Map
      (FIRM) prepared for the Solana Beach area delineates areas exposed to potential 100-year and
      500-year flooding, including coastal flood hazard areas. Exhibit 1 illustrates the location of Solana
      Beach’s flood hazard areas.
      A 100-year flood, also known as an intermediate regional flood, is defined as flooding that can be
      expected once every 100 years or which has a one percent probability of occurring in any given
      year. A 500-year flood, also known as a standard project flood, is defined as flooding that would
      occur if the maximum storm of record in southern California was centered over the previously
      saturated watershed of a given drainage course. Most flood control projects are designed for
      flooding of this magnitude (hence the name, “standard project flood”) since it is regarded as a
      reasonably foreseeable worst-case scenario. The recurrence interval for standard project flooding
      is generally estimated to be once every 200 to 300 years.
      2.3.3 Land Use and Hydrology Issues
      The relationship between land use and flood hazards has two key aspects. First, the potential for
      flooding is a major constraint to land development in that the hazards posed by flooding severely
      restrict the types of land uses within the floodplain. Second, urban land use development could
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                    Page 87 of 399
      result in adverse effects on downstream areas by increasing the potential for flooding. These key
      considerations are discussed below.
      FLOODPLAIN ZONING/LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
      Floodplains are relatively flat land areas subject to periodic inundation by nearby drainage courses.
      These areas have historically attracted human settlement by virtue of their flat terrain, proximity to
      water, and soil characteristics that are often very fertile. It is important to recognize that periodic
      flooding is a natural process that creates the conditions on the floodplain which attracts
      development in the first place. Flooding represents a hazard only after human settlement on the
      floodplain exposes people and property to risks associated with the inevitable flood flows.
      Of course, water control measures such as the construction of dams, levees, retention basins,
      channel improvements, etc. are available to reduce the extent of flooding. However, even the most
      modern engineering practices cannot be substituted completely for implementing appropriate land
      use restrictions within floodplains.
      Areas potentially subject to inundation by 100-year floods should generally be limited to land uses
      that do not interfere with the capacity of the drainage course and that minimize hazards posed to
      people and property. Thus, agricultural and recreation/open space land uses are considered the
      most appropriate land uses for the 100-year flood zone. Further, the development of any such use
      should not involve, or at least minimize, the development of structures that would be exposed to
      100-year floodwaters. The only areas in Solana Beach where development has occurred within a
      100-year flood zone is in the Stevens Avenue/Valley Avenue area. No new urban development
      should be permitted within any 100-year flood zone unless it can be demonstrated that building
      pads will be located above the 100-year flood level and/or floodproofing measures are incorporated
      into project design.
      Areas within the 500-year floodplain are generally subject to a lesser degree of risk as compared to
      the 100-year floodplain. Therefore, urban land uses may be permitted with the understanding that
      some degree of risk is assumed for potential damage resulting from infrequent and typically shallow
      flooding. The only area in Solana Beach where development has occurred within a 500-year flood
      zone is also in the Stevens Avenue/Valley Avenue area.
      EFFECTS OF URBANIZATION
      Urban development can result in adverse effects upon downstream areas involving increased
      flooding and/or erosion and sedimentation problems. Since urbanization involves the construction of
      streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and buildings, the amount of impermeable land area within the
      watershed is increased. Thus, the increase in impermeable surfaces associated with buildout of the
      Solana Beach General Plan is expected to reduce the land area capable of absorbing precipitation.
      Consequently, stormwater runoff conveyed to the San Dieguito River and the San Elijo Lagoon will
      increase in both volume of flow and flow velocity.
      Further, urban development typically involves the development of storm drain systems designed to
      convey stormwater from urban development directly to streams and river. While the effect of
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                     Page 88 of 399
      individual projects themselves may be relatively minor, the cumulative effect of increased
      impermeable surfaces and storm drain construction throughout upstream portions of Solana Beach
      could result in greater frequency and magnitude of flooding in downstream areas. However, given
      the extent of existing urbanization in Solana Beach, additional effects upon downstream areas are
      expected to be very minor.
      Urbanization also can result in increased erosion and sediment transport effects. As vegetation is
      removed during site preparation and grading activities, soil is exposed and is much more
      susceptible to wind and water erosion. Further, the increased velocity of runoff resulting from the
      construction of impermeable surfaces can increase the erosive power of storm flows. Thus,
      downstream areas such as San Elijo Lagoon may experience increased sediment deposition which
      can affect water quality and related biological resources adversely.
      2.4 Fire Hazards
      2.4.1 Types and Causes of Fires
      Fire hazards in Solana Beach take two basic forms: structural fires and brush fires. Structural fires
      in urban areas typically pose an immediate hazard to the affected structure’s occupants and any
      nearby structures. Such fires are usually caused by arson, carelessness, or by malfunctioning
      equipment and are usually brought under control relatively quickly by Solana Beach’s Fire
      Department.
      Brush fires (also known as wildland fires) can spread quickly across a wide portion of undeveloped
      area, particularly hillside areas. Although some wildland fires have a natural origin (ie., lightning),
      the vast majority are caused by human beings either through arson or through carelessness. Given
      the far-reaching and potentially devastating consequences of wildland fires, it is important to
      recognize high fire hazard areas and to integrate related considerations into the land use planning
      and development process. The following subsections describe areas of high fire hazard in the
      Solana Beach area and discuss ways to minimize such hazards through appropriate planning and
      development measures.
      2.4.2 Existing Fire Hazard Areas
      With respect to structural fires, the Solana Beach Fire Department designates “target hazard”
      locations based on characteristics involving the type of use, population density, and/or structural
      condition. For example, schools are considered target hazard locations given the type of use and
      number of people typically using school structures. The high density residential development along
      Sierra Avenue south of Plaza Street is a target hazard area primarily because of population density
      considerations.
      As shown on Exhibit 2, several hillside areas within the city are classified as brush fire hazard
      areas. These classifications reflect an area’s characteristics related to fuel loading (ie., the density
      and type of vegetation) and topography. Brush fires tend to spread more rapidly on steeper slopes
      and firefighting is more difficult on steeper slopes since the mobility of firefighters and equipment is
      much more limited.
      The city’s primary brush fire hazard areas include hillsides along the northern edge of the city
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                   Page 89 of 399
      above San Elijo Lagoon, the area between San Andres Drive and Solana Drive, and the area
      generally between Nardo Avenue and Stevens Avenue.
      2.4.3 Fire Hazard/Land Use Considerations
      Although most brush fires are caused by human beings, it is important to recognize that fires are
      part of the natural cycle. They are occasionally necessary to eliminate dead vegetation and to help
      regenerate the ecosystem. They are considered hazardous primarily because of the dangers they
      pose to human beings and developed properties. The need to minimize the exposure of people and
      property to fire hazards requires a twofold approach. One aspect involves the use of appropriate
      land use planning and development regulations. The second aspect involves fire prevention,
      management, and control measures. Each aspect of this twofold approach is described below.
      PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
      Land development within or adjacent to areas of high fire hazard will increase the number of people
      exposed to risk and will increase the value of property that could be destroyed. Further, by altering
      vegetation and increasing human activity in such areas, land development can increase the degree
      of potential hazard.
      Perhaps the most appropriate land uses within high hazard areas would be open space preserves
      or light recreational facilities. However, urbanization has already occurred throughout the city,
      including neighborhoods adjacent to hillside areas susceptible to brush fires. Further, practical
      considerations involving the development rights of private landowners, the need for a balanced mix
      of land uses in Solana Beach, and the public cost of maintaining open space/recreational areas limit
      the extent to which high hazard areas can be restricted from development. Nevertheless, the
      general plan provides for open space in the Holmwood Canyon area partly as a measure to limit the
      potential for additional urban development in this area of high brush fire potential.
      Since a complete prohibition of development in all high hazard areas is not practical, it is necessary
      to ensure that future land uses are developed in accordance with strict regulations concerning land
      use types, densities, and site design.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                   Page 90 of 399
      In general, site plans for any new development proposed in high hazard areas are subject to the
      review of the Solana Beach Fire Department during the city’s site plan review process. Such plans
      must satisfy the city that the site provides adequate emergency access, has adequate water supply
      and pressure to meet fireflow needs, and provides an adequate fuelbreak or buffer zone to prevent
      the spread of structural fires to hillside areas. Further, strict enforcement of building codes will
      minimize potential fire hazards resulting from inappropriate building materials or structural design.
      PREVENTION AND CONTROL
      The imposition of strict zoning and development regulations such as those referenced above
      represents a key method of fire prevention. Other fire prevention and control measures include the
      removal or reduction of vegetation that constitutes fuel for fires in or near developed areas,
      controlled burning (particularly in areas of dense, dead vegetation), and the development of a
      network of firebreaks that reduce the potential spread of wildfires.
      Maintaining adequate emergency response capabilities is also necessary to ensure that fires are
      controlled if and when they occur. One method to ensure adequate emergency response
      capabilities is to provide the Solana Beach Fire Department with sufficient financial resources to
      maintain its facilities, equipment, and personnel at levels appropriate to the needs identified by the
      city’s Fire Chief. A second method involves maintaining city and county emergency roads to high
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 91 of 399
      fire hazard areas to keep them unobstructed and in adequate condition so that emergency vehicles
      will continue to have access to these areas.
      2.5 Hazardous Materials
      2.5.1 Introduction
      A hazardous material is defined as any injurious substance, including pesticides, herbicides, toxic
      metals and chemicals, explosives, volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels and materials. The use of
      hazardous materials is widespread today in industrial and agricultural activities. As a result of
      revelations during recent years regarding the adverse health effects of hazardous materials (eg.,
      Love Canal in upstate New York and the Stringfellow Acid Pits in southern California), public
      concern about this issue has grown significantly. This increased attention has led to a variety of
      federal, state and local regulations controlling the transport, use, storage, and disposal of
      hazardous materials.
      Hazardous materials can be classified into four general categories: toxins, irritants, flammables,
      and explosives. Toxins include a wide range of industrial chemicals and agricultural pesticides
      which are capable of producing serious illness or death due to poisoning. Irritants can cause
      inflammation or destruction of living tissue with effects ranging from mild to severe, based on the
      degree of exposure and the type of material involved. Flammables are dangerous because of their
      low ignition temperatures and rapid burning characteristics. Some flammables burn so violently that
      they cannot be extinguished, and must be allowed to burn out naturally. Explosives can produce
      rapid chemical reactions causing damage due to blast and flash fire. Because of their widespread
      use, it can be assumed that each type of hazardous material is either transported through, used, or
      stored to some degree within the Solana Beach area.
      The following subsections describe the known status of existing hazardous materials conditions in
      Solana Beach and describe strategies to safeguard the public from risks involving hazardous
      materials incidents.
      2.5.2 Existing Hazards
      Potential public health and safety effects associated with hazardous materials generally involve
      dangers present at a given site and risks associated with transporting hazardous materials.
      Potential dangers at a given site may involve the production, storage, use, and/or disposal of
      hazardous materials.
      Pursuant to Assembly Bill (AB) 3750, the state Office of Planning and Research (OPR) has
      compiled a list of hazardous materials sites throughout California. Based upon input from the State
      Department of Health Services, the State Water Resources Control Board, and the California Waste
      Management Board, the list is intended to inform local agencies of hazardous waste and substance
      sites identified by the state as being within the local agencies’ jurisdictions.
      AB 3750 requires each applicant for a development project to consult the list, available at the local
      agency, and to submit a signed statement indicating whether or not the proposed project is located
      on a listed site. This statement must be submitted prior to the local agency’s determination that the
      project’s applications are complete.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                    Page 92 of 399
      As of December 1987, there are no sites within or in close proximity to Solana Beach included on
      OPR’s list. This status is subject to change as new information becomes available in conjunction
      with OPR’s semi-annual update of the list. Hazardous materials are likely to be found at some light
      manufacturing uses (eg., solvents and toxic metals) and at some commercial uses (eg.,
      underground storage tanks at automobile service stations).
      In terms of hazardous materials transportation, the key area of concern is Interstate 5 since it
      bisects the city and carries a high volume of traffic. As the principal route between San Diego and
      Los Angeles, hazardous materials are likely transported through Solana Beach every day. Data
      specifically regarding the transportation of hazardous materials through the city are not readily
      available. However, a review of California’s recent experience involving hazardous materials is
      useful to understanding the nature and degree of potential risks due to hazardous materials
      transportation in the Solana Beach area.
      Based upon the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment’s findings regarding the amount of
      hazardous materials transported nationally, an estimated four to five million truckloads of
      hazardous materials are transported annually throughout California.7 The California Highway Patrol
      (CHP) has estimated that approximately 15 percent of trucks in rural areas and 25 percent of
      trucks in urban areas carry hazardous materials.8 Although the likelihood of accidents involving
      truck traffic transporting hazardous materials is not greater than that for general truck traffic, the
      consequences of incidents and accidents 9 involving hazardous materials are much greater.
      Of the 342 incidents on California’s state highways involving hazardous materials reported by
      Caltrans in fiscal year 1984-85, 103 (or 30 percent) were accidents. The CHP reported 166
      hazardous materials incidents on state highways and unincorporated county roads in 1985, of which
      76 (46 percent) were accidents.10
      Caltrans reported a total of 137,388 accidents on state highways in 1985. Thus, the 103 accidents
      involving hazardous materials transporters represented approximately 0.07 percent of the accidents
      which occurred on state highways. It is important to note that of these 103 accidents, 86 (83.5
      percent) were attributed to driver error (ie., error on the part of the driver of the transporter or on
      the part of the driver of another vehicle).11 In general, human error has been determined as the
      cause of approximately 90 percent of total truck accidents statewide.12
      Hazardous materials incidents (not involving vehicular accidents) on California’s highways have
      also been attributed primarily to human error. Such errors typically include driver error in accepting
      improper shipments, mistakes when loading and unloading shipments, and failing to secure loads
      and/or closures properly.
      2.5.3 Hazardous Materials Management
      Regulations and enforcement of safety measures for the storage and use of hazardous materials is
      the responsibility of numerous agencies, including local fire agencies. National, state, and local fire
      codes act as a guideline for local enforcement.
      The city Fire Department is currently working with the County of San Diego’s Hazardous Materials
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                Page 93 of 399
      unit to compile a list of businesses that either produce, use, or store hazardous materials. In
      addition, the city is considering the inclusion of an additional Fire Department staff member to
      manage the city’s hazardous materials data base and to work with the community to ensure
      compliance with appropriate codes and regulations governing hazardous materials.
      The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ensures that containers of hazardous materials
      are properly labeled with instructions for use. The California Department of Industrial Relations,
      Cal-OSHA Division, regulates the proper use of hazardous materials. The U.S. Department of
      Agriculture and California Department of Food and Agriculture and the Department of Industrial
      Regulations regulate pest control operations, pesticide dealers, and pesticide users to ensure that
      hazardous agricultural chemicals are properly used.
      To minimize risks associated with hazardous materials transportation, the U.S. Department of
      Transportation (DOT) and the CHP have instituted a number of programs to minimize the number of
      truck-involved accidents and the Transportation Safety Act (also known as the Hazardous Materials
      Transportation Act) authorized the DOT to regulate the safe shipment of hazardous materials. As
      established in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 100-199, the DOT is authorized
      to:
            1. Establish and revise criteria for handling hazardous materials;
            2. Require hazardous materials carriers, shippers, and package-container manufacturers
            to submit biannual registration statements;
            3. Grant exemptions to issued regulations;
            4. Inspect records and properties relative to packaging, containing, and transporting of
            hazardous materials;
            5. Provide both civil and criminal penalties for violations of the HMTA or its regulations;
            6. Establish facilities and staff to evaluate risks and set up a central reporting and data
            system to facilitate hazardous materials emergency response; and
            7. Conduct a continuing review of all aspects of the transportation of hazardous materials
            to recommend steps to ensure safety and to prepare an annual report to Congress.13
      The CHP’s efforts to minimize hazardous materials incidents and accidents are an integral part of
      its on-going commercial vehicle enforcement program. This program includes the following
      measures:14
      ■     Formal inspections of hazardous materials transporters
      ■     Rules-of-the-road enforcement
      ■     On-highway and off-highway commercial vehicle inspections
      ■     Weight enforcement
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 94 of 399
      ■     Major incident response teams
      ■     Concerted education and enforcement efforts directed toward drivers on specified commercial
      corridors
      ■     Production of truck safety maps in conjunction with the California Trucking Association and
      other trucking industry liaison activities
      ■     Participation in the Department of Health Services’ Hazardous Waste Strike Force
      The CHP believes that the implementation and improvement of on-going commercial vehicle
      programs effectively reduces the risk of truck-involved accidents.
      2.6 Aircraft Hazards
      The Naval Air Station (NAS) Miramar is the closest air facility to Solana Beach. It is a military air
      installation located approximately 8-2/3 miles to the southeast of the city. It does not pose any
      extraordinary hazard to Solana Beach given its distance from the city. Therefore, no special
      planning measures are necessary to manage potential aircraft (both fixed and rotary wing) hazards
      in Solana Beach, although the city should work with the FAA to reduce overflights, including those
      for advertising purposes.
      2.7 Other Public Safety Issues
      2.7.1 Law Enforcement
      The city of Solana Beach contracts with the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department for law
      enforcement services. The Sheriff’s Department provides the city with a full range of services
      which includes uniformed patrol, detective follow-up, traffic enforcement, accident investigation,
      aviation support, and administrative and supervisory functions.
      The Sheriff’s Department serves the city from its Encinitas Substation. The department currently
      uses a guidelines for minimum service of one 24-hour patrol unit for every 13,275 residents (not
      including traffic enforcement).
      Response time to priority calls to areas within the city is approximately 8.4 minutes (mean average)
      or 7.0 minutes (median average). Non-priority call response time is approximately 14.3 minutes
      (mean) or 8.0 minutes (median).
      The Sheriff’s Department typically responds to growth by assigning additional deputies to an area in
      direct proportion to its increase in population. Accordingly, the need for augmented law enforcement
      services resulting from increased population in Solana Beach can be met by increasing the number
      of deputies available to the city commensurate with the city’s ability to pay. Further, the need for
      increased law enforcement services can be minimized to some degree by improving the city’s
      traffic circulation systems and by requiring new developments to incorporate “defensible space”
      measures in project design. Such measures typically include adequate lighting of exterior areas and
      the use of burglary-resistant hardware and fixtures in buildings.
      2.7.2 Public Health
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                    Page 95 of 399
      Scripps Memorial Hospital in Encinitas currently provides emergency services to Solana Beach and
      neighboring communities. The hospital offers the following types of emergency services:
      ■    Total medical services for emergency care, 24 hours daily.
      ■    Emergency backup by Scripps staff physicians as requested for outpatients.
      ■    Transfer of emergency cases where appropriate.
      ■    Treatment of patients who have no attending physician, referral to private physicians from
      emergency department referral list.
      ■    Evaluation of employees for job-related injuries/diseases.
      ■    Participation in promoting a community base plan for external disasters.
      Examples of emergency care available include:
      ■    Suturing and repair of lacerations
      ■    Treatment of all orthopedic injuries
      ■    Emergency cardiac care
      ■    Emergency childbirth
      ■    Pediatric treatment
      ■    Emergency treatment of all medical diagnoses
      At present, the hospital does not function as a maternity center. Deliveries are done on an
      emergency basis. Transport to maternity centers is done on all elective deliveries. Maternity
      services are offered at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla.
      Advanced cardiovascular surgery is conducted when needed at Scripps-La Jolla with transport from
      the Scripps-Encinitas emergency department to La Jolla by critical care helicopter ambulance
      transport.
      The hospital currently provides 93 beds (as of 1988) and experienced an occupancy rate of about
      76.5 percent in 1987. In response to the extraordinary growth experienced in the North San Diego
      County area, the hospital is constructing a new wing. This wing will have 150 patient beds, 50 of
      which will be devoted to rehabilitation services. The old wing will be used for auxilliary services and
      office space. Included in the plans is an expanded 10-bed emergency department. Also, a heliport
      may be constructed.
      A key public health issue in Solana Beach involves leakage problems experienced with residential
      septic systems. The age and poor condition of septic tanks in these areas have resulted in leaking
      systems which saturate soils and eventually affect downstream areas adversely with raw sewage.
      The City Council of Solana Beach recently issued a policy statement on the use of new septic
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 96 of 399
      systems as well as expanding existing septic systems.
      2.7.3 Marine Safety
      The Solana Beach Department of Marine Safety provides beach and aquatic emergency services
      along the beach within the city. The lifeguard headquarters at 111 South Sierra Avenue is staffed
      with three full-time personnel and houses the department’s fleet of four 4-wheel-drive vehicles, and
      equipment used for cliff rescues, underwater search and rescue activities, and small boat rescues.
      The facility also serves as a weather station for the National Weather Service.
      A staff of 45 lifeguards is used on a seasonal basis for operations conducted at three lifeguard
      stations (with a fourth station added during the summer). These stations are sited at principal beach
      access points.
      2.7.4 Disaster Preparedness
      Disaster preparedness typically involves the development of response procedures, identification of
      evacuation routes, design and installation of warning systems, purchase of emergency equipment,
      and training of emergency personnel. It is through such proactive measures that the effectiveness
      of other emergency management procedures is ensured.
      These other emergency management procedures include response, recovery, and mitigation
      programs. Response mechanisms come into play when a hazard event occurs and may include
      warnings, evacuations, rescue operations, fire fighting, emergency medical care, emergency food
      and shelter provisions, and measures to preserve public health and safety such as riot control.
      Following the hazard event, recovery activities may involve repairing damaged roads, buildings,
      pipelines, and re-establishing the community’s physical, social, and economic systems.
      Mitigation programs are akin to preparedness actions in that they are measures to reduce or
      eliminate the adverse effects of future hazard events. Mitigation programs are those that go beyond
      the typical objectives of preparedness, response, and recovery. The principal forms of mitigation
      are as follows:
      ■    Implementation of land use controls to prevent or limit the location of development and
      populations in areas that are susceptible to hazard events;
      ■    Enforcement of building codes established to minimize the likelihood or extent of damage,
      which may necessitate the design or construction of a building; and
      ■    Installation of structural barriers (eg., dams and levees) to shield people and development from
      harm.
      The city of Solana Beach’s Fire Chief is responsible for overseeing the city’s disaster preparedness
      program. Solana Beach’s program for local emergency management is currently being prepared by
      the Fire Department and is expected to designate appropriate evacuation routes and emergency
      shelters. The program is also expected to establish appropriate management procedures to be
      followed by emergency personnel.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                          Page 97 of 399
      Larger emergency response actions are managed on a regional basis by the county of San Diego,
      on a statewide basis by the State Office of Emergency Services, and on a federal basis by the
      Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Solana Beach’s Fire Chief is responsible for
      coordinating the city’s emergency response actions with these agencies.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                  Page 98 of 399
                                        3.0 Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      GOAL 3.1
      TO MINIMIZE HAZARDS TO PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE RESULTING FROM
      NATURAL AND MAN-MADE PHENOMENA
      Objective 1.0
      Ensure that geologic hazards in all areas for human use or habitation are mitigated properly
      or avoided prior to or during development.
      Policy 1.a    The city shall require geotechnical investigations by a certified engineering geologist
      for all grading and construction proposed within any area of significant erosion, slope instability,
      and/or areas subject to severe seismic hazards, including inland and coastal bluffs.
      Policy 1.b    The city shall provide qualified expertise for the review of geotechnical reports and
      sufficient personnel for the field inspection of grading operations and construction.
      Policy 1.c    The city shall require construction to be in conformance with the Uniform Building
      Code, specifically Chapter 23 as it provides for earthquake-resistant design, Chapter 70 as it
      provides for excavation and grading, and with the city’s adopted hillside development ordinance.
      Policy 1.d    The city shall encourage public information programs to encourage increased
      awareness of seismic and geologic hazards.
      Policy 1.e    The city shall encourage programs to abate or modify structures deemed hazardous to
      human habitation.
      Objective 2.0
      Establish siting and development standards to reduce risk and damage from flood hazards.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall cooperate with the Federal Emergency Management Agency in defining
      flood hazard areas within the city.
      Policy 2.b    The city shall enter into the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
      Flood Insurance Program.
      Policy 2.c    The city shall enact an ordinance which specifies the types of land uses to be
      permitted within 100-year flood hazard areas and which requires all structures proposed within 100-
      year flood zones to be elevated at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
      Policy 2.d    The city shall require the submittal of information prepared by a qualified civil or
      hydrological engineer which certifies compliance with development standards established for 100-
      year flood zones.
      Objective 3.0
      Minimize the adverse effects of urbanization upon drainage and flood control facilities.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                       Page 99 of 399
      Policy 3.a     The city shall require the implementation of adequate erosion control measures for
      development projects to minimize sedimentation damage to drainage facilities.
      Policy 3.b     The city shall maintain its open space preserves and shall require developers to
      provide adequate open space pursuant to the standards established in the Conservation and Open
      Space Element of the General Plan and the city’s zoning ordinance as a measure to minimize
      impermeable surfaces throughout the city.
      Policy 3.c     The city shall cooperate with the San Diego County Flood Control District to ensure
      that citywide development does not lead to significant adverse effects upon the county’s flood
      control facilities.
      Objective 4.0
      Establish fire prevention regulations and standards to minimize potential fire hazards and
      fire losses.
      Policy 4.a     The city shall enact an ordinance which establishes criteria for land development in
      hillside areas with emphasis on fire-retardant construction materials, access for fire-fighting
      personnel and equipment, removal of combustible vegetation, and minimizing the overall exposure
      to risks associated with wildfires and adjacent structure fires.
      Policy 4.b     The city shall enact an ordinance which establishes structural design standards to
      ensure adequate fire safety.
      Policy 4.c     The city shall ensure that development is phased properly in relation to the city’s ability
      to provide an adequate level of fire protection.
      Policy 4.d     The city shall establish appropriate measures to mitigate potential fire hazards in areas
      of special concern.
      Policy 4.e     The city Fire Department shall review proposed site plans to ensure that adequate fire
      safety measures are provided.
      Policy 4.f    The city will participate with other communities in mutual aid agreements to ensure
      effective cooperation among fire agencies.
      Objective 5.0
      Establish a program to ensure the safe handling, disposal, and cleanup of hazardous
      materials in conjunction with federal, state, and regional programs and regulations.
      Policy 5.a     The city shall enact an ordinance which sets forth restrictions and safeguards
      concerning the use, storage, and disposal of specific hazardous materials.
      Policy 5.b     The city Fire Department shall establish and periodically update an inventory of
      hazardous materials produced, stored, or otherwise located within the city for purposes of
      coordinating emergency response.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 100 of 399
      GOAL 3.2
      TO PROVIDE A SAFE AND SECURE ENVIRONMENT FOR THE CITY’S RESIDENTS,
      WORKERS, AND VISITORS
      Objective 1.0
      Provide an adequate level of police protection throughout the city.
      Policy 1.a    The city shall provide a minimum of one 24-hour police patrol per 13,275 residents.
      Policy 1.b    The city shall enact an ordinance which specifies site design standards for ensuring
      adequate emergency access.
      Policy 1.c    The city shall require new developments and improvements to employ defensible
      space concepts into site design and building specifications (eg., appropriate setbacks, adequate
      lighting of walkways and parking lots, and the use of burglary-resistant hardware and fixtures in
      buildings).
      Policy 1.d    The city shall encourage the use of state-of-the-art design concepts and technological
      improvements for the prevention of crime.
      Objective 2.0
      Enhance public awareness and participation in crime prevention.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall encourage the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department to establish a
      Neighborhood Watch program and shall provide ongoing support to participating neighborhoods.
      Objective 3.0
      Establish an emergency preparedness program and maintain the program through regular
      practice drills and periodic updating of the program.
      Policy 3.a    The city shall establish an Emergency Response Team composed of key city staff.
      Policy 3.b    The city’s Emergency Response Team shall develop a detailed emergency response
      manual which describes the appropriate actions and responsibilities of personnel designated for
      participation in emergency response activities. This manual shall become a working document and
      shall be made available to the public and city staff. Further, this document shall be updated at a
      minimum of every five years.
      Policy 3.c    The emergency response manual shall include a map indicating clearly the city’s
      designated evacuation routes and an operating plan for evacuation management to ensure safe and
      orderly evacuation.
      Policy 3.d    The city’s Emergency Response Team shall be responsible for directing the city’s
      personnel and volunteers involved in disaster relief and emergency evacuation efforts. The team
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 101 of 399
      also shall be responsible for coordinating the city’s emergency response with federal, state, and
      other local agencies.
      Policy 3.e    The Emergency Response Team shall direct annual practice drills involving key city
      personnel, volunteers, and other entities responsible for conducting emergency response activities.
      Objective 4.0
      Protect public safety in potentially hazardous areas such as blufftops.
      Policy 4.a    The city shall limit public access to hazardous blufftop locations through appropriate
      barrier installation, signage, etc.
      Policy 4.b    The city shall discourage the use of seawalls.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                 Page 102 of 399
                                                4.0 The Safety Plan
      As discussed in Section 2.0 of this safety element, a variety of safety issues such as blufftop
      hazards have a substantial effect upon urban development. To ensure that these issues receive
      appropriate consideration, the primary responsibility for implementation of the policies established
      in this safety element is with the city Planning Department and the city’s Fire Chief. The city
      Planning Department is responsible for evaluating proposed development projects to identify
      potential hazards associated with the development. The Planning Department’s site plan review
      process therefore takes into consideration possible seismic, geologic, flood, and fire hazards.
      Proposed projects which have potential adverse effects related to safety considerations should
      have measures to mitigate such effects pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
      (CEQA). The Planning Department is charged with ensuring compliance with CEQA in processing
      development proposals. Nevertheless, the Solana Beach City Council bears ultimate responsibility
      for certifying compliance with CEQA and for imposing specific mitigation measures as conditions of
      project approval.
      The Fire Department is responsible for reviewing development proposals to identify potential
      hazards related to fire. The department also is responsible for the appropriate management of
      emergency response facilities, personnel and equipment as allocated by the Solana Beach City
      Council.
      Disaster preparedness and response activities, including planning, training of personnel, and
      implementation of response mechanisms (eg., evacuation) shall be managed by the Fire Chief. The
      Fire Chief is also responsible for interagency coordination. The Solana Beach City Council is
      responsible for appropriating adequate resources to meet emergency response requirements.
      With respect to hazardous materials, the Fire Department, with support from the city Planning
      Department, is responsible for establishing an inventory of hazardous materials produced, stored,
      or used in Solana Beach. The Planning Department is responsible for consolidating the city’s
      inventory with semi-annual listings distributed by the State Office of Planning and Research and for
      requiring project applicants to consult said list pursuant to the requirements of AB 3750.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                         Page 103 of 399
                                                    5.0 Glossary
      Coastal Bluff: Any bluff where the toe of slope is now or within the past 200 years has been
      subject to marine erosion.
      Critical Facility: Includes facilities housing or serving many people or otherwise posing unusual
      hazards in case of damage from or malfunction during an earthquake, such as hospitals, fire,
      police, and emergency service facilities, utility “lifeline” facilities, such as water, electricity, and gas
      supply, sewage disposal, and communications and transportation facilities.
      Fault: A fracture in the earth’s crus forming a boundary between rock masses that have shifted.
           Active Fault: A fault that has moved recently and which is likely to move again. For planning
           purposes, “active fault” is usually defined as one that shows movement within the last 11,000
           years and can be expected to move within the next 100 years.
           Potentially Active Fault: 1) A fault that last moved within the Quaternary Period before the
           Holocene Epoch (the last 2,000,000 to 11,000 years); 2) a fault which, because it is judged to
           be capable of ground rupture or shaking, poses an unacceptable risk for a proposed structure.
           Inactive Fault: A fault which shows no evidence of movement in recent geologic time and no
           potential for movement in the relatively near future.
      Ground Failure: Mudslide, landslide, liquefaction, or the seismic compaction of soils.
      Hazardous Material: An injurious substance, including pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals and
      chemicals, liquified natural gas, explosives, volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels.
      Liquefaction: A process by which water-saturated granular soils transform from a solid to a liquid
      state because of a sudden shock or strain.
      Seiche: An earthquake-induced wave in a lake, reservoir, or harbor.
      Subsidence: The gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth’s surface with little or no horizontal
      motion. (Subsidence is usually the result of gas, oil, or water extraction, hydrocompaction, or peat
      oxidation, and not the result of a landslide or slope failure.)
      Surface Rupture: A break in the ground’s surface and associated deformation resulting from the
      movement of a fault.
      Wildland Fires: Fires occurring in a nonurban, natural area which contains uncultivated lands,
      timber, range, watershed, brush, or grasslands.
      1
       Geocon Incorporated, Geotechnical Investigation for Solana Beach Lifeguard Facility, Solana
        Beach, California, January 1988.
      2
      Geocon Incorporated, Soil and Geologic Reconnaissance for Solana Beach Community Center
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                   Page 104 of 399
        Expansion, Solana Beach, California, December 1987.
      3
      California Division of Mines and Geology, Urban Geology Master Plan for California – Bulletin
        198, 1973.
      4
      California Division of Mines and Geology, Fault-Rupture Hazard Zones in California – Special
        Publication 42, Revised March 1980.
      5
      Kim Fulton-Bennet and Gary B. Griggs, Coastal Protection Structures and Their Effectiveness (a
        joint publication of the California Department of Boating and Waterways and the U.C. Santa
        Cruz Marine Sciences Institute), undated.
      6
      Federal Emergency Management Agency, Draft Flood Insurance Study-City of Solana Beach,
        California, July 22, 1978.
      7
      California Department of Transportation (in cooperation with the California Highway Patrol and the
        California Public Utilities Commission), Transportation of Hazardous Materials in California by
        Highway and Rail, a report to the Legislature as required by Chapter 1465, Statutes of 1985 (AB
        1311-Leonard), August 1986, p. 2.
      8
      Ibid., p. 4.
      9
      “Incidents” include deliberate dumping, accidental spills or leaks, and traffic accidents resulting in
        the release of hazardous materials. “Accidents” are unintentional events that may or may not
        result in the release of hazardous materials.
      10
      Ibid., p. 9. The difference in Caltrans and CHP statistics result from differing definitions, agency
        responsibilities, reporting requirements, and data collection systems.
      11
      Ibid., p. 10.
      12
      Ibid., p. 5.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code SAFETY ELEMENT                                                         Page 105 of 399
      13
      Transportation Research Board, National Academy of Sciences, op. cit., p. 10.
      14
      Detailed descriptions of these measures are provided in the book entitled Commercial Vehicle
        Activities, prepared by the Department of the California Highway Patrol, June 1986.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 106 of 399
                                        NOISE ELEMENT
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 107 of 399
                                                   1.0 Introduction
      1.1 Overview
      1.1.1 Contents of Element
      The Noise Element follows the recently revised State guidelines in the State Government code
      Section 653021(g) and Section 46050.1 of the Health and Safety Code. The element quantifies the
      community noise environment in terms of noise exposure contours for both near and long-term
      levels of growth and traffic activity. The information will become a guideline for the development of
      land use policies to achieve compatible land uses and provide baseline levels and noise source
      identification for local Noise Ordinance enforcement.
      1.1.2 Key Issues
      1. Transportation Noise Control – Within the City of Solana Beach are a number of transportation
      related noise sources including freeways, major arterials and collector roadways. In addition a
      railroad line runs through the City. These sources are the major contributors of noise in Solana
      Beach. Cost effective strategies to reduce their influence on the community noise environment are
      an essential part of the Noise Element.
      2. Community Noise Control for Non-transportation Noise Sources – Residential land uses and
      areas identified as noise-sensitive must be protected from excessive noise from non-transportation
      sources including commercial and industrial operations. The south side of Solana Beach is
      impacted by noise from the Del Mar Fairgrounds. These impacts are most effectively controlled
      through the adoption and application of a City Noise Ordinance.
      3. Noise and Land Use Planning Integration – Information relative to the existing and future noise
      environment within Solana Beach should be integrated into future land use planning decisions. The
      Element presents the noise environment in order that the City may include noise impact
      considerations in development programs. Noise and land use compatibility guidelines are
      presented, as well as noise standards for new developments.
      1.2 Purpose
      The Noise Element of a General Plan is a comprehensive program for including noise control in the
      planning process. It is a tool for local planners to use in achieving and maintaining compatible land
      use with environmental noise levels. The Noise Element identifies noise sensitive land uses and
      noise sources, and defines areas of noise impact for the purpose of developing programs to ensure
      that Solana Beach residents will be protected from excessive noise intrusion.
      1.3 Authorization
      The State of California has mandated that each county and city prepare a Noise Element as part of
      its General Plan. Section 65302(g) of the California Government Code requires specifically:
            “(g) A Noise Element shall identify and appraise noise problems in the community. The
            noise element shall recognize the guidelines established by the Office of Noise Control in
            the State Department of Health Services and shall analyze and quantify, to the extent
            practicable, as determined by the legislative body, current and projected noise levels for
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 108 of 399
            all of the following sources:
                  Highways and freeways.
                  Primary arterials and major local streets.
                  Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems.
                  Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport operations,
                  aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and
                  maintenance functions related to airport operation. Local industrial plants, including,
                  but not limited to, railroad classification yards.
                  Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing to
                  the community noise environment.
            Noise contours shall be shown for all of the sources and stated in terms of community
            noise equivalent level (CNEL) or day-night average level (LDN). The noise contours shall
            be prepared on the basis of noise monitoring or following generally accepted noise
            modeling techniques for the various sources identified in paragraphs (1) to (6), inclusive.
            The noise contours shall be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of land uses in the
            land use element that minimizes the exposure of community residents to excessive
            noise. The Noise Element shall include implementation measures and possible solutions
            that address existing and forseeable noise problems, if any. The adopted noise element
            shall serve as a guideline for compliance with the state’s noise insulation standards.”
      The State Guidelines for Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan indicates
      that the Noise Element should present the noise environment in terms of noise contours. For those
      areas identified as containing noise sensitive facilities, the noise environment is determined by
      monitoring.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 109 of 399
                                    2.0 Existing Conditions/Issue Analysis
      2.1 Definition of Noise
      1. Noise Definitions. Sound is technically described in terms of the loudness (amplitude) of the
      sound and frequency (pitch) of the sound. The standard unit of measurement of the loudness of
      sound is the decibel (dB). Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies,
      a special frequency-dependent rating scale has been devised to relate noise to human sensitivity.
      The A-weighted decibel scale (dBA) performs this compensation by discriminating against
      frequencies in a manner approximating the sensitivity of the human ear.
      Decibels are based on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale compresses the wide range in
      sound pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in a manner similar to the Richter scale
      used to measure earthquakes. In terms of human response to noise, a sound 10 dBA higher than
      another is judged to be twice as loud; and 20 dBA higher four times as loud; and so forth. Everyday
      sounds normally range from 30 dB (very quiet) to 100 dB (very loud). Examples of various sound
      levels in different environments are shown in Exhibit 1.
      Noise has been defined as unwanted sound and it is known to have several adverse effects on
      people. From these known effects of noise, criteria have been established to help protect the public
      health and safety and prevent disruption of certain human activities. These criteria are based on
      such known impacts of noise on people as hearing loss, speech interference, sleep interference,
      physiological responses and annoyance. Each of these potential noise impacts on people are briefly
      discussed in the following narratives:
           HEARING LOSS is not a concern in community noise problems of this type. The potential for
           noise induced hearing loss is more commonly associated with occupational noise exposures
           in heavy industry or very noisy work environments. Noise levels in neighborhoods, even in
           very noisy airport environs, are not sufficiently loud to cause hearing loss.
           SPEECH INTERFERENCE is one of the primary concerns in environmental noise problems.
           Normal conversational speech is in the range of 60 to 65 dBA and any noise in this range or
           louder may interfere with speech. There are specific methods of describing speech
           interference as a function of distance between speaker and listener and voice level. Exhibit 2
           shows the impact of noise and speech interference.
                                                               Exhibit 1
        SOUND LEVELS AND LOUDNESS OF ILLUSTRATIVE NOISES IN INDOOR AND OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
                                                (A-Scale Weighted Sound Levels)
                                                                                                             LOUDNESS
                 OVERALL LEVEL                                                                                  Human
                  Sound Pressure                                                                            Judgement of
                   Level Approx.                                                                           Different Sound
        dB(A)     0.0002 Microbar          COMMUNITY (Outdoor)                HOME OR INDUSTRY                  Levels
                                      Military Jet Aircraft Take-Off With
                                                                                                             120 dB(A) 32
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                         Page 110 of 399
                                                                                                  120 dB(A) 32
        130                                 After-burner                 Oxygen Torch (121)
                                                                                                 Times as Loud
             UNCOMFORTABLY From Aircraft Carrier @ 50 Ft. (130)
                    LOUD           Turbo-Fan Aircraft @ Take-Off       Riveting Machine (110)
        120                                                                                       110 dB(A) 16
                                               Power                   Rock-N-Roll Band (108-
        110                                                                                      Times as Loud
                                           @ 200 Ft. (90)                         114)
                                    Jet Flyover @ 1000 Ft. (103)
                                    Boeing 707, DC-8 @ 6080 Ft.                                100 dB(A) 8 Times
        100
                                        Before Landing (106)                                        as Loud
                    VERY        Bell J-2A Helicopter @ 100 Ft. (100)
                    LOUD                 Power Mower (96)
                                    Boeing 737, DC-9 @ 6080 Ft.                                90 dB(A) 4 Times
        90                                                              Newspaper Press (97)
                                         Before Landing (97)                                        as Loud
                                      Motorcycle @ 25 Ft. (90)
                                       Car Wash @ 20 Ft. (89)
                                 Prop. Airplane Flyover @ 1000 Ft.
                                                                          Food Blender (88)
                                                 (88)                                          80 dB(A) 2 Times
        80                                                               Milling Machine (85)
                                Diesel Truck, 40 MPH @ 50 Ft. (84)                                  as Loud
                                                                        Garbage Disposal (80)
                                  Diesel Train, 45 MPH @ 100 Ft.
                                                 (83)
                                  High Urban Ambient Sound (80)
                                 Passenger Car, 65 MPH @ 25 Ft.
                MODERATELY                       (77)                  Living Room Music (76)
        70                                                                                          70 dB(A)
                    LOUD         Freeway @ 50 Ft. From Pavement      TV-Audio, Vacuum Cleaner
                                                Edge,
                                        10:00 AM (76 +or- 6)
                                                                       Cash Register @ 10 Ft.
                                                                                (65-70)
                                                                      Electric Typewriter @ 10
                                                                                                60 dB(A) 1/2 as
        60                      Air Conditioning Unit @ 100 Ft. (60)            Ft. (64)
                                                                                                      Loud
                                                                      Dishwasher (Rinse) @ 10
                                                                                Ft. (60)
                                                                          Conversation (60)
                                                                                                50 dB(A) 1/4 as
        50         QUIET        Large Transformers @ 100 Ft. (50)
                                                                                                      Loud
                                           Bird Calls (44)
                                                                                                40 dB(A) 1/8 as
        40                       Lower Limit Urban Ambient Sound
                                                                                                      Loud
                                                 (40)
                JUST AUDIBLE          (dB[A] Scale lnterrupted)
               THRESHOLD OF
        10
                  HEARING
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 111 of 399
      SOURCE: Reproduced from Melville C. Branch and R. Dale Beland, Outdoor Noise in the
      Metropolitan Environment. Published by the City of Los Angeles, 1970, p.2.
           SLEEP INTERFERENCE is a major noise concern because sleep is the most noise sensitive
           human activity. Sleep disturbance studies have identified interior noise levels that have the
           potential to cause sleep disturbance. Note that sleep disturbance does not necessarily mean
           awakening from sleep, but can refer to altering the pattern and stages of sleep.
           PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES are those measurable effects of noise on people which are
           realized as changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, etc. While such effects can be induced and
           observed, the extent is not known to which these physiological responses cause harm or are
           signs of harm.
           ANNOYANCE is the most difficult of all noise responses to describe. Annoyance is a very
           individual characteristic and can vary widely from person to person. What one person
           considers tolerable can be quite unbearable to another of equal hearing capability. It is also
           influenced by the perceived need for the sound. For example, a carpenter is not annoyed by
           the sound of his saw, whereas persons nearby who do not benefit from the work may be
           annoyed.
      2.2 Standards and Methods of Measurement
      2.2.1 Standards
      Community noise is generally not a steady state and varies with time. Under conditions of non-
      steady state noise, some type of statistical metric is necessary in order to quantify noise exposure
      over a long period of time. Several rating scales have been developed for describing the effects of
      noise on people. They are designed to account for the above known effects of noise on people.
      Based on these effects, the observation has been made that the potential for noise to impact people
      is dependent on the total acoustical energy content of the noise. A number of noise scales have
      been developed to account for this observation. These scales are the: Equivalent Noise Level
      (LEQ), the Day Night Noise Level (LDN), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL).
      These scales are described in the following paragraphs.
           LEQ is the sound level corresponding to a steady-state sound level containing the same total
           energy as a time-varying signal over a given sample period. LEQ is the “energy” average
           noise level during the time period of the sample. LEQ can be measured for any time period,
           but is typically measured for 15 minutes, 1 hour or 24-hours.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                 Page 112 of 399
          LDN is a 24-hour, time-weighted annual average noise level. Time-weighted refers to the fact
          that noise which occurs during certain sensitive time periods is penalized for occurring at
          these times. In the LDN scale, those events that take place during the night (10 pm to 7 am)
          are penalized by 10 dB. This penalty was selected to attempt to account for increased human
          sensitivity to noise during the quieter period of a day, where sleep is the most probable
          activity.
          CNEL is similar to the LDN scale except that it includes an additional 5 dBA penalty for events
          that occur during the evening (7pm to 10pm) time period. Either LDN or CNEL may be used to
          identify community noise impacts within the Noise Element. Examples of CNEL noise levels
          are presented in Exhibit 3. Although not shown on the exhibit (prepared by the U.S. EPA)
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                Page 113 of 399
            suburban residential areas would be at roughly the 60 CNEL level.
      The public reaction to different noise levels varies from community to community. Extensive
      research has been conducted on human responses to exposure of different levels of noise. Exhibit
      4 relates LDN noise levels (approximately equal to CNEL noise levels) to community response from
      some of these surveys. Community noise standards are derived from tradeoffs between community
      response surveys, such as this, and economic considerations for achieving these levels.
      Intermittent or occasional noise such as those associated with stationary noise sources is not of
      sufficient volume to exceed community noise standards that are based on a time averaged scale
      such as the LDN scale. To account for intermittent noise, another method to characterize noise is
      the Percent Noise Level (L%). The Percent Noise Level is the level exceeded X% of the time during
      the measurement period. Examples of various noise environments in terms of the Percent Noise
      Levels are shown in Exhibit 5.
      Noise Ordinances are typically specified in terms of the percent noise levels. Ordinances are
      designed to protect people from non-transportation related noise sources such as music, machinery
      and vehicular traffic on private property. Noise Ordinances do not apply to motor vehicle noise on
      public streets or other transportation related noise sources that are preempted by the State or
      Federal government.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 114 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 115 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                              Page 116 of 399
      Noise/Land Use Compatibility Guidelines. The purpose of this section is to present information
      regarding the compatibility of various land uses with environmental noise. It is from these
      guidelines and standards, that the City of Solana Beach Noise Criteria and Standards have been
      developed. Noise/Land use guidelines have been produced by a number of Federal and State
      agencies including the Federal Highway Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the
      Department of Housing and Urban Development, the American National Standards Institute and the
      State of California. These guidelines, presented in the following paragraphs, are all based upon
      cumulative noise criteria such as LEQ, LDN or CNEL.
           The ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY published in March 1974 a very important
           document entitled “Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 117 of 399
           Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety” (EPA 550/9-74-004). Exhibit 6
           presents a table of land uses and requisite noise levels. In this table, 55 LDN is described as
           the requisite level with an adequate margin of safety for areas with outdoor uses, this includes
           residences, and recreational areas. The EPA “levels document” does not constitute a
           standard, specification or regulation, but identifies safe levels of environmental noise exposure
           without consideration for economic cost for achieving these levels.
           The FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION (FHWA) has adopted and published noise
           abatement criteria for highway construction projects. The noise abatement criteria specified by
           the FHWA are presented in Exhibit 7 in terms of the maximum one hour Noise Equivalent
           Level (LEQ). The FHWA noise abatement criteria basically establishes an exterior noise goal
           for residential land uses of 67 LEQ and an interior goal for residences of 52 LEQ. The noise
           abatement criteria applies to private yard areas and assumes that typical wood frame homes
           with windows open provide 10 dB noise reduction (outdoor to indoor) and 20 dB noise
           reduction with windows closed.
           The STATE OF CALIFORNIA requires each City and County to adopt Noise Elements of their
           General Plans. Such Noise Elements must contain a Noise/Land Use compatibility matrix. A
           recommended (but not mandatory) matrix is presented in the “Guidelines for the Preparation
           and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan,” (Office of Noise Control, California
           Department of Health, February 1976). Exhibit 8 presents this recommended matrix.
      2.2.2 Methods of Measurement
      Methodology. The noise environment in Solana Beach was determined through the employment of
      a comprehensive noise measurement survey of existing noise sources and incorporating these
      results into computer noise models to model the noise environment (it is, of course, impossible to
      measure future noise levels so we must rely on computer noise models for future noise estimates).
      The noise environment is commonly presented graphically in terms of lines of equal noise levels, or
      noise contours. The following paragraphs detail the methodology used in the measurement survey
      and computer modeling of these results into noise contours.
                                                               Exhibit 6
                                          Environmental Protection Agency Guidelines
                                                         Indoor                                      Outdoor
                                                                             To                                      To
                                                                           Protect                                 Protect
                                                                           Against                                 Against
                                                                            Both                                    Both
                                          Activity      Hearing Loss       Effects      Activity    Hearing Loss   Effects
                           Measure     Interference     Consideration        (b)      Interference Consideration     (b)
       Residential with   Ldn               45                                45           55                         55
       Outside Space      Leq(24)
       and Farm
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                       Page 118 of 399
       Residences                                               70                                           70
       Residential with    Ldn                 45                            45
       No Outside          Leq(24)
       Space                                                    70
       Commercial          Leq(24)             (a)              70         70(c)           (a)               70        70(c)
       Inside              Leq(24)             (a)              70           (a)
       Transportation
       Industrial          Leq(24)(d)          (a)              70         70(c)           (a)               70        70(c)
       Hospitals           Ldn                 45                            45            55                            55
                           Leq(24)                              70                                           70
       Educational         Leq(24)             45                            45            55                            55
                           Leq(24)(d)                           70                                           70
       Recreational        Leq(24)             (a)              70         70(c)           (a)               70        70(c)
       Areas
       Farm Land and       Leq(24)                                                         (a)               70        70(c)
       General
       Unpopulated
       Land
      Code:
      a.   Since different types of activities appear to be associated with different levels, identification of
      a maximum level for activity interference may be difficult except in those circumstances where
      speech communication is a critical activity.
      b.   Based on lowest level.
      c.   Based only on hearing loss.
      d.   An Leq(8) of 75 dB may be identified in these situations so long as the exposure over the
      remaining 16 hours per day is low enough to result in a negligible contribution to the 24-hour
      average, i.e., no greater than an Leq of 60 dB.
      Note:    Explanation of identified level for hearing loss: The exposure period which results in hearing
      loss at the identified level is a period of 40 years.
      *Refers to energy rather than arithmetic averages.
      SOURCE: EPA
                                                       Exhibit 7
                                          FHWA Noise Abatement Criteria
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 119 of 399
                ACTIVITY      DESIGN NOISE
               CATEGORY        LEVEL – LEQ      DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY CATEGORY
                    A                 57       Tracts of land in which serenity and quiet
                                 (Exterior)    are of extraordinary significance and serve
                                               an important public need and where the
                                               preservation of those qualities is essential
                                               if the area is to continue to serve its
                                               intended purpose. Such areas could include
                                               amphitheaters, particular parks or portions
                                               of open spaces, or historic districts which
                                               are dedicated or recognized by appropriate
                                               local officials for activities requiring special
                                               qualities of serenity and quiet.
                    B                 67       Picnic areas, recreation areas,
                                 (Exterior)    playgrounds, active sports areas and parks
                                               which are not included in category A and
                                               residences, motels, hotels, public meeting
                                               rooms, schools, churches, libraries, and
                                               hospitals.
                    C                 72       Developed lands, properties, or activities
                                 (Exterior)    not included in Category A or B above.
                    D                  –       For requirements of undeveloped lands see
                                               FHWA PPM 773.
                    E                 52       Residences, motels, hotels, public meeting
                                  (Interior)   rooms, schools, churches, libraries,
                                               hospitals, and auditoriums.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 120 of 399
      Measurement Procedure. Twenty sites were selected for measurement of the noise environment
      in Solana Beach. Discussions with City staff and identification of major noise sources in the
      community provided the initial base for development of the community noise survey. The
      measurement locations were selected on the basis of proximity to major noise sources and noise
      sensitivity of the land use.
      The measurement locations are presented in Exhibit 9. The Solana Beach Noise Element
      measurement survey utilized the Bruel and Kjaer Model 4427 Portable Noise Monitor. This
      instrument automatically calculates the Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ), maximum noise levels and
      various percentile noise levels for any specific time period. The system was calibrated with a Bruel
      and Kjaer calibrator with calibration traceable to the National Bureau of Standards. Calibration for
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                     Page 121 of 399
      the calibrator is certified through the duration of the measurements by Bruel & Kjaer. This
      measurement system satisfies the ANSI (American National Standards Institute) Standards 1.4 for
      Type 1 precision noise measurement instrumentation.
      Measurement Results. The noise measurement program was conducted from September 10, 1987
      to September 11, 1987 at 21 locations throughout the City. A measurement period of 15 minutes
      was used for the survey. The results of the ambient noise measurements at each site are
      presented as Appendix A. The measurement data also identifies the date and time of the
      measurement and the primary noise source affecting the noise environment. The quantities
      measured were the Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ), the maximum noise level and several percentile
      noise levels ranging from 1 to 99%.
      2.3 Existing Acoustic Environment
      This section contains a detailed description of the current noise environment within the City. This
      description of the noise environment is based on an identification of noise sources and noise
      sensitive land uses, a community noise measurement survey and noise contour maps.
      To define the noise exposure, this section of the report first identifies the major sources of noise in
      the community. The sources of noise in Solana Beach include: Interstate 5, Highway 101, arterial
      roadways, the Atchinson Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad line, and the Del Mar Fairgrounds located
      in Del Mar adjacent to the southern boundary of Solana Beach. In addition, noise levels within the
      City are affected by overflights from military, commercial, and general aviation aircraft. To
      completely assess the noise environment in the City, noise sensitive receptors must also be
      identified. As mandated by the State, noise sensitive receptors include, but are not limited to,
      residential areas, areas containing schools, hospitals, rest homes, long-term medical or mental
      care facilities, or any other land use areas deemed noise sensitive by the local jurisdiction.
      2.3.1 Noise Sources and Levels
      The predominant land use in the City is residential, and should also be considered the most noise
      sensitive. Other noise sensitive land uses include schools and parks. Maintenance of a relatively
      quiet ambience is important to maintaining the overall atmosphere of the area.
      The predominant noise source in Solana Beach originates from motor vehicles. Several major
      arterial roadways pass through the City. The primary roadways of concern are Interstate 5 and
      Highway 101. The Atchinson Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad line runs parallel to Highway 101 and is
      also considered a primary concern. The other major sources of noise are not found within the City
      but have a significant effect on the City’s noise environment.
      Del Mar Fairgrounds is located on state property adjacent to the southern boundary of Solana
      Beach and impacts City residences. Previously, an analysis of the raceway’s impact on Solana
      Beach was undertaken (“Measurement of Grand Prix Raceway Noise in the City of Solana Beach”,
      Mestre Greve Associates, October 30, 1987). The report provided results of noise measurements
      taken in residential areas of Solana Beach during the Grand Prix races at Del Mar Fairgrounds. The
      report stated that the raceway alone did not violate the Noise Ordinance but a combination of
      freeway traffic, aircraft flyovers and raceway noise exceeded the ordinance on several occasions
      (at the time of the study, results were compared to the Noise Ordinance for San Diego County
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                       Page 122 of 399
      which is presently used by Solana Beach). Noise originating from the fairgrounds during auto/horse
      races is intermittant type noise. The primary entrance and exit routes utilize roadways bordering or
      within Solana Beach; primarily Via De La Valle, Jimmy Durante Boulevard and Highway 101. The
      fairgrounds is operated by the State on State property. Therefore, noise ordinances adopted by
      Solana Beach (or the City of Del Mar) will not be able to control the noise generated at the
      fairgrounds since it is outside the Cities’ jurisdiction. However, recent court cases are testing the
      legality of imposing their noise ordinances on activities on State property. Most notable, is the
      recent court actions by the City of Costa Mesa against Pacific Amphitheatre and the State of
      California. The City has been trying to impose it’s noise ordinance on the amphitheatre which is
      operated on State property. The court cases are still in progress, but could set new precedents in
      this area.
      An acoustical report prepared by Mr. Raymond Sacco (Sound Level Monitoring of Grand Prix at Del
      Mar Auto Race, November 12, 1987, Raymond Sacco, Assistant Noise Control Officer) sums up
      the situation as follows:
            In summary, noise impact from automobile racing activity was greater than other
            activities conducted on the fairgrounds and would exceed the noise standards as adopted
            by the City of Del Mar and the City of Solana Beach, but due to the special status of the
            fairgrounds, local standards are not applicable. The predicted noise levels in the
            Environmental Impact Report were used as the standard not to be exceeded and
            monitoring data shows that the noise produced by the auto racing activities were less
            than predicted and therefore in conformance to the requirements.
      Additional monitoring of fairground activities is needed. It has been observed that when the wind
      blows from the south or east, that the wind carries the noise towards Solana Beach better and
      higher noise levels in residential areas result. Winds from the south or east may cause the
      fairgrounds noise to exceed noise ordinance limits in Solana Beach.
      Several studies have been previously prepared addressing the potential noise impacts of the
      fairground activities. These studies include the “Environmental Noise Study for Southern California
      Grand Prix,” (prepared by Gordon Bricken & Associates, January 7, 1986).
      Aircraft flyovers occur over Solana Beach several times throughout the day. The aircraft consist of
      military, commercial, and general aviation types (both fixed and rotary wing) originating from
      various airports. Aircraft flights occur over residential and other noise sensitive land uses within the
      City. The aircraft flyovers do not contribute significantly to the overall noise level, but can be
      annoying on a short term basis. Future agreements with military, commercial and private airport
      operators may provide the opportunity for more stringent flight paths over the City. It would be
      desirable to confine aircraft flight corridors in the area to less sensitive land uses such as at least 1
      mile off the coast. Flights out over the ocean would have virtually no impact on the City.
      The noise environment for Solana Beach can be described using noise contours developed for the
      major noise sources within the City. The major noise source impacting the City is traffic noise.
      Existing and future noise contour maps have been developed for the City as part of this noise
      element.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 123 of 399
      The traffic noise contours for existing conditions are presented on Exhibit 10. (This map is available
      for review at the City at 1" = 1000' scale.) The noise contours in a tabular format are presented in
      Table 2. The 60, 65 and 70 CNEL contour levels are shown on the map. These traffic noise levels
      were computed using the Highway Noise Model published by the Federal Highway Administration
      (“FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model,” FHWA-RD-77-108, December 1978). The FHWA
      Model uses traffic volume, vehicle mix, vehicle speed, and roadway geometry to compute the LEQ
      noise level. A computer code has been written which computes equivalent noise levels for each of
      the time periods used in CNEL. Weighting these noise levels and summing them results in the
      CNEL for the traffic projections used. The traffic data used to project these noise levels are derived
      from the Circulation Element for the City. The traffic mixes and time distributions for the arterials
      are presented in Table 1. The traffic mix data for the arterials are based on measurements for
      roadways in Southern California and are considered typical for arterials in this area. The existing
      and future contour maps include railroad noise contours from the tracks that run parallel to Highway
      101.
                                                      Table 1
                                 TRAFFIC DISTRIBUTION PER TIME OF DAY IN
                                                PERCENT OF ADT
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 124 of 399
                                                        PERCENT OF ADT
                              VEHICLE TYPE       DAY         EVENING       NIGHT
                             Automobile             75.51         12.57           9.34
                             Medium Truck             1.56          0.09          0.19
                             Heavy Truck              0.64          0.02          0.08
      Most cities have adopted 65 CNEL for outdoor living areas and 45 CNEL for indoor areas. The
      noise contour map indicates that currently and in the future 65 CNEL is only exceeded significantly
      along Highway 101 (in combination with the railroad line) and Interstate 5. The remaining portions of
      the City experience noise levels generally of 60 CNEL or less.
                                                     Table 2
                                 EXISTING (1988) TRAFFIC NOISE CONTOURS
                                                                     Distance to CNEL Contour
                                                                                (feet)
                                               ADT
                          Roadway             (,000)      Speed    70 CNEL 65 CNEL 60 CNEL
               CEDROS AVENUE
               Cliff to Via De La Valle             2.0     35             7          15        33
               STEVENS AVENUE
               Lomas Santa Fe to Via De            10.8     40            27          58       126
               La Valle
               LOMAS SANTA FE DRIVE
               Highway 101 to I-5                  22.3     45            53         115       247
               I-5 to El Camino Real                8.5     45            28          60       130
               VIA DE LA VALLE
               Highway 101 to Jimmy                16.6     45            44          94       203
               Durante
               Jimmy Durante to I-5                43.0     45            82         178       383
               I-5 to El Camino Real               18.4     45            47         101       217
               HIGHWAY 101
               South of Via De La Valle            18.3     45            47         100       217
               Via De La Valle to City Line        17.5     45            45          98       210
               North of City Line                  25.0     45            57         124       267
               INTERSTATE 5
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                      Page 125 of 399
               South of Via De La Valle             169.0      55          363         782       1685
               Via De La Valle to Santa Fe          156.0      55          344         741       1597
               North of Lomas Santa Fe              158.0      55          347         747       1611
               ADT – Average Daily Traffic based on 1987 traffic counts.
               Speed – Speed is in miles per hour.
      An Atchinson, Topeka, and Santa Fe railroad line lies next to Highway 101. To determine train noise
      levels at various distances the Wyle Model was used (“Assessment of Noise Environments Around
      Railroad Operations,” Wyle Laboratories Report WCR 73-5, July 1973). The noise generated by the
      train pass-by can be divided into two components; that generated by the engine or locomotive, and
      that due to the railroad cars. The characteristic frequency of the engine is different than for the
      cars. The noise generated by the engine is the result of the mechanical movements of the engine
      parts, the combustion process of the horn if used, and to a lesser extent the exhaust system. The
      noise generated by the cars is a result of the interaction between the wheels and the railroad track.
      A zero source height is used for the car noise, and a source height of 10 feet is utilized for the
      locomotive.
      Data on railroad operations were obtained from Mr. Jim Beard of the San Bernardino office of the
      A.T. and S.F. Railway line. The railroad line is used for both Amtrak and freight train operations.
      Amtrak operations consist of 16 trains per day passing through the City with an average of 8 cars
      per train. An average of 3 freight trains per day typically pass through the City with 50 cars per
      train. A speed of 90 miles per hour is typical for the Amtrak trains and 55 miles per hour for freight
      trains. The operational data was utilized in conjunction with the Wyle Model to project train noise
      levels on the project site. The results of the train noise projections are displayed in Table 3 in terms
      of CNEL noise levels at distances of 100, 200, 500, and 1000 feet from the tracks. Railroad noise
      sources must be addressed in terms of the CNEL scale as per the State requirements. The
      projections do not include topography or barriers which may reduce the noise levels.
                                                       Table 3
                                            RAILROAD NOISE LEVELS
                               DISTANCE (FEET) 100            200     500      1,000
                               CNEL (DB)             70       66      58       53
      Railroad noise levels are expected to remain virtually unchanged in future years. However, there
      are no guarantees that operations will not change. Freight operations may increase, Amtrak may
      increase passenger service, and private ventures may attempt to provide high speed rail service.
      Any significant changes in operations should be preceeded by the required environmental
      documentation addressing potential impacts and mitigation measures. Railroad levels and traffic
      levels for Highway 101 were combined to achieve the existing and future contour distances along
      the tracks. Potential future mitigation of the railroad noise may include lowering the rail bed.
      2.3.2 Noise Sensitive Land Uses
      The most noise sensitive land use in Solana Beach is residential development. It is considered
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 126 of 399
      especially noise sensitive because (1) considerable time is spent by individuals at home, (2)
      significant activities occur outdoors, and (3) sleep disturbance is most likely to occur in a
      residential area. Additionally, the City of Solana Beach has a number of public and private
      educational facilities, and churches that are considered noise sensitive. The location of residential
      areas, schools, and parks are shown on the Existing Land Use Map (Exhibit 11). The distribution of
      these facilities varies from quiet residential areas to major arterial roadways.
      Four schools are located within Solana Beach. Two of the schools are located along Lomas Santa
      Fe Drive at Stevens Avenue. These two schools are located along major roadways and
      subsequently portions of these school sites experience high noise levels. However, the schools
      have the buildings located back from the roadways which act to reduce the noise levels somewhat.
      School Districts have been able to apply to the State for funds to mitigate noise problems for many
      years. The funds are used to sound insulate classrooms and to provide ventilation or air
      conditioning so that windows may remain closed. The other two schools are located on East Cliff
      Street at Rios Avenue and at Santa Victoria near Santa Carina. These schools are located in areas
      where the noise levels do not appear to be excessive.
      The San Elijo Lagoon merits special consideration. Due to its natural condition it should be
      considered as noise sensitive. However, the wetlands area is located outside the City of Solana
      Beach. Actions by the City should take into consideration the noise sensitive nature of this area.
      Noise contours represent lines of equal noise exposure, just as the contour lines on a topographic
      map are lines of equal elevation. The contours shown on the maps are the 70, 65, and 60 CNEL
      noise level for the traffic and railroad noise contours. The noise contours presented should be used
      as a guide for land use planning. The 60 CNEL contour defines the noise referral zone. This is the
      noise level for which noise considerations should be included when making land use policy
      decisions. The 65 CNEL contour describes the areas for which new noise sensitive developments
      will be permitted only if appropriate mitigation measures are included such that the standards
      contained in this Element are achieved.
      The contours presented in this report are a graphic representation of the noise environment.
      Topography and intervening buildings or barriers have a very complex effect on the propagation of
      noise. This topographic effect is not included in these contours.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                              Page 127 of 399
      2.4 Future Acoustic Environment
      2.4.1 Noise Sources and Levels
      Future traffic noise levels have been computed using the FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction
      Model and projected traffic volumes presented in the circulation element. Table 4 and Exhibit 12
      show the traffic noise contours along the city’s principal highways that are projected to occur
      following buildout of the proposed general plan.
                                                     Table 4
                              FUTURE TRAFFIC NOISE CONTOURS (YEAR 2010)
                                                                      Distance to CNEL Contour
                                                                                 (feet)
                                              ADT
                        Roadway              (,000)       Speed      70 CNEL 65 CNEL 60 CNEL
              CEDROS AVENUE
              Cliff to Via De La Valle             4.0           35        11          24         52
              STEVENS AVENUE
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 128 of 399
             Lomas Santa Fe to Via De      17.0          40       37        79      170
             La Valle
             SAN ANDRES DRIVE
             Marine View to Highland        5.0          40       16        35       75
             Highland to Via De La Valle    7.0          40       20        44       94
             SANTA HELENA
             North of Lomas Santa Fe        6.0          40       18        39       85
             SAN MARLO DRIVE
             North of Lomas Santa Fe        8.0          40       22        48      103
             HIGHLAND DRIVE
             San Andres to Lomas            4.0          40       14        30       65
             Santa Fe
             LOMAS SANTA FE DRIVE
             East of Highway 101           16.0          45       43        92      198
             West of Stevens               24.0          45       56       120      259
             Stevens to I-5                36.0          45       73       158      340
             I-5 to Highland               29.0          45       63       137      294
             Highland to El Camino Real    12.0          45       35        76      163
             VIA DE LA VALLE
             Highway 101 to Jimmy          20.0          45       49       107      230
             Durante
             Jimmy Durante to I-5          45.0          45       85       183      395
             I-5 to San Andres             35.0          45       72       155      334
             San Andres to El Camino       28.0          45       62       133      288
             Real
             HIGHWAY 101
             South of Via De La Valle      27.0          45       60       130      281
             Via De La Valle to City Line  28.0          45       62       133      288
             North of City Line            31.0          45       66       143      308
             SAN DIEGO FREEWAY
             South of Via De La Valle     274.0          55      501     1079      2325
             Via De La Valle to Lomas     266.0          55      491     1058      2279
             Santa Fe
             North of Lomas Santa Fe      265.0          55      490     1055      2274
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 129 of 399
      Based on current and future traffic levels the only areas of the City that experiences noise levels in
      excess of 65 CNEL is along Interstate 5 and Highway 101. Much of the land uses along Highway
      101 are commercial or business uses which are generally considered insensitive to noise.
      However, there are some multi-family residential uses along this road which are considered noise
      sensitive. Several single and multi-family residential areas lie in close proximity to Interstate 5.
      Several of the residential areas are protected from freeway noise by existing noise barriers.
      However, residences exist on hills overlooking the freeway that are unprotected from freeway
      noise. Therefore, future planning for the City should be directed at reducing noise levels along
      Highway 101 and Interstate 5 and limiting the future siting of noise sensitive land uses along these
      areas.
      As previously discussed, the sources of noise in Solana Beach can be divided into two basic
      categories, transportation sources (primarily traffic) and non-transportation sources. A local
      government has little direct control of transportation noise at the source. State and Federal
      agencies have the responsibility to control the noise from the source, such as vehicle noise
      emission levels. The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is through
      reducing the impact of the noise onto the community (i.e. noise barriers and site design review).
      Mitigation through the design and construction of a noise barrier (wall, berm, or combination
      wall/berm) is the most common way of alleviating traffic noise impacts (Exhibit 13). The effect of a
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                  Page 130 of 399
      noise barrier is critically dependent on the geometry between the noise source and the receiver. A
      noise barrier effect occurs when the “line of sight” between the source and receiver is penetrated
      by the barrier. The greater the penetration the greater the noise reduction.
      2.4.2 Noise/Land Use Compatibility
      Noise concerns should be incorporated into land use planning to reduce future noise and land use
      incompatibilities. This is achieved by establishing standards and criteria that specify acceptable
      limits of noise for various land uses throughout the City. These criteria are designed to integrate
      noise considerations into land use planning to prevent noise/land use conflicts. Exhibit 14 presents
      criteria used to assess the compatibility of proposed land uses with the noise environment. These
      criteria are the basis for the development of specific Noise Standards. The proposed standards,
      presented in Exhibit 15, represent City policies related to land uses and acceptable noise levels.
      These tables are the primary tools which allow the City to ensure integrated planning for
      compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
      The most effective method to control community noise impacts from non-transportation noise
      sources is through application of the Community Noise Ordinance. The City presently uses the
      Noise Ordinance for San Diego County. The San Diego County ordinance is a good guideline and
      has served the City for the past several years. In addition, the Orange County Noise Ordinance is
      also a good guideline, is used by many jurisdictions throughout the State of California, and is
      considered to be one of the finest noise ordinances in the nation. The San Diego County ordinance
      addresses noise in terms of the average (Leq) noise level. The Orange County Ordinance also
      addresses peak and intermittent sounds in addition to average levels.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 131 of 399
                                                     Exhibit 14
                                       Noise/Land Use Compatibility Matrix
                                                                           COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT
                                                                                       LEVEL
                           LAND USE CATEGORIES                                          CNEL
           CATEGORIES                            USES                        <55 60   65   70    75   80>
       RESIDENTIAL           Single Family, Duplex, Multiple Family        A    A    B    B    C     D    D
       RESIDENTIAL           Mobile Home                                   A    A    B    C    C     D    D
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 132 of 399
       COMMERCIAL                  Hotel, Motel, Transient Lodging
                                                                                     A    A     B     B     C    C     D
       Regional, District
       COMMERCIAL                  Commercial Retail, Bank
       Regional, Village District, Restaurant, Movie Theatre                         A    A     A     A     B     B    C
       Special
       COMMERCIAL                  Office Building, Research and Development,
       INDUSTRIAL                  Professional Offices, City Office Building        A    A     A     B     B    C     D
       INSTITUTIONAL
       COMMERCIAL                  Amphitheatre, Concert Hall
       Recreation                  Auditorium, Meeting Hall
                                                                                     B    B     C     C     D    D     D
       INSTITUTIONAL
       Civic Center
       COMMERCIAL                  Childrens Amusement Park, Miniature Golf
       Recreation                  Course, Go-cart Track, Equestrian Center,         A    A     A     B     B    D     D
                                   Sports Club
       COMMERCIAL                  Automobile Service Station, Auto Dealership,
       General, Special            Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale,
                                                                                     A    A     A     A     B     B    B
       INDUSTRIAL,                 Utilities
       INSTITUTIONAL
       INSTITUTIONAL               Hospital, Church, Library
                                                                                     A    A     B     C     C    D     D
       General                     Schools’ Classroom
       OPEN SPACE                  Parks                                             A    A     A     B     C    D     D
       OPEN SPACE                  Golf Course, Cemetaries, Nature
                                                                                     A    A     A     A     B    C     C
                                   CentersWildife Reserves, Wildlife Habitat
       AGRICULTURE                 Agriculture                                       A    A     A     A     A     A    A
       INTERPRETATION
       ZONE A                   Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved
       CLEARLY                  are of normal conventional construction without any special noise insulation requirements.
       COMPATIBLE
       ZONE B                   New construction or development should be undertaken only after detailed analysis of the
       NORMALLY                 noise reduction requirements are made and needed noise insulation features in the design
       COMPATIBLE               are determined. Conventional construction, with closed windows and fresh air supply
                                systems or air conditioning, will normally suffice.
       ZONE C                   New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or
       NORMALLY                 development does proceed, a detailed analysis of noise reduction requirements must be
       INCOMPATIBLE             made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
       ZONE D                   New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
       CLEARLY
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 133 of 399
       INCOMPATIBLE
                                              Exhibit 15
                               Interior and Exterior Noise Standards
                                                               ENERGY AVERAGE
                          LAND USE CATEGORIES                        CNEL
                    CATEGORIES                USES           INTERIOR1 EXTERIOR2
                 RESIDENTIAL         Single Family, Duplex,   453  554       65
                                     Multiple Family
                                     Mobile Home               –            655
                 COMMERCIAL          Hotel, Motel, Transient  45            656
                 INDUSTRIAL          Lodging
                 INSTITUTIONAL
                                     Commercial Retail,       55             –
                                     Bank
                                     Restaurant
                                     Office Building,         50             –
                                     Research and
                                     Development,
                                     Professional Offices,
                                     City Office Building
                                     Amphitheatre, Concert    45             –
                                     Hall
                                     Auditorium, Meeting
                                     Hall
                                     Gymnasium                50             –
                                     (Multipurpose)
                                     Sports Club              55             –
                                     Manufacturing,           65             –
                                     Warehousing,
                                     Wholesale, Utilities
                                     Movie Theatres           45             –
                 INSTITUTIONAL       Hospital, Schools’       45             65
                                     Classroom
                                     Church, Library          45             –
                 OPEN SPACE          Parks                     –             65
      INTERPRETATION
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                              Page 134 of 399
      1.  Indoor environment excluding: Bathrooms, toilets, closets, corridors.
      2.  Outdoor environment limited to: Private yard of single family
         Multi-family private patio or balcony which is served by a means of exit from inside.
         Mobile home Park
         Hospital patio
         Park’s picnic area
         School’s playground
         Hotel and motel recreation area
      3.  Noise level requirement with closed windows. Mechanical ventilating system or other means of
      natural ventilation shall be provided as of Chapter 12, Section 1205 of UBC.
      4.  Noise level requirement with open windows, if they are used to meet natural ventilation
      requirement.
      5.  Exterior noise level should be such that interior noise level will not exceed 45 CNEL.
      6.  Except those areas affected by aircraft noise.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                   Page 135 of 399
                                        3.0 Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      GOAL 3.1
      TO PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE BY ELIMINATING EXISTING NOISE
      PROBLEMS AND BY PREVENTING SIGNIFICANT DEGRADATION OF THE FUTURE
      ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT.
      Objective 1.0
      Establish a community noise standard that specifies acceptable limits of noise for various
      land uses throughout the City.
      Policy 1.a    The city shall adopt a standards by which identifies interior and exterior noise
      standards in relation to specific land uses, particularly “noise sensitive” areas such as residential
      areas, schools, hospitals, open space preserves, and parks. The ordinance shall specify the
      maximum allowable noise levels for transportation sources, construction activities, and other non-
      transportation sources such as industrial and commercial land uses.
      Policy 1.b    The adopted community noise standards shall be consistent with applicable state noise
      standards which specify that interior noise levels for residential living spaces shall not exceed 45
      Ldn/CNEL. This standard shall be applied to all new single- and multi-family dwellings, hotels, and
      motels.
      Policy 1.c    The adopted community noise standards shall designate the code enforcement officer
      as the noise control coordinator and shall establish the respective responsibilities and police
      powers of all city departments involved in noise abatement.
      Policy 1.d    The city shall encourage a long-term development pattern which minimizes noise
      conflicts through planning and zoning.
      Objective 2.0
      Establish measures by to control noise impacts from transportation related noise sources.
      Policy 2.a    The city shall require the construction of barriers to mitigate sound emissions where
      necessary and feasible.
      Policy 2.b    The city shall require the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the design of new
      roadway projects in Solana Beach, including Interstate 5 projects.
      Policy 2.c    The city shall minimize potential transportation noise through proper design of street
      circulation, coordination of routing, and other traffic control measures.
      Policy 2.d    The city shall actively support state and federal legislation that may be proposed to
      establish noise control standards to be met by automobile manufacturers.
      Policy 2.e    The city shall exercise its police powers by establishing an intensive motor vehicle
      noise regulation program. This shall include, but not be limited to, pursuing ways to lower the rail
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                     Page 136 of 399
      bed and construct sound walls along the railroad right of way.
      Policy 2.f    The city shall seek measures to minimize noise impacts associated with railroad
      operations.
      Policy 2.g    The city shall explore measures in cooperation with the Federal Aviation Administration
      to minimize noise resulting from low-flying aircraft (including ultralights) and helicopters,
      particularly along coastal areas.
      Policy 2.h    The City shall encourage the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to
      construct sound walls along the San Diego Freeway. Any modifications to the freeway that would
      increase the capacity of the freeway or increase speeds are considered by the City to have the
      potential of significantly noise impacting the residents of Solana Beach. Before any such
      modifications are made necessary mitigation measures such as noise barriers should be
      constructed.
      Objective 3.0
      Establish measures to control impacts from non-transportation noise sources.
      Policy 3.a    The city shall ensure the effective enforcement of city, state and federal noise level
      standards by all appropriate city divisions. The city shall provide quick response to complaints and
      rapid abatement of noise nuisances within the scope of the city’s police powers.
      Policy 3.b    The city shall actively advocate federal regulations for the control of equipment noise
      levels. Currently, Federal regulations only control noise emissions from air compressors.
      Standards may be developed for additional equipment.
      Policy 3.c    The city shall establish noise guidelines for city purchasing policy to take advantage of
      federal regulations and labeling requirements.
      Policy 3.d    The city shall coordinate with the California Occupational Safety and Health
      Administration (Cal-OSHA) to provide information on and enforcement of occupational noise
      requirements within the city.
      Policy 3.e    The city shall cooperate with the Fair Board, the City of Del Mar and all adjacent
      entities (including the cities of Encinitas, San Diego and the County of San Diego) to reduce noise
      impacts from sources outside the city included, but not limited to, concerts.
      Policy 3.f    The city shall adopt a noise ordinance designed to control non-transportation noise
      sources within the city. The noise ordinance will be designed to control industrial and commercial
      sources of noise as well as occasional noise sources such as barking dogs, gas powered dust
      blowers and excessively loud amplified music.
      Objective 4.0
      Integrate the adopted community noise ordinance and related considerations into the city’s
      ongoing land use planning process.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                      Page 137 of 399
      Policy 4.a     The city shall require that potential noise impacts be addressed for all projects as part
      of the initial study per CEQA to determine if unacceptable noise levels will be created or
      experienced. Depending on the level of impact, a noise impact evaluation may be required to be
      undertaken. Should noise abatement be necessary, the city shall require the implementation of
      mitigation measures based on a detailed technical study prepared by a qualified acoustical
      engineer.
      Policy 4.b     The city shall not approve projects that do not comply with the standards established in
      the community noise ordinance concerning noise/land use compatibility unless all practical
      measures have been taken to mitigate potential noise impacts and the City Council adopts a
      “Statement of Overriding Considerations” which provides the rationale for approving such a project.
      Policy 4.c     The city shall establish a noise monitoring program to identify progress in achieving
      noise abatement objectives and to perform necessary updating of the noise element and community
      noise ordinance.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 138 of 399
                                4.0 The Plan for Control and Management of Noise
      In order to achieve the goals and objectives of the Noise Element, an effective implementation
      program developed within the constraints of the City’s financial and staffing capabilities is
      necessary. The underlying purpose is to reduce the number of people exposed to excessive noise
      and to minimize the future effect of noise in the City. The following are the actions that the City
      should consider implementing to control the impacts of noise in Solana Beach.
      Issue 1 – Transportation Noise Control – The most efficient and effective means of controlling
      noise from transportation systems is reducing noise at the source. However, since the City has
      little direct control over source noise levels because of State and Federal preemption (i.e. State
      Motor Vehicle Noise Standards), policies should be focused on reducing the impact of the noise on
      the community. Cooperative efforts with State and Federal offices are essential.
      Action 1      Encourage the use of walls and berms in the design of residential or other noise
      sensitive land uses that are adjacent to major roads, commercial, or industrial areas.
      Action 2      Pursue with Caltrans the issue of sound walls along Interstate 5.
      Action 3      Provide for continued evaluation of truck movements and routes in the City to provide
      effective separation from residential or other noise sensitive land uses.
      Action 4      Encourage the enforcement of State Motor Vehicle noise standards for cars, trucks, and
      motorcycles through coordination with the California Highway Patrol and Solana Beach Police
      Department.
      Action 5      Encourage aircraft overflights to occur over the ocean at least 1 mile off the coast to
      minimize the impact on noise sensitive land uses within the City.
      Issue 2 – Noise and Land Use Planning Integration. Community noise considerations are to be
      incorporated into land use planning. These measures are intended to prevent future noise and land-
      use incompatibilities.
      Action 6      Establish standards that specify acceptable limits of noise for various land uses
      throughout the City. These criteria are designed to fully integrate noise considerations into land use
      planning to prevent new noise/land use conflicts. Exhibit 14 shows criteria used to assess the
      compatibility of proposed land uses with the noise environment. These criteria are the bases for the
      development of specific Noise Standards. These standards, presented in Exhibit 15, define the City
      policies related to land uses and acceptable noise levels. These tables are the primary tools which
      allow the City to ensure noise integrated planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor
      noise.
      Action 7      Incorporate noise reduction features during site planning to mitigate anticipated noise
      impacts on affected noise sensitive land uses. The noise referral zones identified in Exhibits 10 and
      12 (areas exposed to noise levels greater than 55 CNEL) can be used to identify locations of
      potential conflict. New developments will be permitted only if appropriate mitigation measures are
      included such that the standards contained in this Element or an adopted ordinance are met.
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                     Page 139 of 399
      Action 8     Enforce the State of California Uniform Building Code that specifies that the indoor noise
      levels for residential living spaces not exceed 45 dB LDN/CNEL due to the combined effect of all
      noise sources. The State requires implementation of this standard when the outdoor noise levels
      exceed 60 dB LDN/CNEL. The Noise Referral Zones (60 CNEL) can be used to determine when this
      standard needs to be addressed. The Uniform Building Code (specifically, the California
      Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 6, Division T25, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 4, Sections
      T25-28) requires that “Interior community noise levels (CNEL/LDN) with windows closed,
      attributable to exterior sources shall not exceed an annual CNEL or LDN of 45 dB in any habitable
      room.” The code requires that this standard be applied to all new hotels, motels, apartment houses
      and dwellings other than detached single-family dwellings.
      Issue 3 – Community Noise Control for Non-Transportation Noise Sources. The focus of
      control of noise from non-transportation sources is the Community Noise Ordinance. The ordinance
      can be used to protect people from noise generated on adjacent properties.
      Action 9     Amend and adopt a new comprehensive community noise ordinance to ensure that City
      residents are not exposed to excessive noise levels from existing and new stationary noise
      sources. The purpose of the ordinance is to protect people from non-transportation related noise
      sources such as music, machinery and pumps, air conditioners and truck traffic on private
      property. The Noise Ordinance does not apply to motor vehicle noise on public streets, but it does
      apply to vehicles on private property. The Noise Ordinance is designed to protect quiet residential
      areas from stationary noise sources. The noise levels encouraged by the ordinance are typical of a
      quiet residential area.
      Action 10     Enforce the new community Noise Ordinance. The most effective method to control
      community noise impacts from non-transportation noise sources is through application of the
      community noise ordinance.
      Action 11     Monitor upcoming court decisions regarding noise control of operations on State
      property by the City.
      Action 12     Require that new commercial projects, proposed for development near existing
      residential land use, demonstrate compliance with the City Noise Ordinance prior to approval of the
      project.
      Action 13     All new residential projects to be constructed near existing sources of non-
      transportation noise (including but not limited to commercial facilities, public parks with sports
      activities) must demonstrate via an acoustical study conducted by a Registered Engineer that the
      indoor noise levels will be consistent with the limits contained in the noise ordinance.
      Action 14     Require construction activity to comply with limits established in the City Noise
      Ordinance.
      Action 15     Designate one agency in the City to act as the noise control coordinator. This will
      ensure the continued operation of noise enforcement efforts of the City.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                     Page 140 of 399
                                                   5.0 Glossary
      A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
      meter using the A-Weighted filter network. The A-Weighting filter de-emphasizes the very low and
      very high frequency components of the sound in a manner similar to the response of the human
      ear. A numerical method of rating human judgement of loudness.
      AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The composite of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the
      ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given
      location.
      COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT LEVEL (CNEL). The average equivalent A-Weighted sound
      level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of five (5) decibels to sound levels in the evening
      from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. and after addition of ten (10) decibels to sound levels in the night before 7
      a.m. and after 10 p.m.
      DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE LEVEL (LDN). The average equivalent A-Weighted sound level during a
      24-hour day, obtained after addition of ten (10) decibels to sound levels in the night before 7 a.m.
      and after 10 p.m.
      DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to
      the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is
      20 micro-pascals.
      dB(A). A-weighted sound level (see definition above)
      EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL (LEQ). The sound level corresponding to a steady noise level over a
      given sample period with the same amount of acoustic energy as the actual time varying noise
      level. The energy average noise level during the sample period.
      FREQUENCY. The number of times per second that a sound pressure signal oscillates about the
      prevailing atmosphere pressure. The unit of frequency is the hertz. The abbreviation is Hz.
      INTRUSIVE NOISE. That noise which intrudes over and above the ambient noise at a given
      location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency,
      time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
      L10. The A-Weighted sound level exceeded 10 percent of the sample time. Similarly L50, L90, L99,
      etc.
      NOISE. Any unwanted sound or sound which is undesirable because it interferes with speech and
      hearing, or is intense enough to damage hearing, or is otherwise annoying. The State Noise Control
      Act defines noise as “...excessive undesirable sound...”
      NOISE ATTENUATION. The ability of a material, substance, or medium to reduce the noise level
      from one place to another or between one room and another. Noise attenuation is specified in
      decibels.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 141 of 399
      NOISE EXPOSURE CONTOURS. Lines drawn around a noise source indicating constant or equal
      level of noise exposure. CNEL and LDN are typical metrics used.
      NOISE REFERRAL ZONES. Such zones are defined as the area within the contour defining a
      CNEL level of 55 decibels. It is the level at which either State or Federal laws and standards related
      to land use become important and, in some cases, preempted local laws and regulations. Any
      proposed noise sensitive development which may be impacted by a total noise environment of 55
      dB CNEL or more should be evaluated on a project specific basis.
      NOISE SENSITIVE LAND USE. Those specific land uses which have associated indoor and/or
      outdoor human activities that may be subject to stress and/or significant interference from noise
      produced by community sound sources. Such human activity typically occurs daily for continuous
      periods of 24 hours or is of such a nature that noise is significantly disruptive to activities that
      occur for short periods. Specifically, noise sensitive land uses include: residences of all types,
      hospitals, places of worship and schools.
      SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL). The weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound
      level meter having a standard frequency-filter for attenuating part of the sound spectrum.
      SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and
      frequency weighting networks for the measurement and determination of noise and sound levels.
      Appendix A
      Noise Measurement Results
      The following pages present the noise data collected during the measurement survey. The data
      reported is in terms of the Leq, Lmax, and various percentile descriptors. The Leq or noise
      equivalent level represents the energy average noise level. It is the building block of the CNEL
      scale, and the Leq noise level measured at a site during the daytime is usually about equal to the
      CNEL noise level. The CNEL noise level is a 24 hour weighted average noise level as previously
      discussed. The CNEL noise level is not measured directly because it would require that the
      monitoring be conducted continuously at each site for a minimum of 24 hours.
      The Lmax noise level is simply the loudest noise level that was obtained during the monitoring
      period. The L1, L5, L10, etc. are percentile noise levels. The L5, for example, represents the noise
      level that is exceeded 5% of the time. It represents the louder noise levels experienced at the site.
      For example, at a site along Highway 101, the L5 level may be determined primarily by truck pass-
      bys. The L50 noise level is the level that is exceeded half of the time. The L90 and L99 noise levels
      represent the quieter periods at the measurement site. Sometimes these levels are referred to as
      the ambient or background noise levels. Usually, these levels are determined by distant roadways
      or freeways.
      The noise measurement results should be considered as a “snapshot” of the noise environment.
      The noise levels will of course change throughout the day and may change from day to day.
      However, our past experience when repeating measurements on several different days indicates
      that the noise levels do not vary greatly from one day to another. Exceptions to this observation
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                                    Page 142 of 399
      include sites near industrial areas, airports, and construction sites.
      Site 1 is indicative of the residential areas west of Highway 101. The noise level is relatively low
      due primarily to local traffic and some construction activities during the day. Although Highway 101
      could be heard at the site, the noise from the highway appears to be reduced due to the intervening
      buildings, which as a noise barrier. The site was also measured during the evening hours to check
      for potential noise generated by nearby restaurants and other commercial operations.
      Sites 2, 3, and 19 attempted to determine the extent of the noise impact generated by the
      commercial core east of Highway 101. The measurements at Site 2 indicate that the lumber yard
      generates significant levels of noise. Violations by the lumber yard of the Noise Ordinance may
      occur from time to time. All three sites can be significantly impacted by train noise.
      Sites 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 were measurements in residential areas that border low traffic volume
      roadways. The main concern with these sites was how much noise was really generated by these
      low volume roadways, and how intrusive was the noise from the distant major roadways. In our site
      selection meeting, many of the residents felt that this was a noisy part of the City. A second
      purpose of the measurements was to document the noise levels when the fairgrounds were not in
      operation. Generally, our measurements indicated that these were fairly quite areas. Measurement
      results at Sites 4, 5 and 8 at first glance appeared higher than expected. However, the microphone
      location at Sites 4 and 5 was located closer to the street than usual and thus recorded higher
      levels. A portion of the Site 8 data included lawn mower noise.
      Sites 9, 10, and 14 were located along major arterial roadways. The noise data indicate that the
      noise levels are high along these roadways.
      Site 18 was selected as a very quite site near the wetlands area. It was selected to document how
      quite the wetlands currently are. The noise levels measured at this site were the quietest
      encountered during our survey.
      Sites 11 and 17 were designed to measure freeway noise intrusion into the adjacent residential
      area. Houses exist between the freeway and the measurement sites. Site 11 data indicate that the
      substantial noise reduction is provided by the first row of homes along the freeway in protecting the
      second row. Less reduction was observed at Site 17.
      Sites 12, 13, 15, and 16 are representative of various residential location east of the freeway. In
      general, these areas are considered to be relatively quiet. The noise levels at Sites 12 and 13 were
      higher than is typical for this type of area. Further review of the data indicated unusual heavy truck
      activity which appeared to be due to construction activities. Heavy truck noise at Site 12 was made
      even worse at this location due to the roadway grade. Site 15 and 16 had low noise levels typical
      for this type of area.
                                                      Exhibit A
                                             Noise Measurement Results
                         SITE: # 1
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 143 of 399
                     LOCATION: Cliff Street at Acacia Avenue
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 12:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ      Lmax    L1      L5     L10    L33   L50  L90  L99
                     54.8     72.4    66.4    60.6   57.2   50.6  48.6 45.0 43.2
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Construction
                     LAND USE:
                     Commercial/Residential Border
                     COMMENTS:
                     Slight traffic noise from Pacific Coast Highway
                     SITE: # 1
                     LOCATION: Cliff Street at Acacia Avenue
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 7:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ      Lmax    L1      L5     L10    L33   L50  L90  L99
                     49.1     64.7    60.5    52.9   50.5   47.5  46.1 41.3 38.1
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Construction
                     LAND USE:
                     Commercial/Residential Border
                     COMMENTS:
                     Slight traffic noise from Pacific Coast Highway
                     SITE: # 2
                     LOCATION: 202 Cedros Avenue across from Lumber Yard
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 3:00 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ      Lmax    L1      L5     L10    L33   L50  L90  L99
                     64.7     82.7    76.7    69.9   67.3   59.7  57.1 51.1 48.7
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Lumber Yard, Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential/Commercial Border
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 144 of 399
                     COMMENTS:
                     Trucks and Machinery in Lumber Yard are noise source
                     SITE: # 3
                     LOCATION: 209 Rios Avenue
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 3:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1   L5   L10    L33    L50     L90  L99
                     53.3    73.9     66.9 57.3 50.9   46.5   45.3    43.1 42.1
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Very light Traffic
                     SITE: # 4
                     LOCATION: 354 Nardo Avenue
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 4:15 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1   L5   L10    L33    L50     L90  L99
                     61.0    79.9     74.1 67.9 62.3   48.3   44.7    40.1 38.7
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Very light Traffic
                     SITE: # 5
                     LOCATION: Nardo Avenue at Solana Circle
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 4:30 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1   L5   L10    L33    L50     L90  L99
                     62.5    80.3     74.1 69.1 65.9   56.3   50.5    41.3 38.9
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 145 of 399
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Speed limit is 30 MPH
                     SITE: # 6
                     LOCATION: Solana Circle
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 8:45 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1    L5    L10     L33    L50    L90  L99
                     54.8    67.0     63.6  58.6  57.2    54.4   52.6   49.8 48.4
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Light Construction
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Very light traffic
                     SITE: # 7
                     LOCATION: Del Mar Downs at Pepper Tree Lane
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 9:15 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1    L5    L10     L33    L50    L90  L99
                     48.1    61.0     58.8  52.2  50.4    47.2   45.6   42.8 41.8
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Very Light Traffic, Wind Chimes, Single Engine Planes
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential, Church
                     COMMENTS:
                     There is currently no Race Track noise
                     SITE: # 8
                     LOCATION: Highland Court on top of Cliff
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 9:45 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1    L5    L10     L33    L50    L90  L99
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 146 of 399
                     62.4    70.8    67.2  65.0    64.2 62.8   62.0   58.8  55.4
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Lawn Mowers
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential below
                     COMMENTS:
                     There is no Race Track noise
                     SITE: # 9
                     LOCATION: Stevens Avenue in front of City Hall
                     DATE September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 10:00 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5      L10  L33    L50    L90   L99
                     65.6    79.0    74.6  71.2    69.6 64.8   62.0   52.6  47.2
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Commercial
                     COMMENTS:
                     SITE: # 10
                     LOCATION: 505 Lomas Santa Fe Drive
                     DATE September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 10:45 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5      L10  L33    L50    L90   L99
                     72.3    88.4    82.8  76.6    75.0 71.4   69.0   60.6  50.0
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     School, Commercial
                     COMMENTS:
                     Diesel Air Horn is cause of Lmax
                     Traffic Count: 96.2% Cars, 1.1% Medium Truck, 2.6% Heavy
                     Truck
                     SITE: # 11
                     LOCATION: Santa Florencia at Santa Olivia
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 147 of 399
                     TIME: 11:30 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10   L33   L50  L90   L99
                     61.4    76.4     74.0   67.6  64.0  57.0  55.8 53.4  52.2
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Interstate 5 Freeway
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Truck with backup beeper is cause of Lmax
                     SITE: # 12
                     LOCATION: Santa Helena at Santa Victoria
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 11:45 a.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10   L33   L50  L90   L99
                     72.2    97.4     79.8   71.6  68.8  60.2  56.4 50.8  49.0
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Heavy Truck going up grade is cause of Lmax
                     SITE: # 13
                     LOCATION: San Mario Court at Santa Marta Court
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 1:00 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10   L33   L50  L90   L99
                     65.1    81.0     76.0   72.6  69.6  59.8  53.2 43.0  41.4
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential, Golf Course
                     COMMENTS:
                     Heavy Truck is cause of Lmax
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 148 of 399
                     SITE # 14
                     LOCATION: Lomas Santa Fe Drive at Caminode Villas
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 1:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5     L10  L33   L50     L90  L99
                     70.7    84.4    79.0  76.6   75.2 69.8  65.8    52.2 50.2
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential, Golf Course
                     COMMENTS:
                     SITE: # 15
                     LOCATION: Via De La Senda at Vista De La Tierra
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 2:15 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5     L10  L33   L50     L90  L99
                     48.5    63.0    58.0  52.8   49.6 46.6  46.0    44.2 43.2
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Bird Calls
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential, Golf Course
                     COMMENTS:
                     Only two cars drove by location
                     SITE: # 16
                     LOCATION: Avocado Place
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 2:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5     L10  L33   L50     L90  L99
                     54.5    70.6    65.8  57.0   54.0 52.2  51.8    50.2 49.4
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Interstate 5 Freeway
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 149 of 399
                     COMMENTS:
                     SITE: # 17
                     LOCATION: Marine View Avenue
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 3:00 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10    L33  L50  L90   L99
                     66.1    79.6     70.0   67.8  67.2   66.2 65.6 64.0  62.8
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Interstate 5 Freeway
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     SITE: # 18
                     LOCATION: (The Back Road)
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 3:15 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10    L33  L50  L90   L99
                     47.1    53.8     52.0   50.4  49.4   47.2 46.2 43.8  42.4
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Interstate 5 Freeway
                     LAND USE:
                     Residential
                     COMMENTS:
                     Only four cars drove by location
                     SITE: # 19
                     LOCATION: 508 Cedros Avenue
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 3:45 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax     L1     L5    L10    L33  L50  L90   L99
                     58.1    77.3     70.3   59.1  57.3   54.9 53.7 50.7  46.5
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic from Pacific Coast Highway, Train
                     LAND USE:
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code NOISE ELEMENT                                                       Page 150 of 399
                     Commercial/Residential Border
                     COMMENTS:
                     One Amtrak Train with six cars at seventy MPH passed location
                     SITE # 20
                     LOCATION: Pacific Coast Highway at Dahlia Drive
                     DATE: September 10, 1987
                     TIME: 8:15 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5     L10    L33    L50   L90    L99
                     66.8    82.1    77.9  72.5   70.7   64.7   61.9  52.9   49.1
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic, Train
                     LAND USE:
                     Commercial
                     COMMENTS:
                     One Amtrak Train with seven cars at seventy MPH passed
                     location
                     Traffic Count: 98.7% Cars, 0.5% Medium Truck, 0.8% Heavy
                     Truck
                     SITE # 20
                     LOCATION: Pacific Coast Highway at Dahlia Drive
                     DATE: September 11, 1987
                     TIME: 6:15 p.m.
                     MEASURED VALUES (dBA)
                     LEQ     Lmax    L1    L5     L10    L33    L50   L90    L99
                     68.5    80.1    76.3  73.5   72.3   68.5   66.3  58.1   53.1
                     PRIMARY NOISE SOURCES:
                     Traffic
                     LAND USE:
                     Commercial
                     COMMENTS:
                     Traffic Count: 98.3% Cars, 1.1% Medium Truck, 0.6% Heavy
                     Truck
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 151 of 399
                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                         Adopted by Res. 2013-011, passed February 13, 2013.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 152 of 399
                                               Executive Summary
      The Housing Element for the City of Solana Beach is an element of the City’s General Plan. It
      covers the planning period of January 1, 2013 to December 31, 2020.
      Background Information
      Solana Beach, established in 1986, has the second smallest population (12,867 in 2010) in the San
      Diego region. The City covers approximately 3.5 square miles along the Pacific Ocean with Del Mar
      to the south and Encinitas to the north. It is predominantly residential in character. The City has a
      transit station with Amtrak service and commuter rail service via the Coaster to Oceanside and
      downtown San Diego. The City is bisected by Interstate 5, one of the region’s two major north-south
      freeways. East of the freeway is characterized by lower density single-family housing, and west of
      the freeway is characterized by higher density single-family and multi-family housing.
      Needs Assessment
      According to SANDAG’s 2050 Regionwide Forecast, Solana Beach is expected to gain 687 new
      residents and 197 new households between 2008 and 2020. The characteristics of the city’s
      population, housing, and employment that affect its housing goals, policies and programs include:
      Population/Household Characteristics
      •   A larger percentage of residents in the age groups 35 and older than the region.
      •   An ethnic breakdown of 77.3 percent White, 15.9 percent Hispanic, 3.9 percent Asian, and 0.4
      percent Black, 0.2 percent Native American/Alaskan native, 0.1 percent Hawaiian/Pacific Islander,
      and 2.1 percent other or 2+ races.
      •   A smaller household size (2.28) than the region (2.75) reflective of the smaller percentage of
      children and higher percentage of those in the 55+ age group.
      •   A median household income of $86,908 - $23,839 higher than the region.
      Land Use Characteristics
      •   A low supply (approximately 21 acres or one percent) of vacant developable land.
      •   A majority of developed land (56 percent) in residential use.
      Employment Characteristics
      •   An employment base that consists mainly of management/professional, service sector, and
      retail jobs.
      Housing Stock Characteristics
      •   Low rates of housing construction because of the limited availability of vacant land.
      •   A large percentage (48 percent) of single-family homes.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 153 of 399
      •   A higher rate of homeownership (60 percent) than in the region (54 percent)
      •   A median housing price of $840,500 - $520,500 higher than in the region.
      •   Higher rents than in the region.
      Assisted Units at Risk of Converting to Market Rate Rents
      •   One housing unit is at risk of converting in 2019.
      •   One other housing development – Solana Highlands – converted to market rate when its
      covenant with the Housing Authority of the County of San Diego expired in 2010, but the property
      owner is in the process of preparing a redevelopment proposal that could increase the total number
      of units on the site to the maximum allowable density and set aside 32 units as affordable.
      Goals and Policies
      The primary intent of the City of Solana Beach Housing Element is to continue to ensure that
      decent, safe housing is available at a cost that is affordable to current and future residents. To
      achieve this, the City has defined the following goals:
      •   The adequate provision of a range of safe and decent housing opportunities that will meet
      Solana Beach’s share of the existing and future housing needs of the region.
      •   Maintenance, preservation, and enhancement of community and neighborhood character and the
      quality of residential neighborhoods and commercial areas.
      •   Minimized constraints in the development, improvement, preservation, and maintenance of
      housing for all income levels.
      •   Equal access to housing opportunities for all persons regardless of age, race, religion, sex,
      marital status, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, or disability.
      •   A diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community in the
      development of the housing element.
      •   Increased energy conservation and waste reduction in new and existing residential and mixed-
      use development.
      In addition to these goals, the City has included numerous policies to better guide decisions and
      achieve desired outcomes. The City has also established quantified objectives for new housing
      construction based upon the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) as adopted by the San
      Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) that are addressed in this Housing Element. These
      objectives mirror the City’s share of the region’s future housing needs (regional share needs) which
      are divided into four income categories: very low, low, moderate, and above moderate. However, it
      is highly unlikely that adequate subsidies will be available to meet this need. Nonetheless, the City
      will make every effort to meet its lower income housing needs.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 154 of 399
      Table E-1 summarizes the regional share need.
                                                      Table E-1
                                 Regional Housing Growth Needs – Solana Beach
                                                                       Above
                         Very Low        Low          Moderate       Moderate          Total
                            85            65              59             131            340
                           25%          19.1%           17.4%          38.5%          100.0%
      Source: SANDAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment Plan, 2011
      To calculate the projected housing needs for extremely low income, the City assumed 50 percent of
      its very low-income regional housing needs are extremely low-income households. As a result,
      from the very low-income need of 85 units, the City has a projected need of 43 units for extremely
      low-income households.
      In addition to proposing programs to encourage the construction of new affordable housing and
      preservation of existing housing, the Housing Element is required to show that there are adequate
      sites with appropriate zoning and adequate pubic services to accommodate the City’s regional
      share goals. Based on the existing General Plan and Zoning Ordinance, Solana Beach has the
      capacity to accommodate its share of the region’s housing needs with vacant and infill residential
      land; vacant, infill, and redevelopment commercial land with mixed-use potential; and accessory
      living unit capacity.
      Programs
      Programs that Solana Beach will implement to achieve the City’s housing goals, including the
      regional share goals and affordable housing goals, include:
      •    Encouraging mixed-use development.
      •    Encouraging accessory living units.
      •    Continuing to implement the density bonus ordinance.
      •    Continuing to implement the affordable (inclusionary) housing ordinance.
      •    Fulfilling replacement housing obligations.
      •    Addressing and mitigating constraints to housing development.
      •    Amending the zoning ordinance to comply with changes in State law regarding emergency
      shelters and supportive and transitional housing.
      •    Addressing illegal units.
      •    Preserving existing affordable units at risk of converting to market rate.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 155 of 399
      •  Continuing to participate in County programs such as Section 8 Rental Assistance, Residential
      Rehabilitation, and Mortgage Credit Certificate.
      •  Continuing to update the Capital Improvement Program.
      •  Continuing to enforce the condominium conversion policy.
      •  Continuing the residential code enforcement program.
      •  Continuing to distribute fair housing information.
      •  Implementing programs that promote energy conservation.
      •  Implementing effective public communication strategies.
      •  Encouraging the development of affordable housing on City-owned properties.
      These programs provide a range of activities that the City will undertake to promote the provision of
      housing opportunities to serve all income levels.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 156 of 399
                                                    I. Introduction
      This chapter includes a discussion of State housing element requirements and identifies where
      these requirements are addressed in the document. It also includes a summary of the relationship
      between the Housing Element and the other General Plan elements and a description of the public
      participation efforts involved in the preparation of this Housing Element update.
      A.    City Profile
      The charming, seaside community of Solana Beach is nestled along the northern coast of San
      Diego County, and is approximately 23 miles from downtown San Diego. Its main access routes
      include Interstate 5, Highway 101, Lomas Santa Fe Drive, and Via de la Valle. The city enjoys
      temperatures that average 62 degrees in the winter and 77 degrees in the summer. It offers 1.7
      miles of coastline for swimming and surfing. It is a favorite destination for those seeking eclectic
      shops, great dining, golfing, nightlife, and nearby hiking.
      Solana Beach was incorporated in 1986. It has the second smallest population (12,867) of all
      jurisdictions within the region. The City covers approximately 3.5 square miles along the Pacific
      Ocean. It is bordered by the cities of Del Mar and San Diego to the south, the City of Encinitas to
      the north, and the unincorporated community of Rancho Santa Fe to the east.
      The North County Transit District (NCTD) provides public transportation service to the area and
      operates the bus system as well as a commuter light rail service, the Coaster, which runs between
      Oceanside to the north and downtown San Diego to the south. Amtrak also provides rail service to
      Solana Beach as it spans the distance from San Diego to Los Angeles and other northbound
      destinations. Trains stop at the station located in Solana Beach at 105 N. Cedros Avenue.
      Solana Beach is bisected north to south by Interstate 5 and east to west by Lomas Santa Fe Drive,
      which creates four quadrants. Additionally, there is a fifth area bordered by Highway 101 to the east
      and the Pacific Ocean to the west. Residents typically view the City in terms of these five distinct
      areas.
      The City’s proximity to the ocean and its unique community character have resulted in high land
      and housing values. The community is nearly built out, with very little vacant, developable land.
      Solana Beach is an affluent community with a median income of $86,908 and a median home price
      of $840,500.
      B.    State Authorization and Requirements
      The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable living
      environment for every Californian as the State’s main housing goal. Recognizing the important part
      that local planning programs play in pursuit of this goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities
      and counties prepare a housing element as part of their comprehensive general plans. The housing
      element is an important planning tool that identifies the housing needs of the city and establishes an
      action plan to meet those needs.
      Planning to provide housing opportunities for all income levels is extremely important because, in
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 157 of 399
      many cases, there is a wide gap between the cost of housing and a person’s ability to pay for it.
      The cost of housing has risen significantly faster than salaries over the years and the recent
      economic downturn has not improved the situation. Depressed incomes and a higher demand for
      rental housing have widened the gap. There is no state in the U.S. where a full time minimum wage
      worker can afford a two bedroom apartment and very few places in this country where one can
      afford a one bedroom apartment1. “Affordable housing” means that no more than 30 percent of a
      household’s income is spent on housing. According to the 2010 Census, 53 percent of all U.S.
      renters are paying more than 30 percent of their income on housing. In 1960, only 25 percent of
      renters faced such a burden2.
      When people cannot afford their housing expenses, there are ripple effects such as overcrowded
      households; dilapidated housing conditions as residents are unable to afford to maintain their
      properties; an increased homeless population; longer commutes and associated air quality
      problems as people try to find more affordable housing farther away from where they work; and
      potential economic impacts if businesses, unable to find employees that can afford to live in the
      area, relocate to other communities.
      Section 65583 of the California Government Code sets forth the specific components to be
      contained in a community’s housing element. Table I-1 summarizes these State requirements and
      identifies the sections in the Solana Beach Housing Element where they are addressed.
                                                      Table I-1
                                       State Housing Element Requirements
                                                                                      Reference
               Required Housing Element Component                                     Page Begins
               A.   Housing Needs Assessment, Resources, and Constraints
                    1.   Analysis of population trends and projections.                11
                    2.   Analysis of employment trends and projections.                32
                    3.   Quantification of existing and projected housing needs for    44
                         all income levels, including extremely low income
                         households.
                    4.   Analysis and documentation of household characteristics,      20
                         including level of payment and ability to pay, overcrowding,
                         and housing stock condition.
                    5.   An inventory of land suitable for residential development     115
                         including vacant sites and those having redevelopment
                         potential and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
                         public facilities and services to those sites.
                    6.   The identification of a zone or zones where emergency         68
                         shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a
                         conditional use permit or other discretionary permit and
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 158 of 399
                     which have sufficient capacity to accommodate at least one
                     year round shelter.
                7.   An analysis demonstrating that existing or proposed permit 68
                     processing, development, and management standards are
                     objective and encourage and facilitate the development of,
                     or conversion to, emergency shelters.
                8.   An analysis of potential and actual governmental              60
                     constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or
                     development of housing for all income levels, including
                     multi-family rental housing, factory-built housing,
                     mobilehomes, housing for agricultural workers, supportive
                     housing, single-room occupancy units, emergency shelters,
                     and transitional housing, and for persons with disabilities.
                9.   Efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder        69
                     meeting the regional housing need allocations and from
                     meeting the need for persons with disabilities, supportive
                     housing, transitional housing, and emergency shelters.
                10. An analysis of potential and actual non-governmental           81
                     constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or
                     development of housing for all income levels, including the
                     availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of
                     construction.
                11. An analysis of special housing needs, such as those of the 21
                     elderly; persons with disabilities, including developmental
                     disabilities; large families; farmworkers, families with
                     female heads of households; and families and persons in
                     need of emergency shelter.
                12. Opportunities for energy conservation.                         58
                13. An analysis of existing assisted housing developments that 44
                     are eligible to change from low-income housing uses during
                     the next 10 years due to termination of subsidy contracts,
                     mortgage pre-payment, or expiration of restrictions on use.
            B.   Goals and Policies
                1.   A statement of the community’s goals, quantified              84
                     objectives, and policies related to the maintenance,
                     preservation, improvement, and development of housing.
            C.   Programs
                1.   A program that sets forth a schedule of actions during the    87
                     planning period, each with a timeline for implementation,
                     which may recognize that certain programs are ongoing,
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 159 of 399
                       such that there will be beneficial impacts of the programs
                       within the planning period.
                       a.    Identify actions that will make sites available with      N/A
                             appropriate zoning and development standards to
                             accommodate the City’s RHNA.
                       b.    Assist in the development of housing to meet the          87
                             needs of extremely low, very low, low, and moderate
                             income households.
                       c.    Address, and where possible, remove governmental          91
                             constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and
                             development of housing.
                       d.    Conserve and improve the condition of the existing        96
                             affordable housing stock
                       e.    Promote housing opportunities for all persons             100
                             regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, or
                             disability.
                       f.    Preserve assisted housing developments identified as 97
                             “at risk” of converting to market rate.
                       g.    Identify agencies and officials responsible for the       95
                             implementation of the various actions and means by
                             which consistency will be achieved with other general
                             plan elements and community goals.
                       h.    Include a diligent effort to achieve public participation 8, 101
                             of all economic segments of the community in the
                             development of the housing element.
      State housing element law changed in 2008 as a result of Senate Bill 375 to require housing
      elements to be updated at least every eight years (previously it was every five years) to reflect a
      community’s changing housing needs and better synchronize the Regional Transportation Plan
      (RTP) process with the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). Any local government that
      does not adopt a housing element within 120 days of the statutory deadline falls out of the eight
      year cycle and must adopt an element every four years. The statutory deadline for this Housing
      Element cycle is April 30, 2013.
      C.   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      The Solana Beach’s General Plan contains elements addressing Land Use, Circulation, Housing,
      Conservation and Open Space, Noise, Safety, and Economic Development. The content of this
      Housing Element is consistent with the goals and policies of all other elements of the General Plan.
      The City must ensure that the General Plan and its elements form an integrated, internally
      consistent, and compatible statement of development policies 3. All elements of a general plan,
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 160 of 399
      whether they are mandatory or optional, are regarded as equally important. In addition, the goals
      and policies within each element are consistent with each other and with the other elements of the
      plan. The City will ensure that the Housing Element remains consistent with any
      amendments/updates to other elements of the General Plan during this Housing Element cycle.
      D.    Public Participation
      As part of the Housing Element update process, the City utilized a variety of methods to engage the
      public including workshops, City Council update meetings, an online questionnaire, a General Plan
      Update website, public review of the draft document, and public hearings prior to adoption. The first
      public workshop was held on May 10, 2012. The City issued a press release regarding the
      workshop and it was also noticed through announcements at City Council meetings; through
      Facebook, Twitter, and Email blasts; a mass mailing to a number of stakeholders including, but not
      limited to, non-profit and for-profit housing developers, service providers, housing advocates, and
      citizen committees (see Appendix C); and flyers posted throughout the City at public parks, the
      library, apartment complexes, and churches. There were approximately 15 attendees and the
      meeting was broadcast online so people could watch from home. The workshop included a
      presentation to provide an overview of the purpose of the Housing Element and the State
      requirements for the document. Following the presentation, participants were organized into small
      groups and given questions to consider from the perspectives of different people, including those
      with special needs, such as the elderly, large households, single mothers, farmworkers, homeless
      individuals and families, persons with disabilities, etc. to identify potential similarities and
      differences in their housing needs or choices. They were also asked to consider the best way for
      Solana Beach to accommodate its regional housing needs given the community’s constraints. A
      number of suggestions were provided including encouraging underground parking to maximize the
      developable area of a lot, encouraging lot consolidation of smaller sites to facilitate more effective
      multi-family housing, and encouraging redevelopment of the single-story structures along Highway
      101 to include residential uses on upper floors.
      The City also launched a General Plan Update website to keep people informed of the process. The
      website also includes additional opportunities for the public to respond to questions regarding the
      Housing Element update and email comments to staff.
      An online questionnaire was released in May of 2012 and is still available for people to respond to.
      The City noticed the availability of the online questionnaire through announcements at City Council
      meetings; through Facebook, Twitter, and Email blasts; through a press release and notice posted
      in the local newspaper; flyers posted throughout the City at public parks, the library, apartment
      complexes, churches, coffee shops, a grocery store, the golf course, and train station; flyers
      distributed by the local school district; hard copies of the questionnaire available at the permitting
      counter; and flyers distributed during Fiesta del Sol, a major annual family and community event
      featuring live music, arts & crafts, children’s activities, and food and drinks. The questionnaire asks
      respondents to review the existing Housing Element goals, policies, and programs and identify
      additional considerations for the update. To date, there are 84 responses to the questionnaire.
      Responses have ranged from not wanting any new development, to wanting more mixed-use
      development, especially at the train station, to create an identifiable downtown area. Specific
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 161 of 399
      suggestions included, but were not limited to:
      •   Ensuring that community character is preserved,
      •   Providing incentives for energy efficiency,
      •   Reducing development fees,
      •   Preserving existing affordable and rental housing,
      •   Encouraging mixed use,
      •   Providing housing for lower income residents and relatively inexpensive housing for people who
      work in Solana Beach,
      •   Reducing residential densities,
      •   Developing over the train station parking lot,
      •   Integrating affordable housing throughout the community rather than concentrating it in one area,
      •   Letting the market decide what to build,
      •   Not building any more affordable housing, and
      •   Not changing anything.
      A public City Council Update meeting was held on June 13, 2012 to provide an update on the
      existing conditions research and public outreach efforts to date. A presentation was given that
      summarized 2010 Census data and feedback received from the first public workshop and online
      questionnaire.
      The second public workshop was held on July 18, 2012. It was noticed the same as the first public
      workshop with additional flyers posted around the city at coffee shops, a grocery store, the train
      station, and the golf course. There were 31 attendees and the workshop was broadcast online so
      people could watch from home. The second public workshop began with an introductory
      presentation regarding the status of the update, the State requirements, and the public input
      received to date. Following the presentation, participants were asked to organize into small groups.
      They were given the draft goals, policies, and programs to consider as well as a hypothetical
      affordable housing project intended to help generate discussion. In general, the community
      expressed concern over the State’s density bonus law, which permits developers to request
      deviations to development standards and concern over potential parking and traffic impacts
      associated with new residential development. There was a desire to require more bicycle parking
      and bike facilities if a reduction in vehicular parking is requested, provide incentives for bicycle
      use, and implement a bike share program. Opportunities to encourage sustainable development,
      including such features as renewable energy, use of recycled materials, and drought tolerant
      landscaping were looked upon favorably. Suggestions for accommodating affordable housing
      included integrating it into a mixed-use project or converting existing market-rate apartments to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 162 of 399
      affordable units. There was also a request to facilitate aging in place in the policies and address
      sexual orientation in the anti-discrimination policies.
      The results of the public participation efforts have been posted on the City’s website and many of
      these comments have been incorporated into the Housing Element, such as encouraging
      sustainable green building practices, promoting opportunities to age in place, and continuing to
      encourage accessory living units. There will be additional opportunities for public comment as the
      update process continues. The draft document has been released for public review. The City of
      Solana Beach, as the lead agency, has also prepared a Negative Declaration (ND) in accordance
      with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). A subsequent notice and draft ND has been
      released for public review. Additionally, a noticed public hearing(s) will occur prior to the City
      Council’s adoption of the Housing Element. In Solana Beach, the City Council performs the
      Planning Commission functions.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 163 of 399
                                         II. Housing Needs Assessment
      This chapter of the Housing Element examines general population and household characteristics
      and trends, such as age, race and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size,
      household income, and special needs. Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g., number
      of units and type, tenure, age and condition, costs) are also addressed. Finally, the City’s projected
      housing growth needs based on the 2010-2020 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are
      examined. This Needs Assessment will be important to the identification of appropriate goals,
      policies, and programs for the City to implement during the 2013-2020 housing element cycle.
      The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data from the 2010 U.S. Census,
      California Department of Finance (DOF), California Employment Development Department (EDD),
      San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG), the City of Solana Beach, and other relevant
      sources.
      A.    Demographics
      1.   Population Trends
      Solana Beach was incorporated in 1986. However, the city experienced most of its population
      growth before incorporation between 1970 and 1980 when the population grew dramatically from
      5,023 to 13,047. Since 1980, the population has remained fairly constant declining only slightly
      between 1980 and 1990 and 2000 and 2010. San Diego County experienced a relatively large
      amount of growth between 1970 and 1990 and although the County’s population continues to
      increase, the rate of growth has been declining over the years.
                                                     Table II-1
                                         Population Trends (1970-2010)
                                     Solana Beach and San Diego County
                                                             Population
               Jurisdiction          1970            1980          1990        2000          2010
               Solana Beach          5,023          13,047        12,950      12,979        12,867
               San Diego
               County              1,357,854      1,861,846     2,480,100   2,813,833     3,095,313
                                                              % Change
               Jurisdiction       1970-1980      1980-1990      1990-2000         2000-2010
               Solana Beach          160%            -1%            0%                -1%
               San Diego
               County                 37%            33%           13%               10%
      Sources: US Census Bureau & Department of Finance Population Estimates, Historical Data
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 164 of 399
                                             Figure II-A
                                Solana Beach Population (1970-2010)
      Sources: US Census Bureau & Department of Finance Population Estimates, Historical Data
                                             Figure II-B
                              San Diego County Population (1970-2010)
      Sources: US Census Bureau & Department of Finance Population Estimates, Historical Data
                                             Figure II-C
                                         Population Change
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 165 of 399
                                     Solana Beach and San Diego County
                                                 (1970-2010)
      Sources: US Census Bureau & Department of Finance Population Estimates, Historical Data
      2.   Projected Population Estimates
      Figure II-D compares projected population growth in the City of Solana Beach to that of the
      surrounding North County coastal cities and the San Diego Region as a whole based on SANDAG’s
      2050 Regional Growth Forecast. Between 2008 and 2020, it is anticipated that the population of the
      San Diego region will grow by approximately 13 percent, a gain of 403,448 residents. During this
      time period, Solana Beach is expected to grow by approximately five percent, a gain of 687
      residents. Between 2020 and 2050, the region’s population is expected to increase by 24 percent,
      while the population in Solana Beach is expected to increase by 13 percent. Lower growth rates in
      Solana Beach, Del Mar, and Encinitas can partially be attributed to limited land availability.
                                                  Figure II-D
                                       Projected Change in Population
                                       North County Coastal Cities and
                                        San Diego County (2008-2050)
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 166 of 399
      Source: SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast
      3.   Age
      Housing demand within the market is often determined by the preferences of certain age groups.
      Different age groups require different accommodations based on lifestyle, family type, income level,
      and housing preference. Traditionally, both the young adult population (20-34) and the elderly
      population tend to favor apartments, low- to moderate-cost condominiums, and smaller single-
      family units. Persons between 35 and 65 often provide the major market for moderate to high cost
      apartments and condominiums and larger single family units because they tend to have higher
      incomes and larger sized households.
      Table II-2 provides a comparison of the city’s and county’s population by age group in 2010. This
      table shows that Solana Beach has an older population than San Diego County with the median age
      at 43.7, which is 9 years older than the county median. The proportion of young adults (18-24)
      makes up only 5.7 percent of the city’s population compared to 11.9 percent of the county as a
      whole. Nearly 30 percent of Solana Beach’s population is between the ages of 45 and 64. Those
      aged 65 and over make up approximately 18.7 percent of Solana Beach’s population compared to
      11.4 percent of the county’s population.
                                                    Table II-2
                                                Age Distribution
                                           Solana Beach              San Diego County
                     Age Group        Persons          %           Persons           %
                    Under 18
                    years               2,378        18.5%         724,168         23.4%
                    18 to 24
                    years                734          5.7%         367,845         11.9%
                    25 to 44
                    years               3,518        27.3%         891,485         28.8%
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 167 of 399
                    45 to 64
                    years               3,829            29.8%         760,390         24.6%
                    65 to 74
                    years               1,314            10.2%         180,554         5.8%
                    75 to 84             727             5.7%          116,911         3.8%
                    85 and over          363             2.8%           53,960         1.7%
                    Total             12,867            100.0%        3,095,313       100.0%
                    Median Age                   43.7                           34.6
      Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-P1:Age Groups and Sex
                                                      Figure II-E
                          Age Distribution for San Diego County and Solana Beach
      4.   Race/Ethnicity
      Information on ethnicity is important to an analysis of housing demand, as ethnicity tends to
      correlate with other characteristics such as family size, location choices, and mobility. The racial
      and ethnic composition of the city differs significantly from the county in that a larger proportion of
      city residents are White. Approximately 77 percent of city residents are White, contrasted with 49
      percent for the county as a whole. Hispanics or Latinos make up the next largest percentage of the
      population at 16 percent, which is still significantly less than the Hispanic or Latino population
      countywide, which represents approximately 32 percent of the total population. The Asian and Black
      or African American population also contributes to a much smaller percentage of the Solana Beach
      population compared to San Diego County.
                                                       Table II-3
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 168 of 399
                                                Race and Ethnicity
                                                 Solana Beach                  San Diego County
                                              Persons             %           Persons         %
               Not Hispanic or Latino          10,819           84.1%        2,103,965      68.0%
                 White                         9,944            77.3%        1,500,047      48.5%
                 Black or African
                 American                        56              0.4%         146,600        4.7%
                 American
                 Indian/Alaska Native            26              0.2%          14,098        0.5%
                 Asian                          506              3.9%         328,058       10.6%
                 Native
                 Hawaiian/Pacific
                 Islander                        19              0.1%          13,504        0.4%
                 Other Races or 2+
                 races                          268              2.1%         101,658        3.3%
               Hispanic or Latino (any
               race)                           2,048            15.9%         991,348       32.0%
               Total                           12,867          100.0%        3,095,313      100.0%
      Sources: 2010 Census, Table QT-P4: Race, Combinations of Two Races, and Not Hispanic or
        Latino
      B.   Household Characteristics
      Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a city.
      The Census defines a “household” as all persons occupying a housing unit, which may include
      single persons living alone, families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons sharing
      a single unit. Persons in group quarters such as dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or
      other group living situations are included in population totals, but are not considered households.
      1.   Projected Households
      According to SANDAG, in 2008, there were 1,074,896 households in the region. Of these,
      approximately 0.5 percent were located in Solana Beach. Figure II-F shows that between 2008 and
      2020, it is anticipated that the number of households in the San Diego region will grow by 126,070, a
      gain of approximately 12 percent. During this same time period, the number of households in
      Solana Beach is expected to increase by 197 households, a gain of approximately three percent.
      The City will still account for approximately 0.5 percent of the region’s households.
                                                     Figure II-F
                                 Projected Change in the Number of Households
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 169 of 399
                               Solana Beach and the San Diego Region (2008-2020)
      Source: SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast
      2.    Household Composition and Size
      Table II-4 provides a comparison of households by type for Solana Beach and San Diego County as
      a whole, as reported in the 2010 Census. Family households comprised approximately 58 percent
      of all households in the city, about 8 percentage points lower than the county, where families
      encompassed approximately 66 percent of all households. There are more non-family households in
      Solana Beach than the County as a whole (42 percent city vs. 34 percent county) as well as singles
      living alone (31 percent city vs. 24 percent county). The city’s average household size of 2.28 is
      slightly lower than San Diego County as a whole (2.75). These statistics suggest that the need for
      large units in Solana Beach may be slightly lower than other areas of the county.
                                                     Table II-4
                                             Household Composition
                                                Solana Beach                 San Diego County
                       Type               Households              %       Households         %
               Total Households               5,650            100.0%      1,086,865      100.0%
                 Families                     3,283             58.1%       720,480       66.3%
                 - w/children under
                 18                           1,304             23.1%       376,118       34.6%
                 Non-family
                 households                   2,367             41.9%       366,685       33.7%
                 - Single living
                 alone                        1,745             30.9%       261,217       24.0%
               Average household
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 170 of 399
               size                                  2.28                           2.75
      Sources: US Census 2010, Table QT-P11: Households and Families
      3.    Housing Tenure
      Communities need an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to
      accommodate a range of households with varying income, family size and composition, and
      lifestyle. Table II-5 provides a comparison of the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied
      units in the city in 2010 as compared to the county as a whole. It reveals that the level of
      homeownership for the city (60 percent) is somewhat higher than that for the county as a whole (54
      percent).
                                                    Table II-5
                                               Household Tenure
                                               Solana Beach                  San Diego County
                      Tenure                 Units               %           Units            %
               Owner Occupied                3,401            60.2%         591,025         54.4%
               Renter Occupied               2,249            39.8%         495,840         45.6%
               Total occupied units          5,650             100%        1,086,865        100%
      Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-H3: Household Population and Household Type by Tenure
      4.    Household Income
      Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community. Income levels
      influence the range of housing prices within a community and the ability of the population to afford
      housing. As household income increases, the easier it becomes to own a home. As household
      income decreases, households tend to pay a disproportionate amount of their income for housing
      and the number of persons occupying unsound and overcrowded housing increases.
      Household incomes in Solana Beach tend to be higher than those in the San Diego region as a
      whole. According to the 2010 Census, the median household income in Solana Beach was $86,908,
      which is approximately 38 percent higher than the San Diego County median income of $63,069
      (Table II-6).
                                                    Table II-6
                                           Median Household Income
                                                         Median      % of County
                                                       Household         Median
                                   Jurisdiction          Income          Income
                                Solana Beach             $86,908          138%
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                         Page 171 of 399
                              Del Mar                $112,566         178%
                              Encinitas               $86,845         138%
                              Carlsbad                $84,728         134%
                              Oceanside               $60,864          97%
                              Escondido               $51,675          82%
                              San Marcos              $58,897          93%
                              City of San Diego       $62,480          99%
                              San Diego County        $63,069         100%
                              California             $60,883           97%
      Source: 2010 Census, S1903: Median Income in the Past 12 Months
      Figure II-G compares household income in Solana Beach and in the San Diego region in 2008
      based on SANDAG estimates. The values are reported in 1999 dollars adjusted for inflation.
      Approximately 53 percent of households had incomes over $60,000, which is approximately 17
      percent more than regionwide. Approximately 33 percent of Solana Beach households earned
      $100,000 or more, compared to 14 percent regionwide. Approximately 23 percent of Solana Beach
      residents earned less than $30,000 compared to 33 percent regionwide.
                                                 Figure II-G
                                       Household Income (1999 Dollars)
                                 Solana Beach and San Diego County (2010)
      Source: SANDAG Current Estimates 2010
      The median area income for San Diego County is $63,069. Extremely low income is defined as 30
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 172 of 399
      percent median area income ($18,120), very low income is 50 percent median area income
      ($31,535), and low income is 80 percent median area income ($50,455). As shown in Table II-7, the
      Census categories roughly correspond to these income limits giving a sense of the number of
      households within these categories. More than half of the households in Solana Beach are in the
      above-moderate income category. Approximately 16.4 percent are within the moderate income
      category, 8.5 percent are in the low income category, 6.9 percent are within the very low income
      category and 10.3 percent are within the extremely low income category.
                                                     Table II-7
                           Solana Beach Households by Income Category (2010)
                  Income Category           Income Limit      Census Category % of Households
             Extremely Low (≤30%
             AMI)                               $18,920       Less than $20,000        10.3%
             Very Low (31-50% AMI)              $31,535         $20,000-$34,999         6.9%
             Low (51-80% AMI)                   $50,455         $35,000-$49,999         8.5%
             Moderate (81-120% AMI)             $75,683         $50,000-$74,999        16.4%
             Above moderate (120%+
             AMI)                              $75,683+            $75,000+            56.2%
      Source: 2010 Census Table B25106: Tenure by Housing Costs as a Percentage of Household
        Income in the Past 12 Months
      5.   Overcrowding
      Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The U.S.
      Census Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than one person per
      room, excluding bathrooms and kitchens, and severely overcrowded when there are more than 1.5
      occupants per room. Table II-8 summarizes the incidence of overcrowding for Solana Beach as
      compared to San Diego County as a whole.
                                                     Table II-8
                                                   Overcrowding
                                                Solana Beach                 San Diego County
                Household Type           Households           Percent     Households     Percent
             Owner-Occupied                   3,272            100.0%       593,945       100.0%
                Overcrowded                      0                0%         11,782        2.0%
                Severely
                overcrowded                     12              0.37%        3,989         0.67%
             Renter-Occupied                  2,333            100.0%       467,844       100.0%
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 173 of 399
                  Overcrowded                  47              2.0%          28,834        6.2%
                  Severely
                  overcrowded                  36              1.5%          16,069        3.4%
      Source: 2010 Census, Table B25014: Tenure by Occupants per Room
      The data indicates that overcrowding is more prevalent among renters than for owner-occupied
      units. Approximately 3.5 percent of the city’s renter-occupied households were overcrowded as of
      2010 compared to 0.37 percent of owner-occupied households. This trend is also apparent in the
      statistics for San Diego County. San Diego County as a whole has a greater percentage of
      overcrowded units than Solana Beach for both renter- and owner-occupied units.
      6.   Overpayment
      According to State housing policy, overpaying occurs when housing costs exceed 30 percent of
      gross household income. Table II-9 displays estimates for overpayment in 2010 by lower-income
      households in Solana Beach. The data shows that, among renters, approximately 94 percent of all
      lower income households are paying more than 30 percent of their income on housing. Extremely
      low income households face the greatest burden with 100 percent overpaying for housing.
      Approximately 80 percent of owner-occupied lower income households are overpaying for housing.
      Again, the percentage of extremely low income households overpaying is higher at 94 percent. In
      contrast, approximately 37% of moderate and above moderate renters are overpaying for housing
      and 32% of moderate and above moderate owners are overpaying.
      Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits that help to
      compensate for high housing costs, lower-income homeowners may need to defer maintenance or
      repairs due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For lower-income renters, severe cost
      burdens can require families to double up resulting in overcrowding and related problems.
                                                    Table II-9
                                                  Overpayment
                                                  Renters                          Owners
                 Income Category         Households          Percent       Households    Percent
               Extremely low
               income households
               (less than $20,000)           274                              303
                  Households
                  overpaying                 274               100%           285          94%
               Very low income
               households
               ($20,000-34,999)              240                              145
                  Households
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 174 of 399
                   overpaying                 214             89.2%          116           80%
                Low income
                households
                ($35,000-49,999)              302                            175
                   Households
                   overpaying                 279             92.4%           99          56.6%
                All lower-income
                households                    816                            623
                All lower-income
                households
                overpaying           767                  94%           500            80.3%
                Moderate income
                households
                ($50,000-74,999)              549                            369
                   Households
                   overpaying                 388             70.7%          183          49.6%
                Above moderate
                income households
                ($75,000+)                    872                           2,280
                   Households
                   overpaying                 131              15%           652          28.6%
                All moderate and
                above moderate
                income households            1,421                          2,649
                All moderate and
                above moderate
                income households
                overpaying           519                  36.5%         835            31.5%
      Source: 2010 Census Table B25106: Tenure by Housing Costs as a Percentage of Household
        Income in the Past 12 Months
      C.   Special Needs Groups
      The following special needs groups have a significant impact upon the demand for housing. Often
      these groups “compete” for the same housing due to lack of affordable housing. Identifying special
      needs groups is necessary to fully assess Solana Beach’s housing needs and to meet Housing
      Element requirements. The special needs groups analyzed include the elderly, people with
      disabilities, homeless people, single parents, migrant and/or farm workers, large households, and
      students. Many of these groups overlap, for example, many migrant and/or farm workers are
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Page 175 of 399
      homeless and many elderly people have a disability of some type. The majority of these special
      needs groups would be assisted by an increase in affordable housing, especially housing located
      near transit stations.
      1.   Elderly
      The limited income of many elderly persons often makes it difficult for them to find affordable
      housing. In the San Diego region, the elderly spend a higher percentage of their income on food,
      housing, medical care, and personal care than non-elderly families. Many elderly persons are
      dependent on fixed incomes or have disabilities. Elderly homeowners may be physically unable to
      maintain their homes or cope with living alone. The housing needs of this group can be addressed
      through smaller units, second units on lots with existing homes, shared living arrangements,
      congregate housing and housing assistance programs.
      In 2010, there were 1,616 households in Solana Beach where the householder was 65 or older
      (Table II-10). Of the households age 65 or over, approximately 49 percent were over age 75.
                                                   Table II-10
                                        Elderly Households by Tenure
                                                 Owners                          Renters
              Householder Age          Households              %       Households            %
              Under 65 years               2,119             62.3%         1,915           85.1%
              65 to 74 years                701              20.6%          128            5.7%
              75 to 84 years                416              12.2%           88            3.9%
              85 and over                   165              4.9%           118            5.2%
              Total households             3,401             100%          2,249           100%
      Source: 2010 Census, QT-H2 Tenure, Household Size, and Age of Householder
      Figure II-H shows that homeownership rates are higher for householders 65 and over than for
      householders aged 15 to 64. In Solana Beach, approximately 53 percent of householders 65 and
      over owned their own home, compared to 25 percent of householders aged 15 to 64. This trend can
      also be seen countywide. However, homeownership rates in Solana Beach are higher for both age
      groups than countywide.
                                                   Figure II-H
                                          Homeownership Rates for
                                        Householders Age 65 and Over
                                 Solana Beach and San Diego County (2010)
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 176 of 399
      Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-H2 Tenure, Household Size, and Age of Householder
      Table II-11 shows that in 2010, Solana Beach had the second highest percentage of elderly persons
      in the North County coastal area. Approximately 18.7 percent of residents were age 65 and over,
      compared to 11.4 percent countywide.
                                                  Table II-11
                                          Persons Age 65 and Over
                                         North County Coastal Cities
                                        and San Diego County (2010)
                                                                              Percent of
                Jurisdiction            Total Population Population 65+       Population 65+
                 Carlsbad                    105,328              14,798           14.0%
                 Del Mar                       4161                 866            20.8%
                 Encinitas                    59,518               7,643           12.8%
                 Oceanside                   167,086              21,501           12.9%
                 Solana Beach            12,867            2,404               18.7%
                 San Diego County           3,095,313            351,425           11.4%
      Source: 2010 Census, DP-1 Profile of General Population and Housing Characteristics
      A smaller percentage of persons aged 65 and over in Solana Beach live below the poverty level, as
      shown by Table II-12. In 2010, approximately 7.8 percent of San Diego County residents aged 65
      and over were living in poverty compared to 4.4 percent in Solana Beach.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 177 of 399
                                                       Table II-12
                                   Poverty Status for Persons Age 65 and Over
                                   Solana Beach and San Diego County (2010)
                                                           Persons 65+
                                       Total Population Below the             Percent Below
                    Jurisdiction       65+                 Poverty Level      Poverty Level
                    Solana Beach              2,444                107               4.4%
                    San Diego
                    County                  330,093              25,791              7.8%
      Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey, S1701 Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months
      2.   Persons with Disabilities
      Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination – significantly limit the supply of
      housing available to households of persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need for
      persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs. Most single-family homes are
      inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to
      widened doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered countertops, and other
      features necessary for accessibility. Location of housing is also an important factor for many
      persons with disabilities, as they often rely on public transportation to travel to necessary services
      and shops.
      Additionally, disabilities can hinder the ability of a person to earn an adequate income to afford
      housing. Housing advocacy groups report that people with disabilities are often the victims of
      discrimination in the home buying market. People with disabilities, whether they work or receive
      disability income, are often perceived to be a greater financial risk than persons without disabilities
      with identical income amounts.
      At the time this document was prepared, 2010 disability Census data was not yet available.
      However, because Solana Beach’s population has not changed much between 2000 and 2010,
      information from 2000 is still considered relevant. According to 2000 figures, approximately 225
      people between 16 and 64 years of age, or about 2.6 percent of the working age population,
      reported an employment disability (see Table II-13). Of those aged 65 and over, 98 people (about
      4.3 percent) reported some form of physical disability. Reported disabilities included persons
      whose disability hinders their ability to go outside the home (0.2 percent of the working age
      population and 2.3 percent of the senior population). Housing opportunities for the disabled
      population can be maximized through housing assistance programs and providing universal design
      features such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered countertops, single-level units and ground
      floor units.
                                                       Table II-13
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                         Page 178 of 399
                                        Persons with Disabilities by Age –
                                               Solana Beach (2000)
                                  Disability by Age        Persons         Percent
                            Age 5 to 15 - total persons*      1,434           --
                              Sensory disability                0           0.0%
                              Physical disability               7           0.5%
                              Mental disability                 41          2.9%
                              Self-care disability              0           0.0%
                            Age 16 to 64 - total persons*     8,601           --
                              Sensory disability                39          0. 5%
                              Physical disability               99          1.2%
                              Mental disability                 80          0.9%
                              Self-care disability              15          0.2%
                              Go-outside-the-home
                              disability                        13          0.2%
                              Employment disability            225          2.6%
                            Age 65 and over* - total
                            persons*                          2,259           --
                              Sensory disability               107          4.7%
                              Physical disability               98          4.3%
                              Mental disability                 47          2.1%
                              Self-care disability              0           0.0%
                              Go-outside-the-home
                              disability                       53           2.3%
      Source: 2000 Census, Table PCT026 Sex by Age by Types of Disability for the Civilian Non-
        Institutionalized Population 5+
      Note: Totals may exceed 100% due to multiple disabilities per person
      *Numbers in shaded rows represent persons, not disabilities. Persons may report more than one
        disability.
      Senate Bill 812 requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of persons with
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 179 of 399
      developmental disabilities. A developmental disability is defined as a disability that originates before
      an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
      constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This includes mental retardation, cerebral
      palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
      The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the California State Council on
      Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can be
      defined as developmentally disabled is 1.8 percent. Using this figure, approximately 232 persons in
      the City of Solana Beach are estimated to have a developmental disability based on the 2010
      Census population. The San Diego Regional Center (SDRC) serves people with developmental
      disabilities. As of April 2012, the SDRC had 12 clients in Solana Beach, eight adults and four
      children.
      Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
      housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where
      supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
      environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
      disabilities exist before adulthood, supportive housing for the developmentally disabled should
      focus on the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
      independence as an adult.
      3.    Homeless Persons
      Throughout the country and the San Diego region, homelessness has become an increasing issue.
      Factors contributing to the rise in homelessness include a lack of housing affordable to low and
      moderate income persons, increases in the number of persons whose incomes fall below the
      poverty level, reductions in public subsidies to the poor, and the de-institutionalization of the
      mentally ill.
      Legislation governing housing elements (Section 65583(a)(7)) mandates that municipalities address
      the special needs of homeless persons within their jurisdictional boundaries. “Homelessness” as
      defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), includes individuals or
      families who:
      •   Lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence, which includes a primary nighttime
      residence that is:
      o    Not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation (including car, park,
      abandoned building, bus/train station, airport, or camping ground); or
      o    A publicly or privately operated shelter or transitional housing, including a hotel or motel paid for
      by government or charitable organizations.
      •   In addition, a person is considered homeless if he or she is being discharged from an institution
      where he or she has been a resident for 90 days or less and the person resided in a shelter (but not
      transitional housing) or place not meant for human habitation immediately prior to entering that
      institution.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 180 of 399
      This definition does not include persons living in substandard housing (unless it has been officially
      condemned); persons living in overcrowded housing (e.g., doubled up with others), or persons who
      may be at risk of homelessness (e.g. living temporarily with family or friends).
      The Regional Task Force on the Homeless is San Diego County’s leading resource for information
      on issues of homelessness. Established in 1984 as the San Diego Mayor’s Task Force on
      Homelessness, the Task Force promotes a regional approach as the best solution to ending
      homelessness in San Diego County. The Task Force is a public/private effort to build a base of
      understanding about the multiple causes and conditions of homelessness.
      Since 2005, the San Diego region has performed annual Point-in-Time counts of homeless persons.
      HUD requires Continuum of Care Councils (CoC’s) to conduct Point-in-Time counts at least once
      every two years, but encourages them to count annually. The count, which must be conducted
      during the last ten days of January, represents a snapshot of the total number of homeless people,
      both sheltered and unsheltered, at a single point in time.
      Table II-14 shows that the Task Force counted 7 homeless persons in Solana Beach in 2011.
      Solana Beach and San Marcos are the two cities in the County with the fewest homeless people.
      There is no data presently available documenting the increased level of demand for shelter in San
      Diego County during particular times of the year. Due to the relatively mild climate, the only time of
      year when increased demand appears to be a factor is during the winter months (December to
      February). The annual homeless count always takes place in the last week of January, a period
      when demand for shelter typically is at its highest. Since the year-round need described above is
      based on that annual count, the need for emergency shelter either year-round or seasonally is not
      likely to be greater than that found during the annual homeless count.
                                                     Table II-14
                                    Homeless Estimates – San Diego County
                                                              Homeless Estimate
                         Service Planning Area            Sheltered         Unsheltered
                        City of San Diego                    2,526              3,369
                        Escondido                             352                115
                        Oceanside                             375                 77
                        Chula Vista                           207                234
                        Vista                                 351                 80
                        El Cajon                              116                226
                        Encinitas                              50                134
                        National City                           0                140
                        Lemon Grove                             0                 94
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 181 of 399
                         Carlsbad                               62                   21
                         Santee                                  0                   58
                         La Mesa                                 0                   55
                         Coronado                                0                   31
                         Imperial Beach                          0                   28
                         Poway                                   0                   15
                         Del Mar                                 0                   11
                         Solana Beach                0                       7
                         San Marcos                              0                    1
                         Unincorporated San
                         Diego County                           0                   285
                         San Diego County Total               4,039                4,981
      Source: Regional Task Force on the Homeless 2011 Point in Time Survey
      There is a church in Solana Beach that provides shelter and assistance to homeless persons as
      part of the Interfaith Shelter Network. Churches that belong to the Network rotate responsibility of
      sheltering homeless families and individuals for up to two weeks during the winter months. Only 12
      guests at a time generally stay in the congregation facilities. At the end of two weeks, the whole
      operation - cots and guests - rotates to another area congregation. St. James Catholic Church
      provides volunteers and food for the homeless, and allows the use of its facilities for up to two
      weeks to shelter the homeless. The neighboring City of Encinitas’ Community Resource Center
      serves as the case management agency for the Network’s North County Coastal Branch.
      Senate Bill 2 of 2007 requires that jurisdictions identify a zone where emergency shelters are
      permitted “by-right” (i.e., without requiring discretionary approval such as a use permit). Emergency
      shelters may only be subject to those development and management standards that apply to
      residential or commercial development within the same zone except that a local government may
      apply written, objective standards that include all of the following:
      •   The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility;
      •   Off-street parking based upon demonstrated need, provided that the standards do not require
      more parking for emergency shelters than for other residential or commercial uses within the same
      zone;
      •   The size and location of exterior or interior onsite waiting and client intake areas;
      •   The provision of on-site management;
      •   The proximity to other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not required to
      be more than 300 feet apart;
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 182 of 399
      •   The length of stay;
      •   Lighting; and
      •   Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
      4.   Single Parents/Female Heads of Households
      Single parents with dependent children represent another important group with special housing
      needs. Single-parent households often require special consideration and assistance because they
      tend to have lower incomes and a greater need for day care, health care, and related facilities.
      Table II-15 shows that in 2010, Solana Beach had 553 single parent households. Of these, the
      majority (65 percent) were headed by a female. As of 2010, approximately 19 percent of female
      headed households in Solana Beach were below the poverty level, compared to 23 percent
      countywide.4
                                                     Table II-15
                                            Household Type by Tenure
                                                    Owners                            Renters
                 Household Type            Households              %         Households         %
              Married couple family            2,090             61.5%            640         28.5%
              Male householder, no
              wife present                       93               2.7%            100          4.4%
              Female householder,
              no husband present       178                    5.2%          182            8.1%
              Non-family
              households                       1,040             30.6%           1,327        59.0%
              Total households                 3,401             100%            2,249        100%
      Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-H3 Household Population and Household Type by Tenure
      5.   Farmworkers
      Due to the high cost of housing and low wages, a significant number of migrant and/or farmworkers
      have difficulty finding affordable, safe, and sanitary housing. It is estimated that a number of
      migrant and/or farmworker camps are located throughout the San Diego region, primarily in rural
      areas. Farm workers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary income is from seasonal
      agricultural work. Solana Beach is a mostly developed city, with a strong local economy that is not
      tied to agriculture.
      The US Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey reported about 6,165 persons employed in
      farming, fishing, and forestry occupations in San Diego County on a part time seasonal basis and
      3,741 persons employed in this industry on a full time year-round basis (Table II-16).
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 183 of 399
                                                     Table II-16
                                               Agricultural Workers
                                           North County Coastal Cities
                                          and San Diego County (2010)
                                       Farming, fishing, and forestry
                                                   workers                  % of County Total
                  Jurisdiction            Part Time          Full Time   Part Time       Full Time
              Solana Beach            11                   0           0.5%            0.0%
              Carlsbad                         0                 87         0.0%            2.3%
              Del Mar                          0                  0         0.0%            0.0%
              Encinitas                        0                 85         0.0%            2.3%
              Oceanside                        0                615         0.0%           16.4%
              San Diego County               2,424             3,741
      Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey, Tables S2401 and S2402: Occupation by Sex
        and Median Earnings in the Past 12 Months for the Civilian Employed Population 16+ and Full
        Time Year Round Civilian Employed Population 16+
      Since there are no agricultural operations within Solana Beach and housing costs are significantly
      lower in other parts of the County, only 11 Solana Beach residents were reported as being
      employed in agriculture on a part time seasonal basis and no Solana Beach residents were reported
      as being employed in agriculture on a full time, year-round basis. To the extent that agricultural
      workers may desire to live in Solana Beach, their need for affordable housing is similar to that of
      other lower income persons, and affordable housing in the City would serve farmworkers as well as
      others employed in low-wage jobs.
      6.   Large Households
      Household size is an indicator of need for large units. Large households are defined as those with
      five or more members. In Solana Beach, approximately 69 percent of owner households and 71
      percent of renter households have only one or two members. About 7.7 percent of renter
      households and about 5.5 percent of owners are large households (Table II-17). This distribution
      indicates that the need for large units with four or more bedrooms is significantly less than for
      smaller units.
                                                     Table II-17
                                           Household Size by Tenure
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 184 of 399
                                                 Owners                           Renters
                 Household Size        Households              %        Households           %
               1 person                     850             25.0%            895          39.8%
               2 persons                   1,482            43.6%            704           31.3%
               3 persons                    455             13.4%            281           12.5%
               4 persons                    430             12.6%            196           8.7%
               5 persons            131                  3.9%          91              4.0%
               6 persons            29                   0.9%          47              2.1%
               7+ persons          24                    0.7%          35              1.6%
               Total households            3,401            100%            2,249          100%
      Source: 2010 Census Table QT-H2: Tenure, Household Size, and Age of Householder
      7.   Students
      The need for student housing is another significant factor affecting housing demand. Although
      students may produce only a temporary housing need, the impact upon housing demand is critical
      in areas that surround universities and colleges. Typically, students are low income, and are
      therefore affected by a lack of affordable housing, especially within easy commuting distance from
      campus. They often seek shared housing situations to decrease expenses and can be assisted
      through roommate referral services offered on and off campus. The lack of affordable housing also
      influences choices students make after graduation, often with a detrimental effect upon the region’s
      economy. College graduates provide a specialized pool of skilled labor that is vital to the economy;
      however, the lack of affordable housing often leads to their departure from the region.
      Figure II-I shows that in 2010, approximately five percent of Solana Beach residents were enrolled
      in college, a lower percentage than the region as a whole. Solana Beach does not have a college
      within its boundaries nor any housing specifically designated for students.
                                                    Figure II-I
                                   Percent of Residents Enrolled in School
                                  Solana Beach and San Diego County (2010)
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 185 of 399
      Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey, Table B14001 School Enrollment by Level of
        School for the Population 3+
      D.   Existing Land Use Characteristics
      According to the 2010 Land Use Inventory assembled by SANDAG, approximately one percent of
      the existing lands in Solana Beach are vacant. Of the vacant parcels, the majority (17 acres) is
      designated for future residential use, while only four acres is designated for commercial use. Even
      so, residential uses may be allowed as a secondary use in conjunction with permitted commercial
      uses. The City’s zoning ordinance specifies the relationship of residential to on-site commercial
      uses.
      The existing land use inventory designates the type of existing development, in a manner
      consistent with the City’s adopted General Plan. Table II-18 depicts the distribution of existing land
      uses by their General Plan designation. Please refer to Table B-3 in Appendix B for a listing of all
      vacant and underutilized lands and their capacity for future housing units.
                                                    Table II-18
                                         Existing Land Use Inventory by
                                            General Plan Designation
                                              Solana Beach (2010)
                                    Existing Land Use             Acres      Percent
                            Vacant                                    21.09        1%
                            Residential                           1,218.81        56 %
                            Commercial                                91.14        4%
                            Light Industry                            30.86        2%
                            Office / Professional                     44.51        2%
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 186 of 399
                             Recreation / Open Space                   241.44       11 %
                             Public / Institutional                     93.46        4%
                             Right-of-Way                              448.43       20 %
                             Total                                   2,189.75     100 %
      Source: SANDAG 2010 Land Use Inventory (January 1, 2010) and Solana Beach General Plan
        categories
      E.   Employment
      Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. To achieve a better
      balance between jobs and housing, it is important to consider the employment characteristics of a
      region. The jobs available in each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type
      and size of housing residents can afford.
      1.   Current Employment
      Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing needs during
      this planning period. Table II-19 shows that the city had a workforce of 7,062 persons, or 65 percent
      of the working-age population, as reported in the 2010 Census. This table shows that the
      characteristics of the city’s population are similar to those countywide except that the proportion of
      the working age population working from home is higher than that of the county and the percentage
      of residents receiving social security income is 15 percent for Solana Beach compared to 10
      percent for the county. Approximately 35 percent of city residents were not in the labor force, which
      is consistent with San Diego County as a whole.
                                                       Table II-19
                                                      Labor Force
                                   Solana Beach vs. San Diego County (2010)
                                                   Solana Beach                 San Diego County
                                               Persons              %         Persons         %
              In labor force                     7,062            64.8%       1,575,742     65.9%
                 -Work at home                    871               8%         86,297       3.6%
              Not in labor force                 3,829            35.2%        814,728      34.1%
              With social security
              income                             1,633             15%         243,702      10.2%
              Total population age
              16+                               10,891                        2,390,470
      Source: 2010 Census Table DP03: Selected Economic Characteristics
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 187 of 399
      In 2010, approximately 52 percent of the city’s working residents were employed in management
      and professional occupations (Table II-20). A significant percentage of workers (22 percent) were
      employed in sales and office related occupations. Approximately 19 percent were employed in
      service related occupations such as waiters, waitresses and beauticians. Blue collar occupations
      such as machine operators, assemblers, transportation, handlers and laborers constituted
      approximately 7 percent of the workforce. There were 11 people employed in the farming, forestry,
      or fishing industry.
                                                     Table II-20
                                           Employment by Occupation
                                                                           Jobs            Percent
               Management, professional and related                        3,368            51.9%
               Service                                                     1,238            19.1%
               Sales and office                                            1,434            22.1%
               Natural resources, construction, and maintenance             233              3.6%
                 Farming, Forestry, and Fishing                              11              0.2%
                 Construction and extraction                                133              2.1%
                 Installation, maintenance, and repair                       89              1.4%
               Production, transportation, and material moving              213             3.3%
               Total                                                       6,486            100%
      Source: 2010 Census, Table S2401: Occupation by Sex and Median Earnings in the Past 12
        Months for the Civilian Employed Population 16+
      Note: Total jobs in Table II-20 differs from total persons in the labor force in Table II-19 because
        the labor force includes persons currently unemployed and looking for work and persons in the
        armed forces. Per the 2010 Census, there were 534 unemployed persons and 42 persons in the
        armed forces.
      As of 2010, the five largest employment sectors within San Diego County were Government
      (226,000 employees), Professional and Business Services (208,000 employees), Leisure and
      Hospitality (154,600 employees), and Education and Health Services (147,100 employees)5.
      2.    Projected Job Growth
      Future housing needs are affected by the number and type of new jobs created during this planning
      period. Table II-21 shows that between 2008 and 2020, Solana Beach is projected to gain
      approximately 1,247 new employment opportunities within its boundaries, an increase of 17
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 188 of 399
      percent. Along with Encinitas, this is the lowest percentage increase in employment in the North
      County coastal cities. Regionwide, approximately 501,958 new employment opportunities are
      expected to be generated, which is an increase of 32 percent.
                                                     Table II-21
                                    Projected Change in Total Employment
                    North County Coastal Cities and the San Diego Region (2008-2050)
                                                                                 Numeric Percent
                                                                                  Change Change
                                                                                   2008-    2008-
             Jurisdiction     2008       2020        2030        2040     2050      2050     2050
              Carlsbad       61,999     70,228      77,436      83,538   87,109    25,110    41%
              Del Mar        4,065       4,149       4,330      4,690     5,028      963     24%
              Encinitas      26,985     28,711      30,296      31,080   31,481     4,496    17%
              Oceanside      43,977     48,464      54,597      60,377   67,550    23,573    54%
              Solana
              Beach        7,533      7,823        8,162      8,671     8,780     1,247    17%
              San Diego
              Region       1,501,080 1,619,615 1,752,630 1,877,668 2,003,038 501,958         33%
      Source: SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast
      Table II-22 shows projected job growth by occupation for the period 2008-2018 for the San Diego-
      Carlsbad-San Marcos Metropolitan Statistical Area (San Diego County) along with median hourly
      wages. Total employment in San Diego County is expected to grow by 9.5 percent between 2008
      and 2018. The overall growth is expected to add 137,200 new jobs and bring the employment of San
      Diego County to about 1,578,000 by 2018.
      Generally, residents that are employed in well-paying occupations have less difficulty obtaining
      adequate housing than residents in low-paying occupations. Table II-22 illustrates the growth trend
      in low-wage service jobs such as health care support, food preparation and serving, cleaning and
      maintenance, sales, and office/administrative support.
                                                     Table II-22
                               Projected Job Growth by Occupation (2008-2018)
                       San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos Metropolitan Statistical Area
                                                                          Employment       Median
                                      Annual Average Employment             Change         Hourly
                Occupational Title             2008            2018    Numerical Percent Wage*
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 189 of 399
            Total, All Occupations   1,440,800      1,578,000  137,200    9.5    $17.99
            Management
            Occupations                98,790        103,850    5,060     5.1    $48.90
            Business and
            Financial Operations
            Occupations                76,130         86,080    9,950    13.1    $30.85
            Computer and
            Mathematical
            Occupations                38,510         43,610    5,100    13.2    $36.81
            Architecture and
            Engineering
            Occupations                37,560         40,560    3,000     8.0    $37.93
            Life, Physical, and
            Social Science
            Occupations                27,210         31,220    4,010    14.7    $32.36
            Community and
            Social Services
            Occupations                17,930         20,410    2,480    13.8    $20.96
            Legal Occupations          13,050         14,490    1,440    11.0    $40.28
            Education, Training,
            and Library
            Occupations                81,940         92,050    10,110   12.3    $26.81
            Arts, Design,
            Entertainment,
            Sports, and Media
            Occupations                26,220         28,190    1,970     7.5    $22.43
            Healthcare
            Practitioners and
            Technical
            Occupations                61,290         72,750    11,460   18.7    $36.18
            Healthcare Support
            Occupations                32,040         38,760    6,720    21.0    $13.19
            Protective Service
            Occupations                32,490         35,530    3,040     9.4    $21.08
            Food Preparation and
            Serving Related
            Occupations               130,710        141,880    11,170    8.5     $9.42
            Building and Grounds
            Cleaning and
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 190 of 399
              Maintenance
              Occupations                     54,820          57,400     2,580     4.7    $11.34
              Personal Care and
              Service Occupations             62,790          70,790     8,000    12.7    $10.71
              Sales and Related
              Occupations                    154,060          166,230    12,170    7.9    $12.32
              Office and
              Administrative
              Support Occupations            223,490          238,330    14,840    6.6    $16.29
              Farming, Fishing, and
              Forestry Occupations             8,130           8,360      230      2.8    $10.86
              Construction and
              Extraction
              Occupations                     78,770          91,070     12,300   15.6    $22.95
              Installation,
              Maintenance, and
              Repair Occupations              45,630          49,970     4,340     9.5    $20.66
              Production
              Occupations                     71,860          75,290     3,430     4.8    $13.89
              Transportation and
              Material Moving
              Occupations                     67,820          71,130     3,310     4.9    $13.11
      *2010 wages
      Source: California Employment Development Dept., March 2010 Benchmark
      3.   Place of Employment
      According to the 2010 Census, 96 percent of employed Solana Beach residents worked in San
      Diego County, and approximately 30 percent of all workers were employed within the city limits
      (Table II-23). The number of jobs in the City as reported by SANDAG in Table II-21 (7,533) is fairly
      close to the number of Solana Beach residents in the labor force as reported by the 2010 Census
      (7,062). This illustrates a strong jobs/housing balance.
                                                     Table II-23
                                    Job Location for Solana Beach Residents
                                                                  Persons         %
                        Work in San Diego County                   6,180        96.0%
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 191 of 399
                         -Work in city of residence                 1,898         29.5%
                         -Work elsewhere in San Diego
                         County                                     4,282         66.5%
                       Work in another California county             258           4.0%
                       Work outside California                        0            0.0%
                       Total workers age 16+                        6,438
      Source: 2010 Census, Tables B08007: Sex of Workers by Place of Work – State and County
        Level and B08008: Sex of Workers by Place of Work – Place Level
      4.   Commuting Patterns
      Commuting patterns demonstrate the relation of housing to employment opportunities and are a
      component in the allocation of growth to localities. Table II-24 shows that in 2010, 69 percent of
      residents drove alone to work, 6.4 percent less than regionwide. Approximately 11 percent of
      residents carpooled, 3.4 percent walked, one percent took public transportation, and one percent
      bicycled to work. Approximately 13.5 percent of residents worked from home.
                                                   Table II-24
                                       Means of Transportation to Work
                                 Solana Beach and San Diego Region (2010)
                                                                Solana Beach      San Diego Region
                        Means of Transportation                    % of Total         % of Total
              Car, Truck, or Van                                      79.9%             85.9%
                 Drove Alone                                          68.9%             75.3%
                 Carpooled                                            10.9%             10.6%
              Public Transportation                                    1.1%              3.3%
              Bicycle                                                  1.0%              0.6%
              Walked                                                   3.4%              2.9%
              Other Means (Motorcycle, taxi, other)                    1.1%              1.2%
              Worked at Home                                          13.5%              6.1%
              Total                                                   100%              100%
      Source: US Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey Table S0801: Commuting
        Characteristics by Sex
      Figure II-J shows the average travel time for workers age 16 and over in Solana Beach and the San
      Diego region in 2000. A larger percentage of Solana Beach residents have a less than 10 minute
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 192 of 399
      commute compared to the greater San Diego region (21 percent compared to 11 percent,
      respectively). In addition, a lower percentage of Solana Beach residents have a commute of 45
      minutes or more compared to the greater San Diego region (7 percent compared to 13 percent,
      respectively). Approximately 27 percent of Solana Beach residents have a 10 to 19 minute
      commute, 22 percent have a 20 to 29 minute commute, and 22 percent have a 30 to 44 minute
      commute. This may be the result of a relatively balanced jobs-housing ratio in the City.
                                                     Figure II-J
                                           Travel Time to Work (Minutes)
                                Solana Beach and the San Diego Region (2010)
      Source: US Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey Table S0801: Commuting
        Characteristics by Sex
      F.   Housing Stock Characteristics
      This section presents an evaluation of the characteristics of the community’s housing stock and
      helps in identifying and prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of
      housing units, recent growth trends, age and condition, tenure, vacancy, housing costs,
      affordability, and assisted affordable units at-risk of loss due to conversion to market-rate. A
      housing unit is defined as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms, occupied as
      separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
      1.   Total Housing Units
      According to Census data, in 2010, Solana Beach had a housing stock of 6,540 units, as shown in
      Table II-25. This is the second lowest number of housing units among the North County coastal
      cities. Solana Beach and Del Mar had the lowest rates of growth between 2004 and 2010 compared
      to the other North County coastal cities.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 193 of 399
                                                    Table II-25
                                               Total Housing Units
                        North County Coastal Cities and San Diego County (2004 and
                                                      2010)
                                                                               % Change
                           Jurisdiction            2004           2010         2004-2010
                      Carlsbad                 39,308         44,673        13.6%
                      Del Mar                  2,575          2,596         0.8%
                      Encinitas                24,901         25,740        3.4%
                      Oceanside                62,557         64,435        3.0%
                      Solana Beach             6,494          6,540         0.7%
                      San Diego County         1,093,603      1,164,786     6.5%
      Source: Solana Beach 2005-2010 Housing Element and 2010 Census Table QT-H1: General
        Housing Characteristics
      According to the City’s Annual Progress Reports, Solana Beach permitted 116 units between 2004
      and 2010, which resulted in a net increase of 74 units or a percentage change of 1.1 percent. The
      discrepancy between the Census data and the City’s data may be due to errors in counting by the
      Census and a lapse in time between when units were permitted and when they were actually built.
      2.   Projected Housing Units
      According to SANDAG projections, between 2008 and 2020, Solana Beach will gain approximately
      137 housing units, an increase of approximately 2.1 percent. Countywide, approximately 10.7
      percent more units are expected to be added to the housing stock. Between 2020 and 2050, Solana
      Beach is anticipated to gain approximately 419 housing units, an increase of 6.3 percent.
      Approximately 21.1 percent more units are expected to be added regionwide during this timeframe.
      All of the North County coastal cities are expected to have a slower rate of growth than the region
      between 2008 and 2050.
                                                    Table II-26
                                            Projected Housing Units
                       North County Coastal Cities and San Diego County (2008-2050)
                                                                                       %       %
                                                                                   Change Change
                                                                                     2008-   2020-
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 194 of 399
               Jurisdiction     2008       2020       2030       2040       2050       2020   2050
               Carlsbad        43,496     48,104     49,867     50,446     50,559     10.6%   5.1%
               Del Mar          2,535      2,587      2,606      2,606      2,606      2.1%   0.7%
               Encinitas       24,805     26,331     27,895     28,303     28,484      6.2%   8.2%
               Oceanside       64,456     69,630     73,499     73,557     73,551      8.0%   5.6%
               Solana
               Beach          6,509      6,646      6,893      7,022      7,065      2.1%    6.3%
               San Diego
               County        1,140,654 1,262,448 1,369,807 1,457,545 1,529,090 10.7% 21.1%
      Source: SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast
      3.   Housing Type
      As of 2010, the housing stock in Solana Beach was comprised mostly of single-family detached
      homes, which made up about 48 percent of all units. Multi-family units comprised about 33 percent
      of the total. About 19 percent of units were single-family attached (condo) units and the city’s
      housing stock contained 12 mobile home units. Table II-27 provides a breakdown of the housing
      stock by type along with growth trends for the city compared to the county as a whole for the period
      2000 - 2010.
                                                    Table II-27
                                              Housing Units by Type
                 Structure              2000                     2010                  Growth
                    Type          Units          %         Units        %         Units       %
               Solana Beach
               Single-family
               detached           2,906        45.1%       3,150      47.6%        244       8.4%
               Single-family
               attached           1,264        19.6%       1,286      19.4%         22       1.7%
               Multi-family
               2-4 units           611          9.5%        409        6.2%       -202      -33.1%
               Multi-family
               5+ units           1,629        25.3%       1,757      26.6%        128       7.9%
               Mobile
               homes                34         0.53%         12        0.2%        -22      -64.7%
               Boat, RV,
               Van, etc.            5           0.0%         0         0.0%         -5      -100%
               Total units        6,449        100%        6,614      100%         219       3.4%
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 195 of 399
               San Diego County
               Single-family
               detached          530,430      51.0%      597,672    51.8%      67,242      12.7%
               Single-family
               attached           98,101       9.4%      103,398     9.0%       5,297       5.4%
               Multi-family
               2-4 units          77,228       7.4%       84,258     7.3%       7,030       9.1%
               Multi-family
               5+ units          287,451      27.6%      324,535    28.1%      37,084      12.9%
               Mobile
               homes              44,234       4.3%       43,959     3.8%        -275      -0.6%
               Boat, RV,
               Van, etc.          2,705       0.26%       1,052      0.0%       1,653       6.1%
               Total units      1,040,149     100%      1,154,874    100%      118,031     11.0%
      Source: 2000 Census, Table H030: Units in Structure and 2010 Census Table B25024: Units in
        Structure
      Note: The City believes the Census data to be erroneous regarding the number of multi-family 2-4
        units lost between 2000 and 2010.
      According to the U.S. Census, between 2000 and 2010, single-family detached homes grew by
      approximately 8.4 percent in Solana Beach and 12.7 percent within the county as a whole. Single
      family attached homes grew by 1.7 percent in Solana Beach and 5.4 percent in San Diego County.
      The data indicates that Solana Beach lost multi-family developments containing 2 to 4 units;
      however, multifamily developments with 5 or more units grew by approximately 8 percent. Within
      the county, multi-family developments consisting of 2 to 4 units grew by approximately 9 percent
      and multi-family developments containing more than 5 units grew by approximately 13 percent.
      There was a loss of mobile homes in both Solana Beach and San Diego County and a loss of boat,
      RV, and van-type units in Solana Beach. Solana Beach had no authority over the mobile home park
      that was lost as it was regulated by the State.
      Table II-28 shows that the percentage of both single-family and multi-family housing units in Solana
      Beach are expected to remain stable. This trend will continue to occur due to limited land
      availability and a continuing demand for housing.
                                                    Table II-28
                                          Projected Housing Unit Type
                                                   (2008-2050)
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 196 of 399
                Housing              % of          % of           % of           % of           % of
                  Type      2008 Total 2020 Total 2030 Total 2040 Total 2050 Total
               Single-      3,862 59.3% 3,914 58.9% 3,877 56.2% 3,905 55.6% 3,902 55.2%
               Family
               Multi-       2,621 40.3% 2,707 40.7% 2,993 43.4% 3,094 44.1% 3,140 44.4%
               Family
               Mobile      26       0.40% 25      0.38% 23       0.33% 23       0.33% 23       0.33%
               Home
               Total       6,509 100% 6,646 100% 6,893 100% 7,022 100% 7,065 100%
      Source: SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast
      4.   Housing Age and Conditions
      Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Housing units built prior to 1978
      before stringent limits on the amount of lead in paint were imposed may have interior or exterior
      building components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built before 1970 are the most
      likely to need rehabilitation and to have lead-based paint in a deteriorated condition. Lead-based
      paint becomes hazardous to children under age six and to pregnant women when it peels off walls
      or is pulverized by windows and doors opening and closing.
      Table II-29 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Solana Beach compared to San Diego
      County as a whole.
                                                     Table II-29
                                         Age of Housing Stock by Tenure
                                              Solana Beach                   San Diego County
                   Year Built              Units               %            Units             %
               Owner occupied              3,272             100%          593,945          100%
                 2000 or later              171              5.2%           73,364         12.4%
                 1990-99                    147              4.5%           73,673         12.4%
                 1980-89                    484             14.8%          115,138         19.4%
                 1970-79                   1,397            42.7%          137,195         23.1%
                 1960-69                    359             10.8%           72,803         12.3%
                 1950-59                    459             14.3%           75,055         12.6%
                 1940-49                    188              5.7%           23,201          3.9%
                 1939 or earlier             67              2.0%           23,516          4.0%
               Renter occupied             2,333             100%          467,844          100%
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 197 of 399
                2000 or later               51               2.3%           44,166          9.4%
                1990-99                     163              7.0%           49,218         10.5%
                1980-89                     589              25.2%          89,585         19.1%
                1970-79                    1,039             44.5%         124,337         26.6%
                1960-69                     133              5.7%           65,172         13.9%
                1950-59                     260              11.1%          51,958         11.1%
                1940-49                     66               2.8%           20,350          4.3%
                1939 or earlier             35               1.5%           23,058         4.9%
      Source: 2010 Census Table B25036: Tenure by Year Structure Built
      This table shows that many of the owner-occupied housing units in Solana Beach were constructed
      after 1970 (67 percent). In addition, the majority of the rented units in Solana Beach were
      constructed after 1970 (79 percent). These findings suggest that there may be a need for
      maintenance and rehabilitation, including remediation of lead-based paint, for approximately 33
      percent of the owner-occupied units and 21 percent of the renter-occupied units within the city’s
      housing stock.
                                                     Table II-30
                                   Kitchen and Plumbing Facilities by Tenure –
                                       Solana Beach vs. San Diego County
                                                 Solana Beach                   San Diego County
                                               Units               %            Units          %
              Owner occupied                   3,272             100%          593,945       100%
                Complete kitchen
                facilities                     3,272             100%          592,102      99.7%
                Lacking complete
                kitchen facilities               0                0%            1,843        0.3%
              Renter occupied                  2,333             100%          467,844       100%
                Complete kitchen
                facilities                     2,333             100%          461,249      98.6%
                Lacking complete
                kitchen facilities               0                0%            6,595        1.4%
              Owner occupied                   3,272             100%          593,945       100%
                Complete plumbing
                facilities                     3,272             100%          592,059      99.7%
                Lacking complete
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 198 of 399
                  plumbing facilities              0                0%            1,886        0.3%
               Renter occupied                   2,333             100%         467,844        100%
                  Complete plumbing
                  facilities                     2,333             100%         464,575       99.3%
                  Lacking complete
                  plumbing facilities              0                0%            3,269        0.7%
      Source: 2000 Census H48, H51
      Table II-30 identifies shows that 100 percent of both owner and renter-occupied housing units in
      Solana Beach have complete plumbing and kitchen facilities. Within the county, only a small
      percentage of units lack kitchen and plumbing facilities. The lack of complete kitchen or plumbing
      facilities is often an indicator of serious problems, although housing units may need rehabilitation
      even though they have complete kitchens and plumbing facilities.
      5.    Substandard Housing
      The majority of Solana Beach’s housing stock is in good condition. Approximately nine substandard
      units exist that are in need of repair/rehabilitation. The identified units are based upon a combination
      of “windshield surveys”, observations and experiences of the code enforcement and planning staff,
      and indicators from redevelopment blight surveys. Based on a sample Housing Condition Survey
      form provided by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), the
      exterior condition of each home was noted, including the condition of the roof, chimney, and gutters;
      porches, stairs, and garage; doors and windows; exterior surfaces; and foundation. Some of these
      substandard units are in the area of Hernandez and Vera Streets, and the rest are distributed within
      the broader area west of I-5.
      6.    Vacancy
      Housing vacancy rates as reported in the 2010 Census are shown in Table II-31. The table shows
      that vacancy rates in the city were relatively low, with 2.3 percent of rental units and 0.8 percent of
      for-sale units available for rent or sale, respectively. The vacancy rate for the county was at 2.5
      percent for rental units and 1.0 percent for for-sale housing. Rental vacancy rates in the 2 percent
      range indicate nearly full occupancy, and contribute to upward pressures on rents.
                                                       Table II-31
                                                   Housing Vacancy
                                        Solana Beach vs. San Diego County
                                                   Solana Beach                  San Diego County
                                                Units               %            Units          %
               Total housing units              6,540             100%        1,164,786      100.0%
                  Occupied units                5,650            86.4%        1,086,865       93.3%
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Page 199 of 399
               -Owner occupied              3,401             52.0%        591,025       50.7%
               -Renter occupied             2,249             34.4%        495,840       42.6%
                 Vacant units                890              13.6%         77,921        6.7%
               -For rent                     152               2.3%         29,236        2.5%
               -For sale                      50               0.8%         11,682        1.0%
               -Rented or sold, not
               occupied                       33               0.5%          4,124        0.4%
               -For seasonal or
               occasional use                586               9.0%         20,768        1.8%
               -For migrant workers            0               0.0%           61          0.0%
               -Other vacant                  69               1.1%         12,050        1.0%
      Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-H1: General Housing Characteristics
      7.    Housing Cost
      Housing Affordability Criteria
      State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on the area
      (i.e., county) median income (“AMI”): extremely-low (30 percent or less of AMI), very-low (31-50
      percent of AMI), low (51-80 percent of AMI), moderate (81-120 percent of AMI) and above moderate
      (over 120 percent of AMI). Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household
      income and housing expenses. According to HUD and the California Department of Housing and
      Community Development6, housing is considered “affordable” if the monthly payment is no more
      than 30 percent of a household’s gross income.
      Table II-32 shows affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for housing in
      Solana Beach (and San Diego County)7 by income category. Based on state-adopted standards,
      the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $473, the maximum
      affordable rent for very-low-income households is $788, the maximum affordable rent for low-
      income households is $1,261, and the maximum for moderate-income households is $1,892.
      Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest
      rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association
      fees, property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the maximum home purchase prices by
      income category shown in Table II-32 have been estimated based on typical conditions.
                                                    Table II-32
                              Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs
                2010 County Median Income =           Income       Affordable     Affordable Price
                            $63,069                    Limits         Rent             (est.)
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 200 of 399
               Extremely Low (≤30%)                    $18,920           $473              $62,944
               Very Low (31-50%)                       $31,535           $788             $104,885
               Low (51-80%)                            $50,455          $1,261            $167,910
               Moderate (81-120%)                      $75,683          $1,892            $251,786
               Above moderate (120%+)                 $75,683+          $1892+           $251,786+
      Assumptions:
      -30% of gross income for rent or PITI
      -10% down payment, 5.625% interest
      Source: Cal. HCD; Home Affordability Calculator from Realtor.com
      For-Sale Housing
      Housing sales price statistics for homes sold in Solana Beach in the year 2011 show that all new
      homes (both single-family detached and condo) have a median sales price of $840,5008. The
      median sales price for resale single family homes is $1,030,000. The median sales price for resale
      condos is $515,000. Between 2010 and 2011, home prices decreased approximately 20.8 percent
      due to the economic downturn in the economy.
      Rental Housing
      The median rent in Solana Beach increased approximately 61 percent over the last ten years from
      $1,112 in 2000 to $1,787 in 20109. This percent increase is consistent with the increase in rents
      Countywide. The median rent in San Diego County also increased approximately 61 percent during
      the same timeframe, from $761 in 2000 to $1,228 in 20101.
      Another measure of rent increases is Fair Market Rents (FMR). FMRs are updated yearly by the
      U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and are used to determine standard payment
      amounts for grant assisted housing units. They include the shelter rent plus the cost of all tenant-
      paid utilities, except telephones, cable or satellite television service, and internet service. Table II-
      33 shows the Fiscal Year 2011 and 2012 Hypothetical Small Area Fair Market Rents in Solana
      Beach. Interestingly, fair market rents decreased slightly between 2011 and 2012.
                                                     Table II-33
                                      Fair Market Rents by Unit Bedrooms
                               0 Bedroom
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 201 of 399
                    Year        (Efficiency)   1 Bedroom     2 Bedroom       3 Bedroom     4 Bedroom
                    2011           $1,360         $1,560        $1,910         $2,720        $3,360
                    2012           $1,340        $1,530         $1,870         $2,660        $3,290
      Source: HUD User FY2012 and FY2011 San Diego County, CA Hypothetical Small Area FMRs By
         Unit Bedrooms
      When market rents are compared to the amounts lower-income households can afford to pay (Table
      II-32), it is clear that very-low- and extremely-low-income households have a difficult time finding
      housing without overpaying.
      G.    Existing Affordable Housing
      This section identifies the residential projects in the city that provide affordable housing. It also
      includes an analysis of those that are under an affordability restriction and are at risk of losing their
      low-income affordability restrictions within the planning period 2010 – 2020. This information is used
      in establishing quantified objectives for units that can be conserved during this planning period.
      1.   Inventory of Affordable Units
      There are several affordable housing units in the City of Solana Beach. Table II-34 lists those
      projects. Some of these units were built to satisfy inclusionary housing requirements, others were
      the result of density bonus agreements or Coastal Commission requirements, and one (Silverado
      Apartments) accepts Section 8 vouchers. In addition, legally developed accessory living units are
      often rented to low income households. These accessory living units are also identified in Table II-
      34.
                                                      Table II-34
                                         Affordable Housing in Solana Beach
                                             City of Solana Beach (2012)
                                          No./Type of                              Date of
                             Project      Affordable     Deed         Type of    Covenant Monitoring
               Address        Name           Units     Restricted    Subsidy     Expiration   Agency
                                                                                               City of
                   748                                                 Code                    Solana
                 Fresca      Shannon     1 A.L.U./Low     Yes        Incentive   Perpetuity    Beach
                   624                                                                         City of
               Ridgeline                                               Code                    Solana
                  Place      Prestera    1 A.L.U./Low     Yes        Incentive   Perpetuity    Beach
               403, 405,
                 407 N.                        3                                               City of
                Cedros        Cedros      Owner/Very                                           Solana
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 202 of 399
               Ave.     Seaside        Low       Yes     Inclusionary    2060    Beach
             313 San                                                             City of
              Lucas                                          Code                Solana
              Drive       Short      1 A.L.U.    No        Incentive      N/A    Beach
                348                                                              City of
              South                                          Code                Solana
               Rios     Baniaga      1 A.L.U.    No        Incentive      N/A    Beach
                725                                                              City of
            Seabright                                        Code                Solana
               Lane       Dunn       1 A.L.U.    No        Incentive      N/A    Beach
                703                                                              City of
            Seabright                                        Code                Solana
               Lane      Oliver   1 A.L.U./Low   Yes       Incentive  Perpetuity Beach
                                         1                                       City of
              305 N.  North Rios   Owner/Very               Density              Solana
            Rios Ave    Partners       Low       Yes         Bonus       2059    Beach
                                                                                 City of
              548 N.                                         Code                Solana
            Rios Ave.   Kwasny    1 A.L.U./Low   Yes       Incentive  Perpetuity Beach
             930 Via
                Mil
            Cumbres
             and 435                                                             City of
               Bay    North Rios                                                 Solana
            Meadows     Project   2 Owner/Low    Yes     Inclusionary    2028    Beach
                                                                                 City of
              726 N.                                         Code                Solana
            Granados   Billington    1 A.L.U.    Yes       Incentive  Perpetuity Beach
             661-781                                        County       2010
            S. Nardo     Solana                              Bond      (already  County
               Ave.    Highlands  39 Very Low    Yes      Agreement converted)    HCD
                805
              Valley   Silverado        28                                       County
             Avenue   Apartments Rental/Senior   No        Section 8      N/A     HCD
                           Las
             859-863 Casitas De                             County               County
             Vera St.    Solana    3 Very Low    Yes         Loan     Perpetuity  HCD
                                                                                 City of
            222 Helix                                                            Solana
               Ave.    Helix Ave.     1 Low     Yes      Inclusionary    2019    Beach
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 203 of 399
      Note: A.L.U = Accessory Living Unit (Second Dwelling Unit)
      Source: City of Solana Beach Planning Case Files/Building Permits
      2.    Units at Risk of Conversion
      Many assisted housing units in the San Diego region are eligible to change from low income to
      market rate during the next decade due to the termination of various government subsidy programs
      and/or restrictions on rental rates. As rent subsidies and restrictions expire, lower income tenants
      may face steep rent increases or be displaced. Such affected housing units are referred to as “at-
      risk” units. In 1989, Housing Element law was amended to require an assessment of at-risk units,
      along with programs to reduce adverse impacts on lower income tenants.
      The at-risk units include projects receiving state and/or federal assistance and units created
      through local inclusionary housing, density bonus, or bond financing programs. The analysis of
      expiring subsidies must include all units at risk of converting to market rate over a ten year period.
      There are 15 deed-restricted units in the city, located on 10 properties. Six units are owner-
      occupied and the rest are rentals. Housing element law requires jurisdictions to provide an analysis
      and program for preserving affordability of assisted housing developments. Currently, there is one
      unit at risk of converting to market rate during the next ten years.
      Solana Highlands (previously known as the Del Mar Turf Club Apartments) is a privately owned
      multi-family rental project that was identified in the 2005-2010 Housing Element as a project at risk
      of converting to market rate during this Housing Element cycle. Solana Highlands is a 194-unit
      apartment complex. In 1995, the Housing Authority of the County of San Diego provided a $10
      million revenue bond to finance the cost of the acquisition and rehabilitation of the project. In return,
      39 units were restricted to being rented to very low income households. In 2009, the property owner
      notified affected public agencies that the covenant was expiring on June 27, 2010. Although the City
      made efforts to work with the property owner to preserve the units, the property owner was not
      interested in preserving the existing arrangement. The City was not a party to the agreement
      between the County Housing Authority and the owner and could not prevent the units from
      converting to market rate. However, the following protections are in place for the tenants of the
      affected units:
      After the expiration of the agreement, the units are still required to remain available to the current
      qualified tenants occupying such units at the established rent until one of the following occurs: 1)
      the household’s income exceeds 140 percent of the income at which such household would qualify
      as a very low income tenant, 2) the household voluntarily moves or is evicted for “good cause”, 3)
      thirty years after the Qualified Project Period, which is June 27, 2025, or 4) the owner pays
      relocation assistance and benefits to qualified tenants. There are still approximately 20 affordable
      units within the complex, but this number continues to decline with time.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 204 of 399
      The property owner is currently cooperating with the City to develop a preliminary concept for
      redevelopment of the complex and is interested in developing the site to its maximum unit potential
      – 260 units. Community meetings are being scheduled to discuss the project prior to a formal
      application being submitted to the City. This redevelopment project will provide the opportunity to
      re-establish affordable units in the development. As currently envisioned, the project would include
      32 affordable units.
      3.   Estimated Costs of Replacement and Preservation
      Section 65583(a)(8)(b) requires the analysis of at-risk housing to identify “the total cost of
      producing new rental housing that is comparable in size and rent levels, to replace the units that
      could change from low-income use, and an estimated cost of preserving the assisted housing
      developments.” As mentioned in the previous section, there is one unit at risk of conversion in
      2019. This unit is located in the Helix Avenue project, which is a five-unit apartment complex. The
      complex was sold in 2010 for $1,700,000. That puts the estimated value for this one unit at around
      $340,000. It is unlikely that a non-profit organization would be able to acquire one rental unit within
      a small apartment complex and acquisition of the entire development would be more costly than
      replacing the one unit as part of a larger project. In addition, the property owner may not be willing
      to sell. Assuming the unit is approximately 1,200 square feet and using a construction cost
      estimate of $105 per square foot based on recent housing developer estimates and a land cost
      estimate of $168 per square foot based on the assessed taxable land value, the approximate cost
      to replace the unit would be $327,600.
      The unit’s rent is restricted without any County/City subsidy. The estimated gap between the
      market-rate rent and the affordable rent for the one unit is approximately $600 to $1400 per month
      depending on the occupant’s income or $7,200 to $16,800 a year. This analysis suggests that it
      would be more cost-effective to subsidize the unit rather than acquire the property or replace the
      unit, up to approximately 20 years.
      The Government Code requires the City to identify local non-profit corporations which have the
      “legal and managerial capacity to acquire and manage” at-risk units or the apartment complexes
      containing at-risk units. The City also is required to identify the federal, state, and local financing
      and subsidy programs that may be considered to preserve these units.
      A number of non-profit housing developers are active in San Diego County and could assist the City
      in the preservation of at risk units. The Bridge Housing Corporation, Las Palmas Housing, Chicano
      Federation, Community Housing Works, Wakeland Housing and Development Corporation, and the
      San Diego Community Housing Corporation are among some of the most active non-profits in the
      area. In addition, there are also private developers who may be interested in participating in the
      preservation of at-risk units such as Hitzke Development Corporation, Chelsea Investment
      Corporation, Barone Galasso and Associates, and Affirmed Housing Group.
      Potential funding sources to assist in the preservation of the at-risk unit include CDBG and Home
      funds, and affordable (inclusionary) housing fee funds. The City could use these funds to provide
      gap financing to assist non-profits in acquiring an ownership share in the complex containing the at
      risk unit. In addition, the California Department of Housing and Community Development has a
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 205 of 399
      multi-family housing program which provides deferred payment loans at three percent interest for
      the acquisition and rehabilitation of at-risk units. These funds are typically used to leverage
      additional investment from the private sector. The California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA)
      may also provide subsidy assistance for the acquisition of below-market projects.
      The City will also explore direct negotiations with the at-risk project owner to extend the terms of
      the affordability restrictions. There may be financial incentives the City can offer, or disincentives
      to raising the rent to market levels. This is particularly true if the owner is seeking additional bond
      financing, rehabilitation assistance, or conducting other transactions which require City approval or
      participation. To the extent feasible, extensions of below-market rental agreements should keep the
      units affordable for as long as possible.
      H.    Future Growth Needs
      1.   Regional Housing Needs Assessment
      In accordance with Government Code §65584, projected housing needs for each city and the
      unincorporated county are prepared by the San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG)
      under a process known as the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). The RHNA Plan for
      the San Diego region was released October 28, 2011. The current RHNA covers an 11-year
      projection period (January 1, 2010 – December 31, 2020) and is used for the fifth housing element
      planning period (April 30, 2013 – December 31, 2020 (approximately)).
      Recent legislation, Senate Bill 375 (SB 375) (Steinberg, 2008) and SB 575 (Steinberg, 2009), affect
      the City’s housing element cycle and the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) cycle. The
      main changes include the integration of the RHNA process with the Regional Transportation Plan
      (RTP) and the Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS), required coordination/consistency with the
      RTP and its SCS per SB 375, and the length of the housing element cycle. Consequently, this
      housing element is due on April 30, 2013, and the next housing element will be due approximately
      eight years from that date; past housing elements were due every five years.
      The City adopted the “City of Solana Beach 2005-2010 Housing Element” by Resolution on August
      24, 2006. As part of the City’s General Plan, the Housing Element covered the time period of July 1,
      2005 to June 30, 2010. As a result of SB 375 and SB 575, the due date for this Housing Element
      was extended to April 30, 2013.
      The foundation of the current 2010-2020 RHNA uses the 2050 Regional Growth Forecast, which is
      based on the land use and housing capacity data collected from the 18 cities and the County of San
      Diego. The 2050 Regional Growth Forecast projects the amount of housing that the region
      anticipates will be built, in contrast to the RHNA Determination from the California Department of
      Housing and Community Development (HCD), which quantifies the region’s housing needs. HCD
      assigns the region’s housing needs into four income categories to plan for over the 11 year period.
      The previous RHNA covered a 7.5-year period and used the 2030 Regional Growth Forecast as its
      foundation.
      The 2010-2020 RHNA is based on a new analysis of economic and land use factors from the 2050
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 206 of 399
      Regional Growth Forecast that influence growth in the region. For this reason, comparisons with the
      previous RHNA values are not advised because of the different economic and land use inputs. It is
      also important to keep in mind that any previous projected housing need would be integrated with
      the current RHNA allocations.
      Based on the current land uses and densities in the existing Solana Beach General Plan and
      existing development patterns, the city has a realistic capacity of 533 housing units (refer to Table
      2, Final RHNA Plan dated 10-28-11). The 2010-2020 RHNA allocates 340 units to Solana Beach for
      all income categories, which does not exceed the housing capacity in the City’s general plan.
      Because of the community’s location, projected employment growth, and transit station, the 2050
      Regional Growth Forecast anticipates units in Solana Beach being constructed during the earlier
      years of the RHNA projection period.
      Of the 340 units allocated to Solana Beach in the 2010-2020 RHNA, 131 units are identified for
      above moderate incomes, 59 units for moderate income, 65 units for low income, and 85 units for
      very low income. Refer to Table II-35, below.
                                                   Table II-35
                              Regional Housing Growth Needs – Solana Beach
                                                                     Above
                      Very Low         Low         Moderate       Moderate          Total
                          85            65             59             131            340
                        25%           19.1%          17.4%           38.5%         100.0%
      Source: SANDAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment Plan, 2011
      To calculate the projected housing needs, the City assumed 50 percent of its very low-income
      regional housing needs are extremely low-income households. As a result, from the very low-
      income need of 85 units, the City has a projected need of 43 units for extremely low-income
      households. Many extremely low-income households will likely be seeking rental housing and most
      face an overpayment, overcrowding, or substandard housing condition. Some extremely low-
      income households could contain residents with mental or other disabilities and special needs. To
      address the range of needs, the City will employ a detailed housing strategy including promoting a
      variety of housing types, such as single-room occupancy (SRO) units.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 207 of 399
                                           III. Resources and Opportunities
      A variety of resources are available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing
      in the City of Solana Beach. This chapter provides a description of the land resources and adequate
      sites to address the City’s regional housing needs allocation and describes the financial and
      administrative resources available to support the provision of affordable housing. Additionally, the
      chapter discusses opportunities for energy conservation that can lower utility costs and increase
      housing affordability.
      A.    Land Resources
      The first key opportunity that offers the City a significant advantage as it prepares its housing
      strategies has to do with better use of the City’s available land, both vacant and developed. This
      could be accomplished through a more proactive planning and design approach to development and
      redevelopment opportunities, and using mixed use and/or residential infill techniques.
      The design of “neighborhood villages,” well within the City’s existing intensity/density and
      community character, would strategically position the City to not only better manage change and
      create special places within the City, but also help meet its housing challenges. The City already
      has taken a number of important steps upon which it can build. For example, a key step in this
      process in the ongoing efforts to bring forward a mixed-use residential development proposal for the
      site just north of the transit station. Other important opportunities should arise as a result of normal
      private market redevelopment cycles, especially of older, marginal strip commercial centers. The
      City is in a good position to leverage sustainable development resources in order to take the
      necessary steps to meet its share of the housing needs and to manage that change in a proactive
      manner, resulting in new and vibrant neighborhood villages that are consistent with the character of
      Solana Beach and that could become valuable community assets.
      1.    Regional Share Goals
      All new units built or preserved after January 1, 2010 are credited in the current RHNA period.
      During the first two years of the 2010-2020 RHNA cycle, ten housing units were issued building
      permits, leaving a remainder of 330 units in the total RHNA allocation for all income types. Of those
      ten housing units, four units were permitted in the first year of the reporting period in 2010. During
      the second year, there were ten new dwelling units and four demolished units, resulting in a net
      increase of six above moderate dwelling units in 2011. For the current RHNA cycle, the number of
      permitted housing units by affordable category is listed below:
      •   The City’s total RHNA allocation for above moderate income units is 131 and nine units in this
      category have been permitted.
      •   The total RHNA allocation for moderate income units is 59 and zero moderate income units
      have been permitted.
      •   The total RHNA allocation for low income units is 65 and one unit has been permitted, which is a
      deed restricted accessory living unit.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 208 of 399
      •   The total RHNA allocation for very low income units is 85 and zero units have been permitted.
      Table III-1 shows the RHNA and new units built during 2010 and 2011, and the net remaining growth
      need.
                                                    Table III-1
                                             Net Remaining RHNA –
                                                  Solana Beach
                                                              Income Category
                                                EL/VL/L              Mod        Above       Total
               RHNA (total)                        150                59         131         340
               Units Completed 2010-
               11                                   1                  0          9           10
               RHNA (net remaining)                149                59         122         330
      Source: City of Solana Beach Community Development Dept., 3/2012
      2.   Inventory of Sites for Housing Development
      Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an “inventory of
      land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for
      redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to
      these sites.” A detailed analysis of vacant land and potential redevelopment opportunities has been
      prepared and is described in Appendix B. The results of this analysis are summarized in Table III-2,
      below. The table shows that the city’s land inventory, including projects approved and the potential
      development of vacant and underutilized parcels, exceeds the net remaining RHNA for this planning
      period.
                                                    Table III-2
                                            Land Inventory Summary
                                                  Solana Beach
                                                                         Minimum           Site
                                                          Net RHNA        Density       Inventory
              Income Group       RHNA        Credits     Remaining       Guidelines      Capacity
               Extremely
                                    43          0              43
               Low
                                                                          20 Du/Ac         280
               Very Low             42          0              42
               Low                  65          1              64
               Moderate                                                                29 + Excess
                                    59          0              59         15 Du/Ac     capacity from
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 209 of 399
                                                                                              above
               Above                                                                       55 + Excess
                                                                           Less than 15
               Moderate             131          9              122                       capacity from
                                                                               Du/Ac
                                                                                              above
               Total            340         10           330                              364
      A discussion of public facilities and infrastructure needed to serve future development is contained
      in Section IV.B, Non-Governmental Constraints. There are currently no known service limitations
      that would preclude the level of development described in the RHNA, although developers will be
      required to pay fees or construct public improvements prior to or concurrent with development.
      B.    Financial and Administrative Resources
      1.    State and Federal Resources
      State and federal funding sources for affordable housing have declined significantly since the
      adoption of the City’s last housing element in 2006. Requests for funding greatly exceed available
      funds. The City will seek to utilize these sources if it identifies a project that may be competitive,
      but it is unlikely that any funds obtained will meet more than a fraction of the City’s identified need
      for lower income housing. A study prepared by Keyser-Marston Associates in 2010 showed that the
      subsidy required for a lower income rental unit in Solana Beach would range from $109,000 to
      $162,000 per unit, while the subsidy for an extremely low income unit would range from $239,000 to
      $292,000 per unit. The City would need to obtain $25 million to $35 million in subsidies to meet its
      entire lower income housing need.
      Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
      The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program is a flexible program that provides
      communities with resources to address a wide range of unique community development needs. It
      works to ensure decent affordable housing, to provide services to the most vulnerable populations,
      and to create jobs through the expansion and retention of businesses.
      Every year, the City of Solana Beach is eligible to apply for federal CDBG funding administered by
      the County of San Diego Department of Housing and Community Development. In past years, the
      City has been granted funds used for the Eden Gardens Master Plan improvements. These funds,
      which have totaled over $160,000, are used to continue to implement street improvements such as
      drainage facilities, curbs, sidewalks, and gutters. The City has also been looking for opportunities
      to utilize CDBG grant funding for affordable housing projects.
      HOME Investment Partnership Funds (HOME)
      HOME is a Federal housing program administered by the California Department of Housing and
      Urban Development (HUD). The program provides federal funds to local jurisdictions to develop and
      rehabilitate rental and ownership housing affordable to low-income households. The program
      defines low-income as households below 80 percent of area median income. HOME gives local
      governments flexibility to fund a wide range of affordable housing activities through housing
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 210 of 399
      partnerships with private industry and non-profit organizations.
      Because of its small size, Solana Beach does not receive an allocation of HOME funds and must
      apply through the County of San Diego. The City has hoped to utilize County HOME funds in
      connection with the Hitzke development discussed in Section 2, Local Resources.
      Section 8 Rental Assistance
      The Housing Choice (Section 8) voucher program is the federal government’s major program for
      assisting very low-income families, the elderly, and the disabled to rent decent, safe, and sanitary
      housing in the private market. Since the rental assistance is provided on behalf of the family or
      individual, participants are able to find and lease privately owned housing, including single-family
      homes, townhouses and apartments from landlords who accept vouchers.
      The County of San Diego Department of Housing and Community Development (County HCD)
      coordinates and administers Section 8 rental assistance on behalf of the City of Solana Beach.
      Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program
      The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program was created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to
      provide an alternate method of funding low- and moderate-income housing. Each state receives a
      tax credit, based upon population, toward funding housing that meets program guidelines. The tax
      credits are then used to leverage private capital into new construction or acquisition and
      rehabilitation of affordable housing. Projects funded under the Tax Credit programs must include a
      certain percentage of rent-restricted units, typically for households earning 50 to 60 percent of
      median income.
      Nine percent tax credits are granted by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee and are
      highly oversubscribed, with few successful projects. Four percent tax credits are granted by the
      California Debt Limit Allocation Committee. While these are less competitive, they provide a lower
      subsidy, so that typically only a portion of a development is affordable.
      California Housing Financing Agency (CalHFA)
      The California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) was established in 1975 as the state’s affordable
      housing bank. CalHFA makes low interest rate loans to first-time homebuyers and multi-family
      developers through the sale of tax-exempt bonds and other financing tools. CalHFA is a self-
      supporting state agency, with bonds being repaid by revenues generated through mortgage loans,
      not taxpayer dollars. However, beginning with the 2008 recession, CalHFA was unable to issue
      bonds for low-interest multifamily housing development, and no funds are currently available.
      CalHFA does administer the Mental Health Services Act, which assists supportive housing for
      mentally ill persons.
      Emergency Shelter Grant Program (ESG)
      Each year, the County Department of Housing and Community Development (County HCD)
      receives funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for homeless
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 211 of 399
      assistance under the Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG). The ESG program is designed to be the first
      step in a continuum of assistance to prevent homelessness and to enable homeless individuals and
      families to move toward independent living.
      ESG funds are used by emergency shelters and transitional housing facilities for activities such as:
      renovation, rehabilitation and conversion of building for use as an emergency shelter or transitional
      housing, essential services, operating costs and homeless prevention activities.
      County HCD currently funds five programs in San Diego County with ESG funds including the
      Interfaith Shelter Network, which provides seasonal shelter and services to homeless persons in
      Solana Beach as described in Chapter 2.
      Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP)
      The multi-family housing program (MHP) is administered by the State Department of Housing and
      Community Development (HCD) and provides assistance for new construction, rehabilitation and
      preservation of permanent and transitional rental housing for lower income households. The
      program offers 55-year term loans with a simple interest of three percent per year. For the first 30
      years, annual interest payments are required in the amount of 0.42 percent of the outstanding
      principal loan balance. The annual payment amount for the next 25 years is set by HCD in year 30,
      and is the minimum amount necessary to cover HCD’s monitoring costs. Unpaid principal and
      accrued/deferred interest is due at the end of the loan term.
      MHP funds are provided for post-construction permanent financing only. Eligible costs include the
      cost of child care, after-school care and social service facilities integrally linked to the assisted
      housing units; real property acquisition; refinancing to retain affordable rents; necessary onsite and
      offsite improvements; reasonable fees and consulting costs; and capitalized reserves. HCD
      expects MHP funds to be leveraged with other resources, including local government funds, the
      federal Continuum of Care programs, four percent low-income housing tax credits, tax-exempt bond
      financing and private debt financing. MHP-General projects using nine percent tax credits are
      ineligible.
      Eligible applicants include local public entities, for-profit and nonprofit corporations, limited equity
      housing cooperatives, individuals, Indian reservations and rancherias, and limited partnerships in
      which an eligible applicant or an affiliate of an applicant is a general partner. Applicants or their
      principals must have successfully developed at least one affordable housing project.
      Affordable Housing Innovation Program (AHIP)
      The Affordable Housing Innovation Fund provides funding for three programs to demonstrate
      innovative, cost-saving approaches to creating or preserving affordable housing: the California
      Affordable Housing Revolving Development and Acquisition Program, the Construction Liability
      Insurance Reform Pilot Program, and the Innovative Homeownership Program. This fund also
      provides funding to the existing Local Housing Trust Fund Program. These programs are
      administered by HCD and provide financing for the development or preservation of affordable
      housing. The Acquisition Program provides loans for developers through a non-profit fund manager
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 212 of 399
      for property acquisition. Applicants must demonstrate local government support, the availability of
      leveraged funds, organizational stability and capacity, and a track record of developing affordable
      housing. The Construction Liability Insurance Reform Pilot Program reduces insurance rates for
      condominium development by promoting best practices in construction quality control and provides
      grants for pre-development costs. Eligible applicants must be receiving financing from other HCD of
      CalHFA programs. Solana Beach is not eligible to receive funding for the Innovative
      Homeownership Program as that program is only available to Cities or Counties designated as
      either a Gold or Silver Catalyst Community under the Department’s Catalyst Projects for California
      Sustainable Strategies Pilot Program. The Local Housing Trust Fund Program provides matching
      grants (dollar-for-dollar) to local housing trust funds that are funded on an ongoing basis from
      private contributions or public sources that are not otherwise restricted in use for housing
      programs.
      Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods Program (BEGIN)
      The purpose of the Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods Program (BEGIN) is to reduce
      local regulatory barriers to affordable homeownership housing and provide down-payment
      assistance loans to qualifying first-time low- and moderate-income homebuyers in BEGIN Program
      projects. Grants recipients (Cities and Counties) make deferred-payment, second mortgage loans
      to qualified buyers of new homes in projects where the affordability has been enhanced by local
      regulatory incentives or barrier reductions. The loans cannot exceed 20 percent of the home sales
      price. Applications are invited through the issuance of Notices of Funding Availability (NOFA) from
      HCD.
      CalHome Program
      The CalHome Program is administered by HCD to enable low and very low income households to
      become or remain homeowners. Localities or nonprofit organizations that receive CalHome awards
      in turn make deferred-payment or forgivable loans available to individual homeowners or
      homebuyers.
      Predevelopment Loan Program
      The predevelopment loan program provides capital to finance the start of low income housing
      projects. Eligible costs include, but are not limited to, site control, site acquisition for future low-
      income housing development, engineering studies, architectural plans, application fees, legal
      services, permits, bonding, and site preparation. Priority is given to developments which are rural,
      located in public transit corridors, or which preserve and acquire existing government-assisted
      rental housing at risk of conversion to market rents. Short term loans are provided with three
      percent simple annual interest for up to two years. The maximum loan amount for purposes other
      than site option or site purchase is $100,000.
      Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Housing Program
      Under the Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Program, low-interest loans are available as gap
      financing for rental housing developments that include affordable units, and as mortgage assistance
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 213 of 399
      for homeownership developments. In addition, grants are available to cities, counties, and transit
      agencies for infrastructure improvements necessary for the development of specified housing
      developments, or to facilitate connections between these developments and the transit station.
      Infill Infrastructure Grant Program
      The primary objective of the Infill Infrastructure Grant Program is to promote infill housing
      development. The program seeks to accomplish this objective by providing financial assistance for
      infrastructure improvements necessary to facilitate new infill housing development. Under the
      program, grants are available as gap funding for infrastructure improvements necessary for specific
      residential or mixed use infill development projects. Both infill projects and areas must have either
      been previously developed or be largely surrounded by development. Specific eligible
      improvements include: development or rehabilitation of parks or open space, water, sewer or other
      utility service improvements, streets, roads, parking structures, transit linkages, transit shelters,
      traffic mitigation features, sidewalks and streetscape improvements.
      2.     Local Resources
      Solana Beach Housing Successor
      Prior to the dissolution of redevelopment agencies in February 2012, the Solana Beach
      Redevelopment Agency received approximately $200,000 per year in Low and Moderate Income
      Housing Funds to use for affordable housing purposes. The City of Solana Beach elected to
      become the “housing successor” to the Redevelopment Agency, with rights to all housing assets of
      the Agency. However, the City as housing successor receives no additional Low and Moderate
      Income Housing Funds and retains only existing funds that are subject to an existing contract with
      a third party. All other housing funds must be turned over to the County Auditor-Controller.
      The Solana Beach City Council and Redevelopment Agency approved two resolutions on July 14,
      2010, authorizing the City Manager and the Executive Director of the Redevelopment Agency to
      execute an Exclusive Negotiation Agreement (ENA) between the City of Solana Beach, Solana
      Beach Redevelopment Agency and Hitzke Development Corporation (see Resolution Nos. RDA 040
      and 2010-110). The agreement is for a proposed development of an affordable mixed-use housing
      project, including ten very low income units, at the 500 block of South Sierra Avenue. The proposed
      parcel of property is owned by the City of Solana Beach. In January 2011, the Redevelopment
      Agency approved a loan to the developer for the cost of the entitlement process and plan
      preparation. The City received an initial application on February 23, 2011 from Hitzke Development
      Corporation. The project has since been redesigned and a new application was received on January
      23, 2012. This application is currently being processed for a future public hearing at the City
      Council to consider the proposed project and a Disposition and Development Agreement. The City
      can receive no more Low and Moderate Income Housing Funds except those encumbered by this
      loan agreement, and the developer will need to find other sources of subsidy for project
      construction.
      Home Repair Loan Grant Program
             The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 214 of 399
      The County of San Diego Department of Housing and Community Development (County HCD)
      administers a Home Repair Program for owner-occupied property, which provides loans and grants
      for the repair of owner-occupied homes. Eligible households may receive deferred loans offered at
      three percent simple interest and calculated annually on the unpaid principal. The total amount
      borrowed must be repaid when the property changes hands or the recipient moves from the
      property. Owners may borrow up to $25,000 for a single-family home. A non-repayable grant is
      available to eligible mobilehome owners of up to $12,000. Homeowners must reside within the
      residence they wish to repair and have an annual gross household income at or below 80 percent of
      the County of San Diego area median income (AMI).
      Downpayment and Closing Cost Program
      The County of San Diego offers low-interest deferred payment loans of up to $35,000 or 33 percent
      of the purchase price, whichever is less, for low-income first-time homebuyers. The loan funds may
      be used to pay downpayment and closing costs on the purchase of a new or re-sale home.
      Properties eligible for assistance include single-family homes, condominiums, townhomes and
      manufactured homes on a permanent foundation. The appraised value of the property may not
      exceed $451,250. Participants must contribute a minimum of one percent of the purchase price
      from their personal funds. The total gross annual income of the entire household must not exceed
      80 percent of the San Diego County area median income (AMI).
      Affordable Housing Impact Fee
      With the dismantling of local redevelopment agencies, the City no longer has the ability to rely on
      redevelopment set-aside funds for the development of affordable housing. However, the City has
      implemented an affordable housing impact fee for rental residential projects of five or more dwelling
      units. Affordable housing impact fees must be used exclusively to provide or assist with the
      continued provision of affordable housing in the city through acquisition, construction, development
      assistance, rehabilitation, financing, rent or other subsidies, provision of supportive services, or
      other methods, and for costs of administering programs that serve those ends. As an alternative to
      payment of this fee, developers may set aside at least 15 percent of the rental units as affordable to
      very low or low income households if their proposal meets the requirements of the Costa Hawkins
      Act regarding permissible rent controls.
      Density Bonus
      The City of Solana Beach has adopted a density bonus ordinance (Section 17.20.050 of the zoning
      ordinance) that complies with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915 et seq. The
      density bonus ordinance allows developers to receive a residential density bonus when they agree
      to construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households.
      An applicant for a qualifying development may also submit a proposal for additional incentives or
      concessions that assist with the provision of affordable housing by resulting in identifiable,
      financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.
      Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 215 of 399
      Chapter 17.70 of the Solana Beach zoning ordinance specifies the City’s affordable inclusionary
      housing requirements. Developers of for-sale residential projects providing five or more dwelling
      units, or five or more lots for sale for residential purposes, shall construct and set aside 15 percent
      of all units or lots for sale to very low or low income households at sales prices affordable to such
      persons or families. As an alternative, the development may provide an affordable accessory living
      unit (ALU) for each for-sale affordable unit otherwise required, provide rental affordable units rather
      than for-sale affordable units, construct and operate an affordable housing development on other
      property within the city for occupancy by low or very low income households, or acquire existing
      housing units within the city for occupancy by very low or low income households.
      Replacement Housing Fund
      Pursuant to a settlement agreement, the City has set aside a replacement housing fund, but the
      City will require additional funding sources to meet its replacement housing obligations.
      C.    Energy Conservation Opportunities
      The primary uses of energy in urban areas are for transportation, lighting, water heating, and space
      heating and cooling. The high cost of energy demands that efforts be taken to reduce or minimize
      the overall level of urban energy consumption. Energy conservation is important in preserving non-
      renewable fuels to ensure that these resources are available for use by future generations. There
      are also a number of benefits associated with energy conservation including improved air quality,
      reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, and lower energy costs.
      The City is taking strides to conserve energy and thus reduce dependence on fossil fuels. The
      City’s policies relating to energy include encouragement of the use of alternate energy systems,
      urban design that maximizes opportunities for solar energy use and energy conservation, and
      promotion of energy conserving standards and requirements for new construction.
      Title 24, Building Energy Standards for Residential Development, establishes energy budgets or
      maximum energy use levels. The standards of Title 24 supersede local regulations, and State
      requirements mandate Title 24 requirements through implementation by local jurisdictions. The City
      will continue strict enforcement of local and state energy regulations for new residential
      construction, and continue providing residents with information on energy efficiency.
      SDG&E offers an Energy Savings Assistance program to income-qualified households to:
      •   Install improvements to help make the home more energy efficient;
      •   Help understand the best ways to save energy around the home; and
      •   Determine whether some of the appliances are eligible for free repairs or replacement.
      Examples of free home improvements offered by SDG&E include: attic insulation; door
      weatherstripping and caulking; low-flow showerheads and faucet aerators; water heater blankets;
      energy-efficient lighting; and assistance in selecting energy-efficient appliances. The City helps
      publicize this program on its website.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 216 of 399
      In addition, as part of the current General Plan Update, the City is preparing a Climate Action Plan
      to identify greenhouse gas reduction measures and climate adaptation practices suitable for Solana
      Beach. The City has already made significant strides to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by:
      •   Signing the US Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Agreement;
      •   Adopting an ordinance to reduce the use of plastic bags in Solana Beach stores;
      •   Participating in the Cool Cities Program;
      •   Becoming a member of the Local Governments for Sustainability network and the San Diego
      Regional Climate Protection Initiative;
      •   Approving a voluntary Living Forest Carbon Offset Fund Program;
      •   Providing incentives to encourage owners and builders to voluntarily seek certification under the
      GreenPoint Rated (residential) or LEED (commercial) programs;
      •   Carrying out an extensive recycling program aimed at both municipal operations and the
      community at large; and
      •   Working with both the Clean and Green Committee and Ad Hoc Committee on Environmental
      Sustainability to reduce the city’s energy use and carbon footprint. These committees are currently
      in the process of pursuing development of an energy efficiency program and a Solar Financing
      District for the City.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 217 of 399
                                                  IV. Constraints
      In planning for the provision of housing, potential constraints to the development, maintenance, and
      improvement of housing must be analyzed, and jurisdictions must take appropriate steps to relieve
      them, where feasible. Local government cannot control many of these constraints, such as those
      related to general economic and market conditions, but others can be addressed. Actual or potential
      constraints to the provision and cost of housing affect the development of new housing and the
      maintenance of existing units for all income levels. Governmental and non-governmental
      constraints are discussed below.
      A.    Governmental Constraints
      Governmental constraints can limit the operations of the public, private, and non-profit sectors,
      making it difficult to meet the demand for affordable housing and limiting supply in a region.
      Governmental constraints include land use controls, building codes, on- and off-site improvements,
      processing and permit fees, site improvement costs, growth management measures, and
      inclusionary housing requirements.
      1.    Land Use Plans and Regulations
      General Plan
      Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide
      its future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
      development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, General Plan elements must be
      internally consistent and the City’s zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land
      use plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing
      Element.
      The Solana Beach General Plan Land Use Element provides for six residential land use
      designations. Residential uses are also permitted within the commercial zones when integrated into
      a mixed-use development (Refer to Table IV-1.)
                                                     Table IV-1
                         General Plan Residential and Mixed-Use Land Use Categories
                    Residential Land Use          Density                 % of Total City
                          Categories             (DUs/ac)      Acres         Acreage      Max. Units
               Estate                               0-2        288.8           13.1           577
               Low Density                           3         234.6           10.7           796
               Low-Medium Density                    4         327.8           14.9         1,311
               Medium Density                       5-7        164.3            7.5         1,150
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 218 of 399
               Medium-High Density                  8-12        84.3          3.8          1011
               High Density                        13-20       130.3          5.9          2,606
               General Commercial                    20        108.2          4.9          2,164
               Light Commercial                      12         2.2           0.1            26
               Special Commercial                    20         34.2          1.6           684
               Total                                 n/a      1,374.7        62.5%        10,325
      Source: City of Solana Beach General Plan
      The City of Solana Beach General Plan allows more than enough units to accommodate the 6,540
      existing units and the 340 needed to accommodate the City’s fair share. Adequate sites with
      appropriate densities have been identified to permit the construction of the 340 housing units
      adopted by SANDAG for the 2010-2020 RHNA, as shown in Appendix B.
      Densities range from about 1 unit per acre in the Estate category to a maximum of 20 units per acre
      in the High Density and Commercial categories. These densities are typical for many communities
      in San Diego County.
      Specific Plans
      North Rios and Tangaroa Estates Specific Plans
      In 1997, the North Rios Specific Plan was adopted to rezone agricultural land to low-density
      residential. The intent of the Specific Plan was to create a compatible and complimentary land use
      adjacent to the existing residential neighborhood and to produce aesthetically pleasing design
      elements for sustainable neighborhood planning. The Specific Plan allowed for the development of
      approximately 10 acres owned by Isao and Midori Nakatani and Rios Drive Associates, located at
      the northeast corner of Rios Avenue and Patty Hill Drive in the City of Solana Beach. The subject
      land is located approximately 300 feet south of the San Elijo Lagoon.
      The Tangaroa Estates Specific Plan allowed for the residential development of nine lots located
      east of Rios Avenue on the northern edge of the San Elijo Lagoon. The Specific Plan satisfied the
      terms of Resolution No. 96-94, dated September 3, 1996, which amended the City’s General Plan
      Land Use and approved rezoning of the subject property from a combination of Agricultural (A) and
      Open Space/Recreational (OS/R) to a combination of Low Residential (LR/SP) and Open
      Space/Recreational (OSR/SP).
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 219 of 399
      Together, these specific plans apply to only 33 units and are completely built out.
      Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
      The Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan is a plan for the physical development and redevelopment
      of the Highway 101 roadway area that significantly defines Solana Beach. Highway 101 has grown
      over the decades to serve as a vital commercial corridor for the region. With extensive community
      participation, the adopted plan envisions revitalization of the Plaza, Beach Park, and the Highway
      101 corridor as the heart or downtown of Solana Beach.
      The Specific Plan identifies the types, intensity, location, standards, criteria and implementation
      measures for future development and conservation of the 163-acre project area. It was originally
      adopted by Ordinance No. 303, effective June 19, 2003 and later amended by Ordinance No. 346,
      effective July 28, 2006.
      With most of the land area built out, the future development and redevelopment of this vital
      commercial corridor is essential to the long term economic stability of the community. The urban
      design concepts for the area are intended to focus on pedestrian access, create a distinctive but
      rustic and natural setting, encourage a variety of architectural styles to enhance the eclectic
      character of the community, frame and preserve views, minimize the dominance of traffic and
      asphalt parking areas, and establish distinct business districts.
      The provision of residential development with commercial development is encouraged in integrated
      mixed-use developments. Residential dwellings are permitted on the upper floors, in basements,
      and on the rear 50 percent of the ground floor. Alternatively, residential dwellings may be permitted
      in any portion of the building (or buildings) pursuant to a development review permit, provided that
      the total residential development does not exceed 40 percent of gross allowable floor area.
      The development standards provide incentives to incorporate residential uses into commercial
      developments by providing for a higher floor area ratio (FAR) for mixed-use developments as well
      as reduced parking. The standard FAR is 1.0 while the FAR for mixed-use is 1.2. Within the Plaza
      District, retail and office uses that are integrated into a mixed-use development are required to
      provide 3.2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet while retail and office uses that are not
      incorporated into a mixed-use development are required to provide 3.35 parking spaces per 1,000
      square feet. Similarly, restaurants that are integrated into a mixed-use development are required to
      provide seven parking spaces per 1,000 square feet while stand-alone restaurants are required to
      provide 7.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet. In addition, the City is currently in the process of making
      streetscape improvements to the Highway 101 Corridor. These improvements, which include such
      features as decorative lighting and street furniture, additional pedestrian crosswalks, public art, and
      enhanced landscaping, are anticipated to attract residential uses to the area by contributing to a
      more pedestrian and bicycle friendly environment.
      The following tables generally summarize the development standards outlined in the Specific Plan.
      Refer to the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan for full content.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 220 of 399
                                                 Table IV-2
                                   Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                   Residential Development Standards
                      Development                Residential Low          Residential
                      Standard                Medium and Medium Medium High
                       Minimum Lot Area               10,000SF              6,000SF
                       Setbacks
                         Front                           25’                   20’
                         Side                            10’                    5’
                         Rear                            25’                   25’
                       Height                            25’                   30’
                                                 Table IV-3
                                   Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                  Commercial Development Standards
                    Development                 Light         Special           General
                    Standard                Commercial Commercial Commercial
                    Minimum Lot Area          6,000SF         6,000SF           6,000SF
                    Setbacks
                      Front                       15’             10’               0’
                      Side (Interior)             10’              0’               0’
                      Side (Street)               10’             10’               0’
                      Rear                        15’              0’               0’
                    FAR                           1.0             1.0              1.2
                    Height                                    35’ / 2-3         35’ / 2-3
                                           25’ / 2 stories      stories          stories
                                                 Table IV-4
                                    Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                   Mixed-Use Development Standards
                           Development                  Special         General
                           Standard                  Commercial Commercial
                            Minimum Lot Area           10,000SF         6,000SF
                            Setbacks
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      Page 221 of 399
                               Front                        10’               0’
                               Side (Interior)               0’               0’
                               Side (Street)                10’               0’
                               Rear                          0’               0’
                             FAR                            1.2              1.2
                             Height                      35’ / 2-3        35’ / 2-3
                                                          stories          stories
                                                    Table IV-5
                                     Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                            Office/Professional, Public/Institutional, and Open
                                Space/Recreation Development Standards
                 Development                                                          Open
                   Standard     Office/Professional Public/Institutional Space/Recreation
                 Minimum Lot
                 Area                  6,000SF                   n/a                   n/a
                 Setbacks
                   Front                  25’                    25’                   25’
                   Side
                   (Interior)             10’                     5’                    5’
                   Side
                   (Street)                5’                     5’                    5’
                   Rear                   15’                    25’                    5’
                 FAR                      1.0                    2.0                   0.7
                 Height             35’ / 2 stories       30’ / 2 stories        15’ / 1 stories
                                                    Table IV-6
                                     Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                    Plaza District Parking Requirements
                                                              Plaza District
                                                                Non-Mixed- Plaza District
                                                                     Use         Mixed-Use
                           Land Use              City-wide    Development Development
                    Retail/                        5/KSF
                                                                 3.35/KSF         3.2/KSF
                    Office                         4/KSF
                    Restaurant                    10/KSF          7.5/KSF           7/KSF
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 222 of 399
                       Hotel                      1/Room         0.75/Room      0.75/Room
                       Multi-Family
                       Residential                1.7/Unit        1.25/Unit      1.25/Unit
      Note: KSF = 1,000 Square Feet
      Zoning
      The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the
      Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are
      designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Zoning
      Ordinance also helps to preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Zoning
      Ordinance and Zoning Map set forth residential development standards for each zoning district.
      The seven zoning districts that allow residential units as a permitted use are as follows:
                                   ER1           Estate (1 du/ac)
                                   ER2           Estate (2 du/ac)
                                   LR            Low Residential (3 du/ac)
                                                 Low Medium Residential (4
                                   LMR           du/ac)
                                                 Medium Residential (5-7
                                   MR            du/ac)
                                                 Medium High Residential (8-
                                   MHR           12 du/ac)
                                                 High Density Residential (13-
                                   HR            20 du/ac)
      A summary of the development standards for the seven major zoning districts permitting residential
      development is provided in Table IV-8. Refer to the Section 17.20.030 of the City’s zoning
      ordinance for full content. These development standards are reasonable to protect the public health,
      safety and welfare and maintain the quality of life, and are not considered to be constraints to the
      development of housing. Based on the City’s experience, these standards do not prohibit projects
      from achieving the allowable residential densities. Current pending applications for residential and
      mixed-use projects are proposing maximum unit yields. See Appendix B for further information.
                                                    Table IV-7
                                    Generalized Development Standards for
                                               Residential Zones
                                                             Setbacks2
                                                                                              Bldg.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 223 of 399
                                                                                               Bldg.
                   Zone          FAR1                                    Street
                                              Front5,8       Side                   Rear7     Height
                                                                         Side8
              ERI            0.6 for first       35’          15’         10’        50’        25’
              ER2            5,000SF;
                                                 25’          10’         10’        40’        25’
                             plus 0.3 for
              LR                                 25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
                             5,000-
              LMR            20,000SF;
                                                 25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
                             plus 0.15 for
              MR             >20,000SF          25’6        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
              MHR                 0.75           25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’4
              HR                  0.75          25’           5’          10’        25’        25’4
        1.   Each primary dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 650SF in size.
        2.   Additional setback standards for coastal and inland bluffs, as well as the canyon rim in the
        Canyon Drive vicinity apply.
        3.   See Zoning Map for specific setback.
        4.   May be increased to 30’ by City Council review.
        5.   Lots less than 100 feet in depth or fronting on public rights of way greater than 55 feet in
        width have 20 foot front yard setbacks.
        6.   Staggered/incremental setbacks for lots on west side of Pacific Avenue exist.
        7.   Where any lot has a depth of less than 90 feet, the minimum required rear yard shall be 15
        feet.
        8.   All required front and street side yards shall be measured from the edge of the ultimate
        right-of-way.
      A summary of the residential development permitted by Section 17.12.020 of the City’s zoning
      ordinance is provided in Table IV-8, below.
                                                      Table IV-8
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 224 of 399
                           Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District
                                                           Zone
              Residential Use
                                ER1ER2 LR LMR MR MHR HR C SC LC OP PI LI           A OS
            Single-Family         P   P   P   P    P   P  P    E   E  E   E    E E P PL
            Dwellings
            Two-Family            E   E   E   E    P   P  P   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Dwellings (Duplex)
            Multiple-Family       E   E   E   E    P   P  P   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Dwellings
            Residential/Mixed-    E   E   E   E    E   E  E   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Use Buildings
            Residential Care      P   P   P   P    P   P  P    P   P  E   E    E E E  E
            Facilities (6 or
            fewer persons)
            Residential Care      C   C   C   C    C   C  C    C   C  E   E    C E E  E
            Facilities (7-12
            persons)
            Residential Care     CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC E             E CC E   E  E
            Facilities (13 or
            more persons)
            Family Day Care       P   P   P   P    P   P  P    P   P  E   E    E E E  E
            Homes (6 or fewer
            persons)
            Group Residential     E   E   E   E    E   C  C CC E      E   E    E E E  E
            Facilities
            Senior                E   E   E   E   CC CC CC E       E  E   E    E E E  E
            Citizen/Congregate
            Care Housing
            Mobile Home and      PL PL PL PL PL PL PL E            E  E   E    E E PL E
            Manufactured
            Housing (individual
            lots)
            Mobile Home          CC CC CC CC CC CC CC E            E  E   E    E E E  E
            Parks
            Guest Houses         PL PL PL     E    E   E  E    E   E  E   E    E E PL E
            Accessory Living     PL PL PL PL PL        C  C    E   E  E   E    E E PL E
            Units
            Caretaker Units       E   E   E   E    E   E  E   PL PL PL PL C PL E CC
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 225 of 399
               Home Occupations PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL E                        E   E PL PL
               Live/Work Uses         E  E    E    E    E     E     E C   C     E  E   E   E   E    E
      P= Permitted; PL= Permitted subject to limitations; C= Subject to a conditional use permit issued
        by Community Development Director; CC= Subject to a conditional use permit issued by the
        City Council; E= Not permitted
      Table IV-8 abbreviates the zoning districts as presented below:
                                    ER1        Estate (1 du/ac)
                                    ER2        Estate (2 du/ac)
                                    LR         Low Residential (3 du/ac)
                                    LMR        Low Medium Residential (4 du/ac)
                                    MR         Medium Residential (5-7 du/ac)
                                               Medium High Residential (8-12
                                    MHR        du/ac)
                                               High Density Residential (13-20
                                    HR         du/ac)
                                    C          General Commercial
                                    SC         Special Commercial
                                    LC         Limited Commercial
                                    OP         Office Professional
                                    PI         Public/Institutional
                                    LI         Light Industrial
                                    A          Agricultural
                                    OS         Open Space/Recreation
      The zoning ordinance provides for a variety of housing types including single-family homes (both
      attached and detached), multi-family (both rental and condominiums), mixed-use, manufactured
      housing, accessory dwelling units, and live/work units. Low-income housing can be accommodated
      in all residential districts.
      As identified in Table IV-8, residential uses are permitted in the City’s General, Special, and Light
      Commercial zones. The provision of residential development with commercial development is
      encouraged in a mixed use integrated development. Residential dwellings are permitted on the
      upper floors, in basements, and on the rear 50 percent of the ground floor. Alternatively, residential
      dwellings may be permitted in any portion of the building (or buildings) pursuant to a development
      review permit, provided that the total residential development does not exceed 40 percent of gross
      allowable floor area. Residential dwellings approved pursuant to a development review permit shall
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 226 of 399
      be compatible with the intent of the commercial zones to preserve and enhance street level
      pedestrian oriented commercial frontages.
      The maximum residential density allowed within the General Commercial and Special Commercial
      zones is 20 dwelling units per acre. The maximum residential density within the Light Commercial
      zone is 12 dwelling units per acre.
      A summary of the commercial development standards is provided in Table IV-9, below. Refer to
      Chapter 17.28 of the City’s Municipal Code for full content.
                                                     Table IV-9
                                     Generalized Development Standards for
                                                Commercial Zones1
                                                           Setbacks2
                                                                                               Bldg.
                   Zone          FAR                                 Street
                                           Front        Side                        Rear      Height3
                                                                      Side
               C              1.2             0’          0’4           0’           0’4         35’
               SC             1.0/1.25                                                        35’/25’6
                 North and                    0’          0’            5’           0’
                 South
                 Cedros
                 All Other                   10’          0’            5’           0’
                 Streets
               LC             1.0            10’          0’4          10’           0’4         25’
        1The  Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan has established superseding standards.
        2In the South Cedros Avenue district, a minimum 15-foot rear or side yard shall be required
        where any portion of the rear or side yard abuts a residentially zoned property. If permitted,
        each story above two (one in the Stevens Avenue district) shall be set back an additional five
        feet from the required setback of the story below it. In the North Cedros Avenue district and the
        Stevens Avenue district, a minimum 10-foot rear or side yard shall be required where any
        portion of the rear or side yard abuts a residentially zoned property. Architectural features, such
        as eaves, steps, balconies, and stairways, may not project more than five feet into any required
        setback area. In the South Cedros Avenue district, upper level architectural relief, such as
        raised elements, slightly offset upper levels, and/or artificial or real windows, etc., is required;
        and front setback of 10 feet from face of curb to building, with a three-foot wide parkway and a
        seven-foot-wide sidewalk.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                        Page 227 of 399
        3Up   to 15 percent of the roof plane may exceed a height of 35 feet to allow for architectural
        projections of exceptional quality and merit.
        4A  minimum 10 foot rear or side yard shall be required where any portion of the rear or side yard
        abuts a residentially zoned property. Each story above two shall be setback an additional five
        feet from the required setback of the story below it.
        5FAR    is increased to 1.2 for mixed-use projects in the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan area.
        6Height   limit is 35’ within the Steven’s Avenue district and north of Lomas Santa Fe and 25’
        south of Lomas Santa Fe.
      These development standards are not considered to be a constraint to the establishment of
      residential uses in commercial zones. The City is currently in the process of reviewing two
      applications for mixed-use developments within the General Commercial zone. In addition, the City
      is working with the North County Transit District on a mixed-use development proposal adjacent to
      the transit station.
      Special Needs Housing
      Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, emergency shelters,
      transitional and supportive housing, housing for persons with disabilities, elderly housing,
      farmworker housing, and single room occupancy units. The City’s provisions for these housing
      types are discussed below.
      Residential Care Facilities
      Residential care facilities are defined as any family home, group care facility, or similar facility, with
      or without food services(s) and kitchen facilities, for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of
      personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or
      for the protection of the individual including, but not limited to, alcoholism or drug abuse recovery
      facilities, congregate living facilities, community care facilities, or intermediate care facilities for the
      disabled, which are licensed by the State of California, excluding housing for the elderly, nursing
      and convalescent homes. Consistent with state law, small residential care facilities that serve six
      or fewer persons are permitted by right in all residential zones. Residential care facilities that serve
      seven to twelve persons are allowed with the Community Development Director’s approval of a
      conditional use permit in all residential zones; residential care facilities with thirteen or more
      persons require approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council. The City has no
      concentration requirements for residential care facilities and imposes the same parking
      requirements as required for similar uses in the zone. The City will be amending its zoning
      ordinance to ensure that the definition of a residential care facility is distinct from that of transitional
      or supportive housing.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 228 of 399
      Emergency Shelters
      Senate Bill 2 requires local governments to identify one or more zones that will allow for emergency
      shelters (year round shelters for the homeless) without a conditional use permit or other
      discretionary action. The identified zone(s) must have sufficient capacity to accommodate at least
      one year-round emergency shelter and accommodate the city’s unsheltered homeless population.
      The statute permits the City to apply objective development regulations to emergency shelters
      related to the maximum number of beds, off-street parking, the size and location of waiting and
      intake areas, the provision of onsite management, the proximity to other emergency shelters, length
      of stay, lighting, and security.
      The City of Solana Beach’s zoning ordinance does not explicitly address emergency shelters.
      Therefore, the City will amend its zoning ordinance within one year of adoption of the Housing
      Element to allow emergency shelters by right in the General Commercial zone. The General
      Commercial zone is the most appropriate zone for an emergency shelter since it allows for similar
      uses, is close to public transportation, and provides convenient access to services and retail uses.
      There are approximately 4.6 acres of vacant land in the General Commercial zone, with the
      smallest lot sized at around 6,800 square feet. This is more than sufficient to establish an
      emergency shelter that can accommodate the estimated homeless population of seven persons in
      Solana Beach. In addition, there are numerous opportunities for redevelopment within this zone.
      Transitional and Supportive Housing
      Senate Bill 2 also requires that transitional and supportive housing be treated like any other
      residential use in the same zone. Transitional housing is rental housing for stays of at least six
      months where the units are re-circulated to another program recipient after a set period. It may
      include supportive services to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of
      independent living. Supportive housing has no limit on the length of stay, provides onsite or offsite
      services, and is occupied by a target population such as low income persons with mental
      disabilities, people with substance abuse or chronic health conditions, or people with developmental
      disabilities. Services typically include assistance designed to meet the needs of the target
      population in retaining housing, living and working in the community, and/or improving health.
      Currently, the City of Solana Beach zoning ordinance does not list transitional and supportive
      housing as separate residential uses. Consistent with state law, the zoning ordinance will be
      revised to specifically treat transitional and supportive housing as standard residential uses
      permitted in all zones where residential uses are permitted.
      Housing for Persons with Disabilities
      Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination – significantly limit the supply of
      housing available to households of persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need for
      persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs. Most single-family homes are
      inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to
      widened doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered countertops, and other
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 229 of 399
      features necessary for accessibility. Location of housing is also an important factor for many
      persons with disabilities, as they often rely on public transportation to travel to necessary services
      and shops.
      The City has conducted a review of its zoning laws, policies, and practices and has not identified
      zoning or other land use regulatory practices that could discriminate against persons with
      disabilities or impede the availability of housing to such individuals. The City permits housing for
      special needs groups, including for individuals with disabilities, without regard to distances between
      such uses or the number of uses in any part of the City. The Land Use Element of the General Plan
      does not restrict the siting of special needs housing. The City is also in the process of updating its
      General Plan to include policies that encourage universal design standards to create environments
      that are usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone, regardless of age, ability, or situation.
      Section 17.08.030 of the City’s zoning ordinance defines family as, “two or more persons living
      together as a bona fide single housekeeping unit.” This definition does not limit the number of
      unrelated adults in a household and is consistent with the California Supreme Court’s decision in
      Adamson v. City of Santa Barbara, which does not allow limits on the number of unrelated persons
      who live together as a single housekeeping unit.
      The City does not impose special permit procedures or requirements that could impede the
      retrofitting of homes for accessibility. The City’s requirements for building permits and inspections
      are the same as for other residential projects and are fairly simple and straightforward. City officials
      are not aware of any instances in which an applicant experienced delays or rejection of a retrofitting
      proposal for accessibility to persons with disabilities. The City does not impose special occupancy
      permit requirements for the establishment or retrofitting of structures for residential use by persons
      with disabilities.
      The City will continue to take actions to accommodate the approval of housing for persons with
      disabilities, ADA retrofit efforts, ADA compliance and/or other measures through the implementation
      of Title 24 as well as provide flexibility in the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
      The City has established the following procedures for obtaining reasonable accommodation
      pursuant to ADA:
      •   Ensure Reasonable Accommodations. Individuals with disabilities can telephone the City,
      send an email, write a letter, stop by City offices, or appear at a City meeting to request special
      accommodation or variance from the requirements of the City zoning or building codes due to a
      disability. The City has variance and encroachment permit processes to accommodate special
      structures or appurtenances, such as handicapped access ramps or lifts, needed by persons with
      disabilities. The City recently granted a reasonable accommodation to its affordable housing
      policies to allow a severely disabled person to reside with a caregiver.
      •   Variance Permit Procedure. The City can grant variances from zoning standards to
      accommodate the legitimate needs of persons with disabilities. Applications involving variances can
      be advertised as a public hearing and heard by the Director of Community Development. A request
      for a variance to accommodate handicapped access needs can be handled in four weeks or less.
      The Community Development Director’s decision to approve such a variance may be appealed to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 230 of 399
      the City Council at a public hearing. The City has worked closely with all applicants, but has never
      received a variance application for ADA issues. The City will be revising its procedures to eliminate
      the need to obtain a variance to grant reasonable accommodations (See Program 6D in Chapter 5).
      •   Encroachment Permit Procedure. Encroachment permits for structures within public rights-of-
      way also are handled administratively by the Public Works Department. Such permits are typically
      approved in less than 30 days for minor encroachments of the type needed for disabled
      accessibility. The Public Works Director’s decision to deny an encroachment permit may be
      appealed by the applicant to the City Council, which must conduct a public hearing and make a final
      decision within 45 days of an appeal.
      •   Residential Retrofitting. The City also allows residential retrofitting to increase the suitability
      of homes for persons with disabilities in compliance with ADA requirements. Such retrofitting is
      permitted under Chapter 11 of the 1998 version of the California Code. The City works with
      applicants who need special accommodations in their homes to ensure the application of building
      code requirements does not create a constraint. The City’s Zoning Ordinance has been reviewed
      for Chapter 11 compliance and has been found to be compliant.
      •   Information Regarding Accommodation for Zoning, Permit Processing, and Building
      Codes. The City implements and enforces Chapter 11 of the California Code, which is very similar
      to ADA. The City provides information to applicants or those inquiring of City regulations regarding
      accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of building codes for persons with
      disabilities.
      •   Building Codes. The City provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in
      the enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits through its flexible
      approaches to retrofitting or converting existing buildings and construction of new buildings that
      meet the shelter needs of persons with disabilities.
      Housing for the Elderly
      Senior citizen/congregate care housing developments are subject to a Conditional Use Permit
      issued by the City Council in the MR, MHR, and HR zones. The zoning ordinance allows a 25
      percent density bonus as an incentive to construct senior citizen/congregate care housing. In
      addition, such developments have fewer parking requirements. They are subject to the regulations
      included in Section 17.20.040 (E) of the City’s zoning ordinance, which are intended to protect
      health, safety, and welfare. Those regulations are summarized as follows:
      •   The parcel upon which the senior group housing facility is to be established shall conform to all
      standards of the underlying zone.
      •   The senior group housing shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.
      •   The main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the parking facility shall
      be provided with handicapped access.
      •   Indoor common areas and living units shall be handicap adaptable and be provided with all
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 231 of 399
      necessary safety equipment (e.g., safety bars, etc.), as well as emergency signal/intercom
      systems as determined by the Director.
      •    Adequate internal and external lighting, including walkways, shall be provided for security
      purposes.
      •    Common recreational and entertainment activity areas of a size and scale consistent with the
      number of living units shall be provided. The minimum size shall equal 100 square feet for each
      living unit.
      •    Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility, consistent with the number of
      living units and the Uniform Building Code, shall be provided.
      •    Off-street parking shall be provided in the following manner:
      o    One covered parking space for each dwelling unit for the exclusive use of the senior citizen
      residents plus one space for every five units for guest parking.
      o    Three parking spaces for every four dwelling units for employee and guest use for congregate
      care residences.
      o    All off-street parking shall be located within 150 feet of the front door of the main entrance.
      o    Adequate and suitably striped paved areas for shuttle parking. Shaded waiting areas shall be
      provided adjacent to the shuttle stops.
      o    Design standards relating to handicapped parking, access, surfacing, striping, lighting,
      landscaping, shading, dimensional requirements, etc. shall be consistent with the standards
      outlined in The City of Solana Beach Off-Street Parking Design Manual.
      o    Senior citizen/congregate care parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project
      basis, subject to a parking study based on project location and proximity to services for senior
      citizens including but not limited to medical offices, shopping areas, mass transit, etc.
      •    All parts of all structures shall be within 150 feet of paved access for single-story and 50 feet for
      multistory.
      The Density Bonus provisions outlined in Section 17.20.050 of the Solana Beach zoning ordinance
      also specify that Senior Citizen Housing Developments, as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil
      Code, are permitted to receive density bonuses or equivalent financial incentives pursuant to State
      Government Code Section 65915.
      Farmworker Housing
      As discussed in Chapter II, the City of Solana Beach does not have major agricultural areas, and
      only 11 part-time seasonal agricultural workers were found to be residing in the City. The City’s
      overall efforts to provide and maintain affordable housing opportunities will help to provide housing
      for any farmworkers that may choose to reside in the city.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 232 of 399
      Single-Room Occupancy Units
      Single-room occupancy units, or SROs, are one-room units intended for occupancy by a single
      individual. They are similar to studios or efficiency units. Although the zoning ordinance does not
      specifically identify this housing type as a permitted use, it falls within the category of multi-family
      housing. Subject to the same development standards as multi-family dwellings, SROs would be
      allowed by right in the MR, MHR, and HR zones, and permitted subject to limitations in the C, SC,
      and LC zones. The zoning ordinance will be amended to include clarifying language that specifies
      that SROs are considered a multi-family use.
      Accessory Living Units
      Accessory living units, which are a tool in facilitating affordable housing, are permitted by-right
      (subject to limitations) in the ER, LR, LMR, and MR districts. The passage of AB 1866 requires
      cities to use a ministerial process to consider accessory dwelling units in an effort to facilitate the
      production of affordable housing statewide. Accessory dwelling units must also comply with Section
      17.20.040 (D) of the City’s zoning ordinance; those development standards are summarized as
      follows:
      •   A detached primary dwelling unit shall exist on the lot or premises.
      •   The lot on which an accessory living unit is proposed shall have a minimum area of 6,000
      square feet, not including any commonly owned area.
      •   The accessory living unit shall be attached to or contained within the primary dwelling in such a
      manner as to avoid the appearance of the add-on unit. For the purposes of this regulation,
      “attachment” shall include second story additions to (a) the principal structure, (b) an attached
      garage, or (c) a detached garage. The accessory living unit shall be architecturally integrated with
      the structure to which it is attached. The entrance to an accessory living unit shall not be visible
      from the street adjacent to the front yard setback.
      •   The maximum allowed area of the accessory living unit shall be 640 square feet. The minimum
      allowed area of the accessory unit shall be 350 square feet.
      •   The total floor area of all structures shall not exceed the maximum floor area (FAR) for the site.
      •   The owner of the property must continually occupy either the main dwelling unit or the
      accessory living unit. For purposes of this section, “owner” includes a lessee if the leasehold
      includes both the main dwelling and accessory living unit.
      •   One off-street parking space shall be provided for the accessory living unit and all off-street
      parking deficiencies shall be corrected.
      •   Any construction of an accessory living unit shall conform to all property development
      regulations of the zone in which the property is located as well as all fire, health, safety and building
      provisions of this title.
      •   The City may offer incentives to encourage development of accessory dwelling units. If owners
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 233 of 399
      of accessory units elect to file a 30-year deed restriction to rent the unit to lower income
      households, the City will consider waiving fees and reducing parking and development standards or
      providing other incentives consistent with the Costa Hawkins Act.
      Eight accessory living units were constructed in Solana Beach from 2003 to 2010.
      Off-Street Parking Requirements
      The City’s parking requirements for residential uses vary by residential type. Single-family
      dwellings require 2 parking spaces per unit. Multi-family dwellings require 1 parking space per
      studio unit, 1.5 spaces per one bedroom unit, and 2 spaces for two or more bedroom units, in
      addition to guest parking. The parking requirements, specified in Section 17.52.040 of the City’s
      zoning ordinance, are summarized in Table IV-10, below.
                                                    Table IV-10
                                       Residential Parking Requirements
                             Use                              Number of Spaces Required
              Single-family dwellings             2 spaces
              Two-family dwellings, multiple      For rental apartments - a minimum of 50 percent
              family dwellings, and mobile        of required parking spaces shall be covered
              homes
                 Studios                          1 space per unit
                 One Bedroom                      1.5 spaces per unit
                 Two or More Bedrooms             2 spaces per unit
              Mobile Home Parks                   2 covered spaces per unit within an enclosed
                                                  garage which may be tandem, and 1 uncovered
                                                  guest space for each 4 units
              Group Residential                   1 space for each resident in accordance with
                                                  total permitted occupancy plus 1 guest space for
                                                  each 4 residents of permitted occupancy
              Accessory Living Units              1 space in addition to those required for primary
                                                  residence
              Caretaker Units                     2 spaces in addition to those required for primary
                                                  use
              Residential Day Care                2 spaces in addition to those required for primary
                                                  residence
              Residential Care Facilities         The use should comply with all property
                                                  development regulations of the underlying zone,
                                                  including parking, unless a variance is granted in
                                                  conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit for
                                                  facilities serving 7 or more persons
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 234 of 399
      The required parking is typical for most cities in San Diego County and is not considered to be a
      constraint on the production of affordable housing because applicants of affordable housing
      developments may request reduced parking requirements as a density bonus concession. The City
      Council also has the ability to grant reduced parking for senior housing through the Conditional Use
      Permit process. In addition, in all zones, applicants may request a reduction in the total number of
      required off-street parking spaces if the parking facilities may be shared by multiple uses whose
      activities are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when hours of peak use vary. This
      is also accomplished through the Conditional Use Permit process.
      Density Bonus
      The City of Solana Beach has adopted a density bonus ordinance (Section 17.20.050 of the zoning
      ordinance) that complies with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915 et seq. Under the
      City’s ordinance, a density bonus of 20 percent is available to senior housing developments as
      defined by Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code and a density increase of up to 35 percent over
      the otherwise maximum allowable residential density is available to developers who agree to
      construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households. An
      applicant for a qualifying development may also submit a proposal for up to three additional
      incentives including, but not limited to, the reduction of zoning ordinance requirements, approval of
      mixed-use development in conjunction with the multi-family residential project, or any other
      regulatory incentives or concessions which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
      cost reductions. An applicant may also request a density bonus and/or incentives for land donation,
      child care, and condominium conversions.
      Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing
      Chapter 17.70 of the Solana Beach zoning ordinance specifies the City’s affordable inclusionary
      housing requirements. Developers of for-sale residential projects providing five or more dwelling
      units, or five or more lots for sale for residential purposes, shall construct and set aside 15 percent
      of all units or lots for sale to very low or low income households at sales prices affordable to such
      persons or families. As an alternative, the development may provide an affordable accessory living
      unit (ALU) for each for-sale affordable unit otherwise required, provide rental affordable units rather
      than for-sale affordable units, construct and operate an affordable housing development on other
      property within the city for occupancy by low or very low income households, or acquire existing
      housing units within the city for occupancy by very low or low income households.
      For rental residential projects of five or more dwelling units, prior to the issuance of a building
      permit for each market-rate rental dwelling unit, affordable housing impact fees shall be paid to
      mitigate the rental residential project’s impact on the need for affordable housing in the city. As an
      alternative, the developer may enter into a development agreement with the City pursuant to
      Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. to provide rental affordable units rather than paying the
      affordable housing impact fee.
      In August 2010, Keyser Marston Associates prepared an “Economic Study of Affordable Housing
      Need” for the City and concluded that the City’s affordable housing requirements were not a
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 235 of 399
      significant additional constraint on residential development. The analysis noted that Solana Beach’s
      inclusionary program was adopted in 1994, that residential development had proceeded at a
      reasonable rate since 1994, that land prices had long adjusted for the inclusionary requirement, and
      that developers who assembled sites in Solana Beach were aware that the inclusionary
      requirements must be taken into account in determining project economics. The report noted that a
      more important constraint is the absence of large developable sites because the City is largely built
      out.
      Mobilehomes/Manufactured Housing
      State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile homes on
      permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also requires that a mobile home park be a permitted
      land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use and prohibits requiring the average
      density in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code.
      In the City of Solana Beach, manufactured housing and mobile homes are allowed in all residential
      zones as a permitted use provided the following requirements, outlined in Section 17.20.040 (B) of
      the zoning ordinance, are met:
      •   The structure has been certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
      Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and has not been altered in violation
      of applicable codes.
      •   The structure is occupied only as a single-family detached residential dwelling.
      •   The structure is attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with the provisions of
      Section 18551 of the state of California Health and Safety Code.
      •   The structure is covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventional dwellings.
      The exterior material shall extend to the ground, except that when a skirt or solid concrete or
      masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top
      of the foundation.
      •   The structure has a roof pitch of not less than two inches vertical rise for each 12 inches of
      horizontal run and consists of shingles or other material customarily used for conventional
      dwellings.
      •   Prior to installation of a mobile home on a permanent foundation system, the owner or a
      licensed contractor shall obtain a building permit from the department of community development.
      To obtain a permit, the owner or contractor shall comply with all requirements of Section 18551(a)
      of the Health and Safety Code.
      Mobile home parks are allowed as a conditional use within all residential zones and the agricultural
      zone. The City of Solana Beach currently has no mobilehome parks.
      Condominium Conversions
      In order to reduce the impacts of condominium conversions on residents of rental housing and to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 236 of 399
      maintain a supply of rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons, the City only considers
      requests for the conversion of existing rental property when the vacancy rate exceeds 6 percent. In
      addition, Chapter 17.69 of the City’s zoning ordinance provides for the following:
      •   All tenants must receive notices consistent with State law.
      •   Relocation assistance equal to one month’s rent shall be supplied to any residential tenant who
      relocates from the building after receipt of notice from the subdivider, except when the tenant has
      given notice of his intent to vacate prior to receipt of the notification from the applicant.
      •   The project must conform to all current development standards and requirements including
      parking requirements, setbacks, requirements for recreational facilities, and other zoning
      standards.
      •   All residential conversion projects shall comply with or be conditioned to meet the current
      building standards and requirements.
      •   As part of the application submittal, a building evaluation report is required to be submitted to
      the planning department.
      •   For a development consisting of 10 or more dwelling units, 10 percent of the units shall be
      reserved in perpetuity for sale or rental to qualified very low and low-income households.
      •   For a development consisting of less than 10 dwelling units, the applicant shall pay a fee in an
      amount established by City Council resolution in lieu of reserving units.
      2.   Building Codes and Enforcement
      The City of Solana Beach adopted and enforces the Title 24 California Building Code, which
      ensures that all housing units are built to specified standards. The code is determined by the
      International Conference of Building Officials and the State of California. The only significant local
      amendments that the City has adopted are: (1) requiring multi-family housing to be sprinklered and
      (2) requiring Class A roof materials due to high fire hazard. Both of these amendments are
      necessary to ensure public safety.
      Code enforcement is conducted by the City and is based on systematic enforcement in areas of
      concern and on a complaint basis throughout the city. The Code Enforcement Division works with
      property owners and renters to assist in meeting state health and safety codes. Since 2010, there
      have been 77 total code enforcement cases. There have only been two code violations for
      affordable housing units in the past two years. Both have been processed and cleared. Building
      permits were needed for the windows that were being replaced in the units.
      3.   Permit Processing Procedures
      The processing time for permits varies in Solana Beach based upon the scope and type of project
      and the applicant’s compliance with the City’s ordinances and completeness of applications.
      Certain types of applications/permits are discretionary and require a public hearing, while others
      are processed administratively. Projects needing discretionary review typically involve significant
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 237 of 399
      grading activity or buildings over 500 square feet in size. On average, permit processing for
      discretionary projects takes between two and four months. Administrative approval takes between
      several days to two or three weeks. A significant portion of the permit processing in the City is
      associated with single-family remodels.
      Projects that take a longer time to secure final approval generally have significant environmental
      impacts or involve general plan amendments or rezonings. The developers may be responsible for
      delays by failing to provide information or requesting continuances. Permit approval under these
      circumstances requires more time for public notice, public hearings, and negotiation of design
      modification to resolve problems.
      For a discretionary development review permit, the City automatically proceeds with a development
      proposal hearing at the next scheduled City Council meeting once four requirements are met: (1)
      the proposed development is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable requirements,
      including special regulations, overlay zones, and specific plans; (2) the proposed development
      complies with the development criteria; (3) environmental review as required by CEQA is
      completed; and (4) all required permits and approvals, including Variances, Conditional Use
      Permits, comprehensive Site Plans, etc., are processed concurrently with the development review
      permit. Once the criteria are met, the City continues to apply the State of California Streamlining
      Act requirements to ensure continued timely and predictable permit processing. The process is
      further expedited in the City of Solana Beach because the City has no Planning Commission; the
      Council acts as the Planning Commission and; thereby, reduces the steps in the process and
      removes uncertainty of Planning Commission-City Council policy interpretations.
      Solana Beach is located entirely within the state’s coastal zone and all Coastal Development
      Permits must be heard by the State Coastal Commission. The City is in the process of preparing a
      Local Coastal Program (LCP), which will consist of a Land Use Plan (LUP) and Local
      Implementation Plan (LIP), which together will meet the Coastal Act requirements for a
      comprehensive planning and regulatory program. On March 7, 2012, the Coastal Commission
      approved the City’s first LCP/LUP. The LCP/LUP represents a collaborative planning effort initiated
      by the City and developed over the course of many years with the participation of various interests,
      including environmental groups and property owners. The next step is for the City Council to ratify
      the LCP/LUP. In addition, the LIP still needs to be approved by both the Coastal Commission and
      the City Council.
      Once both the LCP/LUP and LIP are ratified, permit authority to review and approve development in
      Solana Beach will be transferred to the City, which will apply the requirements of the LCP/LUP and
      LIP in reviewing new development proposals. The Coastal Commission will still act on appeals from
      local government coastal permit decisions and review and approve any amendments to the
      previously certified LCP/LUP and LIP.
      The general process for obtaining an administrative building permit in Solana Beach is as follows:
      •   One set (1) of building plans are initially reviewed by the Planning Department. Once the
      planning department has reviewed and noted required revisions or comments, the plans are marked
      to proceed with plan check. The applicant is advised to submit four (4) additional sets to the
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 238 of 399
      Building Department, which is managed by Esgil, an independent firm that provides plan check
      services to the City of Solana Beach. The Engineering, Environmental and Fire Departments
      conduct their reviews at the same time. The plans are reviewed for compliance with both the City’s
      Municipal Code and applicable State laws.
      •   The Building Department plan check process may require plan revisions and subsequent
      rechecks until the plans are determined to meet all California Building Codes.
      •   The final set of plans must then be resubmitted to the City of Solana Beach for a “Re-Stamp.”
      This Re-Stamp is required to allow each department the opportunity to review the final plan to
      confirm that required revisions were made, and to evaluate whether changes required by a different
      department did not create additional comments. Once the building permit plans have been placed in
      stamp out, the City sets no longer than ten days to sign off. Generally, the Re-Stamp proceeds
      more quickly than the initial review.
      The City operates a permit and processing counter with daily hours and provides extensive
      technical assistance to project proponents to ensure that their applications are complete and
      correct. In this manner, the City is able to provide a high degree of certainty and process proposals
      within seven to eight weeks.
      The City does not require a use permit for, nor does it have any additional permit or processing
      requirements for higher density, multi-family, and mixed-use proposals in comparison to single-
      family residential development.
      4.   Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
      Within the San Diego region, a variety of fees are charged to new developments. These fees
      include, but are not limited to, development impact fees, permit issuance fees, engineering and
      public works fees, and subdivision processing fees. Each of these fees is used to pay for the
      necessary local infrastructure needed to support the development and cover the cost of processing
      the permits.
      Development impact and permit issuance fees are used to support a variety of functions including
      checking submitted plans, paying local facilities management fees, special road assessments, and
      public service related fees for other agencies such as school districts, water districts, and utility
      providers. Engineering and public works fees perform a similar function. Subdivision processing
      fees are used to cover the City’s administrative costs incurred through the processing of
      subdivision applications and plans. Table IV-11, on the following page, summarizes the most
      common planning and development fees. These fees are comparable to the fees required by other
      jurisdictions and, in many cases, are substantially less than other North County coastal
      jurisdictions.
                                                    Table IV-11
                                     Planning and Development Fees (2012)
                                                    Permit Fees
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 239 of 399
            Pre-Application Review                       $1,546 (50% is credited against future
                                                            fees if the project goes forward)
            Conditional Use Permit                                        $9,300
            Variance                                                      $2,163
            General Plan Amendment                                   $10,000 deposit
            Rezoning Review/Specific Plan                            $10,000 deposit
            Zoning Text Amendment                                     $5,000 deposit
            Development Review Permit                      Residential $3,030 / Others $6,058
                                                           Projects with EIR $10,000 deposit
            Major Subdivision Tentative Map                              $10,858
            Major Subdivision Final Map                                   $5,777
            Minor Subdivision Tentative Map                               $8,674
            Environmental Review: In-House Initial            $291 + any additional costs
            Study – Exempt
            Environmental Review: Non-Exempt, with                     Cost + 15%
            Negative Declaration, or with EIR
            Structure Development Permit (for            $744 – not charged in conjunction with
            structures exceeding 16’ in height)              a Development Review Permit
            Public Improvement Plans                      Between 3% and 5% of construction
                                                                         valuation
                                                                 Minimum fee is $1,020
            Grading Plans                                 Between 3% and 5% of construction
                                                                         valuation
                                                                 Minimum fee is $1,020
            Encroachment Permit – Street Cut                               $611
            Encroachment Permit – Standard                                 $261
            Building Plan Check & Inspection                Based on construction valuation
            Fire Building (Non-Sprinkler) Plan Check                        $70
            Review
            Fire Sprinkler Plan Check & Inspection        Between $45 and $600 depending on
                                                                      the # of heads
                                            Impact/Capacity Fees
            Regional Transportation Congestion               Single-Family: $3,623 per unit
            Program (RTCIP) Fee                               Multi-Family: $2,889 per unit
            Park Development Fees                              Flat Fee (Vacant Lot) $600
            Public Facilities Fee                                1% of project valuation
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 240 of 399
              Public Art Fee                                           0.5% of project valuation
              Sewer Initial Hook Up Fee                                    $4,500 per EDU
              Sante Fe Irrigation District Capacity Fee            $4,492 to $873,327 depending on
                                                                              meter size
              School District Fees:
              Solana Beach Elementary                                  Residential - $1.41 / sq.ft.
                                                                     Commercial - $0.22 per sq.ft.
              San Dieguito Union High                                 Residential - $1.68 per sq.ft.
                                                                     Commercial - $0.27 per sq. ft.
              Affordable Housing Impact Fee                                $25.28 per sq. ft.
      Source: City of Solana Beach, 2012
      An analysis of permit costs and fees a housing developer can expect to pay was conducted using
      information from a local developer that is currently processing a new housing project in Solana
      Beach. The analysis shows that the cost of permits and fees is approximately six percent of the
      total project cost. Based on information from developers and a comparison of the City’s fees to
      other jurisdictions, Solana Beach’s fees are not considered a constraint to housing development.
      Site improvements in the City consist of those typically associated with development for on-site
      improvements (fronting streets, curbs, gutters, sewer/water, and sidewalks), and off-site
      improvements (drainage, parks, traffic, schools, and sewer/water). Minimum street widths have
      already been established as part of the Circulation Element. There are no new streets identified in
      the Circulation Element since the City largely is built out. The existing widths would not impact any
      proposed residential and non-residential development because any improvements would occur
      within the existing ROW footprint. These improvements add little to the cost of housing; the costs
      associated with the provision of services are necessary for the health and safety of the public.
      5.   Growth Management Measures
      In the General Election of 2000, Solana Beach’s voters passed Proposition T, which requires voter
      approval to change, alter, or increase General Plan land use categories. Proposition T amended the
      General Plan to specify that without approval by a majority of voters in the City, no General Plan
      Amendment, including a Specific Plan adoptions or changes, shall be adopted which would 1)
      change, alter, or increase the General Plan Residential Land Use Categories, or 2) change any land
      use designation to any other, except changes to land already designated residential and which
      clearly result in a reduction in intensity or density of said land use designated as residential.
      This provision does not apply to amendments necessary to comply with state or federal law, or
      which are necessary to implement or obtain certification of the Local Coastal Program. Proposition
      T does not interfere with rights to obtain density bonuses (which do not require a general plan
      amendment), or limit rights or other entitlements available under affordable housing law.
      Proposition T does not act as a constraint to housing production or to the dispersal of low and
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 241 of 399
      moderate income housing opportunities throughout the city because the City’s entire RHNA can be
      accommodated under the existing General Plan’s Land Use policies. Solana Beach can meet its
      regional share goals through higher density mixed-use development in its existing multi-family
      residential and commercial designated areas.
      B.   Non-Governmental Constraints
      A number of private sector factors contribute to the cost of housing: land costs, construction costs,
      financing, and environmental constraints, all of which affect the availability of affordable housing.
      The following is a discussion of these factors and their impact on affordable housing development.
      1.   Land Costs
      High land costs are a significant constraint to the development of affordable housing in the city.
      Land values fluctuate with market conditions and the recent downturn in the housing market has
      affected land values negatively. However, land values within the North County coastal cities
      continue to remain significantly higher than in other areas of San Diego County. Based on the
      current sales prices of vacant lots in Solana Beach, the cost of land ranges from approximately
      $66.22 to $103.51 per square foot10. In October, 2012, the median cost of a single-family home was
      $412 per square foot and the median cost of a condominium was $348 per square foot11.
      Per-unit land cost is directly affected by density – higher density allows the cost to be spread
      across more units, reducing the total price. Solana Beach contains residentially zoned property that
      permits up to 20 dwelling units per acre, which is considered an adequate density to permit
      affordable housing development.
      2.   Construction Costs
      Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards and general
      market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes
      and development standards in Solana Beach are not substantially different than most other cities in
      San Diego County and the State of California. Based on information from local developers,
      construction costs are approximately $105 per square foot.
      3.   Cost and Availability of Financing
      The recent crisis in the mortgage industry has affected the availability and cost of real estate loans,
      although the long-term effects are unpredictable. The credit “crunch” resulted when “sub-prime”
      lenders made it possible for low-income families or others who could not qualify for standard
      mortgages to become home owners even though they might not have had the credit history and
      income to support repayment of the loans. The problem typically occurs with adjustable rate
      mortgages (ARMs) after the initial fixed interest rate period expires (often three years) and the
      interest rate converts to market. Because ARMs often offer “teaser” initial interest rates well below
      market for the first few years, monthly payments may increase by several hundred dollars when the
      loan converts to market rate. When property values were increasing, as was the case from 2000 to
      2006, homeowners had the option of refinancing to a new loan when the initial rate expired.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 242 of 399
      However, in the current market with declining values, homeowners may owe more than the resale
      value of their home, making refinancing impossible. As a result of these conditions, there has been
      a significant rise in foreclosure rates. In addition, changes in mortgage underwriting standards is
      likely to have greater impacts on low-income families than other segments of the community
      because banks have become much more cautious about offering ARMs and subprime loans. Even
      though interest rates are at historic lows, it has become much more difficult to obtain a loan
      because of stricter lending standards and requirements for qualified buyers.
      Table IV-12 summarizes Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data to analyze mortgage lending patterns
      in San Diego County. The data indicates that, in general, a higher percentage of applications from
      higher income groups are approved and a higher percentage of applications from lower income
      groups are denied.
                                                      Table IV-12
                                San Diego County Mortgage Lending Rates (2010)
                                                             Approved
                                       Total      Loans       But Not       %      Apps         %
               App. Income Group Apps. Originated Accepted Approved Denied                   Denied
               Less than 50% AMI       1,262        627         127      59.7%      319       25.3%
               50-79% AMI              3,574       2,149        272      67.7%      642       18.0%
               80-99% AMI              2,522       1,583        218      71.4%      376       14.9%
               100-119% AMI            2,337       1,575        181      75.1%      290       12.4%
               More than 120%
               AMI                    14,440       9,678       1,046     74.3%     1,741     12.1%
      Source: Mortgage Home Disclosure Act Aggregate Table 5-2: Disposition of Applications for
         Conventional Home Purchase Loans
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 243 of 399
                                                  V. Housing Plan
      This chapter identifies the City’s goals, policies, housing programs, and quantified objectives for the
      2013-2020 Housing Element cycle.
      A.   Goals and Policies
      Goal H-1.0: The adequate provision of a range of safe and decent housing opportunities that will
      meet Solana Beach’s share of the existing and future housing needs of the region.
      Policy H-1.1 Maintain sufficient land designated and zoned for housing to achieve a mix of single-
      family and multi-family development that will accommodate the housing needs established by the
      Regional Housing Needs Assessment Plan.
      Policy H-1.2 Encourage a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, and location of housing
      throughout the community.
      Policy H-1.3 Maintain a reasonable balance between rental and ownership opportunities.
      Policy H-1.4 Encourage the consolidation of smaller parcels to facilitate more effective multi-family
      residential development.
      Policy H-1.5 Encourage development of housing for local workers to meet the needs of the
      workforce and their families and to generate economic activity.
      Policy H-1.6 Encourage accessory living units as a way to provide additional affordable housing
      opportunities in existing single-family neighborhoods.
      Goal H-2.0: Maintenance, preservation, and enhancement of community and neighborhood
      character and the quality of residential neighborhoods and commercial areas.
      Policy H-2.1 Promote high quality design and appropriate size, bulk, and scale to ensure that new
      housing projects blend in with the existing community and enhance neighborhood character.
      Policy H-2.2 Review residential and mixed-use projects for elements that discourage crime (crime
      prevention through environmental design techniques).
      Policy H-2.3 Encourage mixed-use and transit, bicycle, and pedestrian-oriented development which
      works to establish a “sense of place” and complements existing community character.
      Policy H-2.4 Reduce barriers to homeownership and promote public awareness of the various
      means available to become a homeowner.
      Policy H-2.5 Encourage the integration of affordable housing throughout the residentially-designated
      areas of the city and avoid an over-concentration of lower-income units.
      Goal H-3.0: Minimized constraints in the development, improvement, preservation, and
      maintenance of housing for all income levels.
      Policy H-3.1 Support applications for financial assistance for the development and/or purchase of
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 244 of 399
      housing affordable to extremely low income, very low income, low income, and moderate-income
      households.
      Policy H-3.2 Facilitate affordable housing through advocacy, education, and support.
      Policy H-3.3 Take into consideration where housing is planned or likely to be built when preparing
      plans for capital improvements and expand or improve infrastructure and public facilities to support
      new residential development and ensure adequate facilities, as needed.
      Policy H-3.4 Explore incentives, bonuses, and flexibility in standards and requirements that could
      benefit affordable housing development, such as density bonuses, flexible development standards,
      reduced permit fees, and streamlined permit processing.
      Policy H-3.5 Encourage remodeling, maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation of existing housing to
      meet special needs, prevent deterioration, and ensure that housing is kept in a safe and sanitary
      condition.
      Policy H-3.6 Strive to preserve the existing affordable housing stock and seek to replace affordable
      units that may be lost as a result of redevelopment.
      Policy H-3.7 Grant priority water and sewer service to housing with units affordable to lower income
      households.
      Goal H-4.0: Equal access to housing opportunities for all persons regardless of age, race, religion,
      sex, marital status, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, or disability.
      Policy H-4.1 Seek to accommodate housing for residents with special needs through appropriate
      zoning standards and permit processes.
      Policy H-4.2 Strive to maintain a reasonable balance between senior and family housing.
      Policy H-4.3 Ensure equal access to housing by providing reasonable accommodation for persons
      with disabilities consistent with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Fair Housing Act (FHA)
      requirements.
      Policy H-4.4 Support and enforce anti-discrimination laws and practices.
      Policy H-4.5 Encourage new development and redevelopment to utilize universal design standards
      to create environments that are usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone, regardless of
      age, ability, or situation.
      Policy H-4.6 Support efforts to provide services that facilitate aging in place such as senior
      transportation, recreational activities, and other means to help older adults connect to the services
      they need to live independently in their own homes.
      Goal H-5.0: A diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the
      community in the development of the housing element.
      Policy H-5.1 Utilize diverse media, technology, and communication methods to convey information
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 245 of 399
      to the public.
      Policy H-5.2 Promote opportunities for public feedback that utilize internet technology (e-mail,
      websites) in addition to traditional forms of communication in order to better identify issues, submit
      comments, and exchange dialogue.
      Policy H-5.3 Expand efforts to reach out to and provide meaningful involvement opportunities for
      low-income, minority, disabled, children and youth, and other traditionally underrepresented citizens
      in the public participation process and utilize communication methods that convey complex ideas in
      an easily understandable format.
      Policy H-5.4 Initiate outreach efforts as early as possible in the decision-making process to allow
      sufficient time for public review and comment.
      Policy H-5.5 Periodically review the effectiveness of the procedures and strategies used to solicit
      public input and develop outreach processes and methodologies tailored to the needs of the
      community.
      Goal H-6.0: Increased energy conservation and waste reduction in new and existing residential and
      mixed-use development.
      Policy H-6.1 Work with energy providers, such as San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E), to
      promote energy conservation programs and incentives.
      Policy H-6.2 Encourage the use of building placement, design, and construction techniques that
      minimize energy consumption.
      Policy H-6.3 Promote the use of green building practices in new and existing development to
      maximize energy efficiency and conservation.
      Policy H-6.4 Consistent with the California Public Utilities Commission’s California Long Term
      Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan, strive to achieve zero net energy use for new residential
      development by 2020 and zero net energy use for new commercial development by 2030.
      Policy H-6.5 Require affordable housing developments that receive public subsidies to obtain
      Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification.
      Policy H-6.6 Require construction projects to recycle construction debris and promote the use of
      recycled materials as part of new construction or renovations, including the reuse of existing
      building shells/elements.
      B.    Programs
      Implementation programs describe actions or techniques that carry out policy. They also specify
      primary responsibility for carrying out the action and an estimated timeframe for its
      accomplishment, unless the activity is ongoing. The timeframes are general guidelines and may be
      adjusted based on City staffing and budgetary considerations.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 246 of 399
      Program 1: Encourage Mixed-Use Development
      A. Continue to identify potential sites for mixed-use development
      Program Description
      Due to the built-out nature of Solana Beach, there are very few vacant/underutilized residentially-
      zoned parcels in the City. The City is reliant upon vacant/underutilized commercial sites that can
      accommodate mixed-use development as a way to facilitate additional housing opportunities and
      permits mixed-use developments in all commercial zones. This housing element has identified
      approximately eight percent of the mixed-use sites in the City as likely to accommodate residential
      development. On an ongoing basis, the City will continue to identify potential sites that are suitable
      for mixed-use development and will work with the community and property owners to identify these
      sites. These sites could include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            1. Older commercial centers needing revitalization;
            2. Sites that facilitate pedestrian, bicycle, and transit oriented development, especially those
            along transit routes;
            3. Sites where planned infrastructure would enable infill or additional residential development
            to occur;
            4. Sites where public investments could be used to complement mixed-use development,
            especially projects containing affordable housing.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: The City has already identified adequately zoned and available sites for the current
      planning period. This is an on-going program to continue to monitor development trends and update
      the adequate sites analysis as additional potential sites become viable for mixed-use development.
      Timeline for Implementation: Ongoing.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      B. Facilitate mixed-use development
      Program Description
      The City revised its mixed-use development standards in 2006 to help facilitate mixed-use
      development. For example, mixed-use projects are permitted a greater floor area ratio (FAR) than
      non-mixed use projects. In addition, as appropriate, the City will continue to support applications for
      financing and/or funding for mixed-use projects. At this time, the City does not believe that
      additional revisions to its development standards are needed; however, it will continue to consult
      with developers to ensure that its development standards encourage mixed-use development. To
      the extent possible, the City will also identify possible actions to shorten the permitting process for
      mixed-use development such as through the use of CEQA exemptions for infill projects.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 247 of 399
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to consult with developers to ensure that the City’s mixed-use development
      standards facilitate mixed-use projects. Compare the City’s expectations for mixed-use
      development to the feedback gathered from developers to evaluate the effectiveness of mixed-use
      developments standards. Make revisions to the standards to encourage and facilitate mixed-use
      development, as appropriate. Work to implement procedures that will allow for CEQA streamlining
      for eligible projects pursuant to SB375 and other CEQA exemptions.
      Timeline for Implementation: Ongoing. In conjunction with Program 1C, the City will hold two
      workshops with for-profit and non-profit developers during this Housing Element period to evaluate
      its mixed-use development standards and the opportunities for mixed-use in the city.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      C. Increase awareness of the potential for mixed-use development
      Program Description
      The City will continue to work to increase developer awareness of the potential for mixed-use
      development. The City will continue to pursue both for-profit and non-profit developers to determine
      the best method to implement this program. Options may include (but would not be limited to)
      conducting workshops with developers, meeting with the Building Industry Association, making the
      suitable sites inventory available on the City’s website, and/or training staff members to meet with
      individual developers to promote the City’s mixed-use program. Additionally, the City will continue
      to provide technical support to developers proposing mixed-use projects.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: The City will ensure that developers are aware of the mixed-use development
      opportunities in the city.
      Timeline for Implementation: Ongoing. In conjunction with Program 1B, the City will hold two
      workshops with for-profit and non-profit developers during this Housing Element period.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      D. Federal and State Programs
      Program Description
      The City will regularly review potential federal and state housing financing and subsidy programs for
      their potential availability to Solana Beach. If the programs could be reasonably thought to be
      available to Solana Beach, the City would work with the appropriate developers and non-profits to
      support feasible funding application(s). This program also will entail the provision of City staff
      assistance to developers of housing for lower income housing and assessing the potential to match
      their projects to applicable federal and state programs. Included in this assistance would be pre-
      application meetings and helping the applicant with identifying potential approaches to address
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 248 of 399
      design and site requirements.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Review State and federal affordable housing programs for grant opportunities that can
      facilitate housing development in Solana Beach.
      Timeline for Implementation: Assist with a minimum of four financing applications within the
      planning period, as resources and opportunities are available.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 2: Encourage Accessory Living Units
      Program Description
      The City’s goal is to encourage the development of affordable accessory living units, equitably
      distributed throughout the entire City, without placing undue constraints on the developers of these
      units. Accessory living units provide housing at below market prices within existing neighborhoods.
      The City currently has an accessory living unit ordinance, and the City will continue to encourage
      the development of accessory living units.
      Therefore, the City will continue to explore methods to facilitate development. The City is
      committed to providing incentives that could include, but would not be necessarily limited to,
      continuing to assess development standards and implementing a faster permit approval process for
      these units. The City will also distribute information to the public regarding the accessory living unit
      program at the permitting counter and other public venues. In addition, the City will evaluate the
      progress that it makes from 2013 to 2020 in order to assess the program’s effectiveness and take
      appropriate action to enhance program effectiveness, if necessary.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Distribute information to the public regarding the accessory living unit program at the
      permitting counter and other public venues, assess program effectiveness, and continue to monitor
      development standards and the permitting process. Seven additional accessory dwelling units are
      expected to be approved between 2013 and 2020 based on past trends.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 3: Density Bonus Program
      Program Description
      The City will continue to implement its density bonus ordinance to facilitate developer use of this
      program, and to comply with state law. The City will develop educational materials regarding the
      State’s density bonus law.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 249 of 399
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Develop an educational hand-out regarding the State’s density bonus law.
      Timeline for Implementation: Complete written materials within 12 to 18 months of adopting the
      Housing Element.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 4: Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing Program
      Program Description
      The City will continue to implement its affordable housing ordinance, which requires that housing
      developers of five or more units provide a percentage of the total units in the development for very
      low and low income households. The number of affordable units required is 15 percent. In for-sale
      projects, units can be provided on or off-site, through new construction or acquisition and
      rehabilitation of existing units. Rental projects must pay an affordable housing impact fee unless the
      developer offers to provide affordable rental units consistent with the Costa Hawkins Act. Because
      the entire City of Solana Beach is located within the coastal zone, the Affordable Housing
      Ordinance also satisfies the requirement of Government Code Section 65590(d) that new housing
      developments within the coastal zone provide housing for low or moderate income households.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to enforce the City’s Affordable Housing Ordinance for new developments.
      Utilize any Affordable Housing Impact Fees to provide affordable housing through new construction
      or conversion from market-rate housing.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: Affordable Housing Impact Fees and application fees.
      Program 5: Replacement Housing
      Program Description
      The Coastal Act does not require the City to replace affordable housing demolished or converted in
      the coastal zone because less than 50 acres of land in the City are vacant, privately owned, and
      available for residential use (Government Code Section 65590(b)(3)). Table II-18 in Chapter 2
      shows that only 21 acres of vacant land remain in the City. However, the City desires to retain
      affordable housing in the coastal zone, and the City’s Affordable Housing Program, described in
      Program 4, is intended to meet the City’s obligation to provide housing for low and moderate income
      households in the coastal zone.
      Under the terms of a settlement agreement in Haro v. City of Solana Beach, the City committed to
      replacing 13 units of affordable housing. To date, the City has replaced three units and is working
      with the Hitzke Development Corporation to replace the remaining ten units. Former redevelopment
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 250 of 399
      agency funds have been set aside to meet this obligation.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Replacement of ten very low income units per the Haro settlement.
      Timeline for Implementation: Replacement of affordable units per the Haro settlement by the end
      of the planning period.
      Funding Source: Former redevelopment agency Funds; Affordable Housing Impact Fees;
      developer financing; federal and state subsidies if available.
      Program 6: Address and Mitigate Constraints to Housing Development
      State law requires that cities address, and where appropriate and legally possible, remove
      governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
      A. Monitor Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing Ordinance
      Program Description
      The City of Solana Beach’s inclusionary housing program requires that housing developers of five
      or more units provide a percentage of the total units in the development for very low and low
      income households. To facilitate the continued use of this program, the City will continue to monitor
      its effectiveness and provide incentives to the developers of affordable inclusionary housing units,
      as needed. Such incentives could include discounted city fees, an expedited application process, or
      other assistance. The City will continue to monitor this program to identify any potential constraints
      and make adjustments to the ordinance if necessary to facilitate successful implementation of this
      program.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Monitor the effectiveness of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance in achieving additional
      affordable housing units.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      B. Monitor Permit Processing Procedures
      Program Description
      The processing time for permits varies in the City of Solana Beach, based upon the scope and type
      of project and the applicant’s compliance with the City’s ordinances and completeness of the
      applications. Certain types of applications/permits are discretionary and require a public hearing,
      while others are processed administratively.
      In Solana Beach, permit processing times do not act as a significant constraint to housing
      development. On average, projects requiring administrative approval are processed within a period
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 251 of 399
      development. On average, projects requiring administrative approval are processed within a period
      of several days to three months, while those requiring discretionary approval may have processing
      times between two and four months. Projects that take longer usually have significant
      environmental impacts and require Environmental Impact Reports (EIRs).
      The City will continue to monitor its permit processing procedures over the housing element period
      to ensure that they are not acting as a constraint to the development of housing. If the City finds
      that its procedures are overly burdensome on residential projects, it will consider making revisions
      to the permitting process to mitigate potential constraints. An example of a potential revision might
      include developing a priority processing system for multi-family residential or mixed-use projects
      involving land identified in the suitable sites inventory.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Monitor permit processing procedures.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      C. Public Education
      Program Description
      The City shall initiate a public education program to provide information that describes the benefits
      of affordable housing and the myths and realities of affordable housing through such means as
      public presentations, newspaper articles, and information posted on the City’s website.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Publish/post a new story or information or conduct a presentation once a year.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going with initial efforts starting within six to eight months of
      adoption of the Housing Element.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      D. Constraints for Persons with Disabilities/Transitional and Supportive Housing
      Program Description
      The City will continue to take actions to accommodate the approval of group homes, ADA retrofit
      efforts, ADA compliance and/or other measures through the implementation of Title 24 as well as
      amend its procedures to provide more flexibility in the development of accommodations for persons
      with disabilities by eliminating the need for a variance.
      The City will continue to facilitate the development, maintenance and improvement of housing for
      persons with disabilities. Also, the City will continue to ensure the City’s zoning does not constrain
      the development of housing for persons with disabilities or residential care facilities. In addition, it
      will amend its zoning ordinance to treat transitional and supportive housing as residential uses
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 252 of 399
      subject to the same requirements as any other residential use in the same zone.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Consistent with SB2, amend the City’s zoning ordinance to treat transitional and
      supportive housing as residential uses subject to the same requirements as any other residential
      use in the same zone in which it is proposed and amend the definition of residential care facility to
      delineate the difference between residential care facilities and transitional or supportive housing.
      Revise the reasonable accommodation procedures to eliminate the need for a variance and
      continue to monitor zoning and land use rules and regulations to ensure that they do not constrain
      the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
      Timeline for Implementation: Amend the zoning ordinance and reasonable accommodations
      procedures within one year of adoption of the Housing Element.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      E.    Facilitate Housing for the Extremely Low Income
      Program Description
      AB2634 requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely
      low income households (earning 30 percent or less of the area median income) and identification of
      how zoning encourages and facilitates housing for this income group. In addition to transitional and
      supportive housing, single-room occupancy (SRO) units, which are one-room units intended for
      occupancy by a single individual, can often accommodate lower income households. They can be
      characterized as studios or efficiency units. The City permits studios/efficiency units in its multi-
      family zones and will amend its zoning ordinance to clarify that SROs are considered a multi-family
      use. In addition, the City will encourage and facilitate the development of housing for extremely low
      income households through a variety of activities such as holding workshops with housing
      developers, providing financial or in-kind technical assistance or land write-downs, providing
      expedited permit processing, identifying grant or funding opportunities, applying for or supporting
      applications for funding on an on-going basis, and offering a reduced fee schedule.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Amend the City’s zoning ordinance to clarify that SROs are considered studios or
      efficiency units, which are permitted in multi-family zones. Hold at least two workshops with
      housing developers to inform them of opportunities to provide extremely low income housing. Apply
      for or support applications for funding. Establish a reduced fee schedule for applications that
      include extremely low income housing.
      Timeline for Implementation: Amend the zoning ordinance and establish reduced fees within one
      year of adoption of the Housing Element. In conjunction with Programs 1B and 1C, hold two
      workshops with housing developers during this Housing Element cycle. Apply for or support
      applications for funding on an on-going basis.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 253 of 399
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      F. Priority Water and Sewer Service for Affordable Housing
      Program Description
      SB 1087 requires water and sewer providers to establish specific procedures to grant priority
      service to housing with units affordable to lower income households. It also requires local
      governments to immediately forward adopted housing elements to water and sewer providers. The
      City will immediately forward the adopted Housing Element and any subsequent amendments to the
      Santa Fe Irrigation District. The City will also develop priority service procedures for its sewer
      service.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Immediately following adoption, provide the Santa Fe Irrigation District with a copy of
      the Housing Element. Adopt priority sewer service for affordable housing.
      Timeline for Implementation: Forward the adopted Housing Element to the Santa Fe Irrigation
      District within 30 days of adoption. Adopt priority sewer service policies for affordable housing
      within 18 months of Housing Element adoption.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      G. Housing Element Consistency and Monitoring
      Program Description
      The Housing Element was drafted by the City and assessed for consistency with other elements of
      its General Plan and coastal policies throughout the process. This assessment reviewed: the goals
      and policies in the Housing Element for consistency with the General Plan goals and policies; the
      key elements of the general plan, including the Land Use Element, the Circulation Element, and the
      Open Space and Conservation elements for consistency with their respective parts of the Housing
      element; the constraints section of the Housing element with the general plan implementation
      strategies as well as current City policies and procedures, including redevelopment, permitting
      procedures, and public works fees and procedures; and other data and demographic sources.
      Although some of the information in the Housing element is more current, the Housing element is
      consistent with other important planning and policy procedures of the City, especially the general
      plan.
      The City will continue to monitor the Housing Element as part of its annual general plan
      implementation report. This includes monitoring the Housing Element for consistency with any
      amendments made to the Safety, Conservation, and/or Land Use Elements pursuant to AB162 and
      the required annual review of floodplain maps. If sites identified in the Housing Element as suitable
      for housing are subsequently identified as inappropriate due to changes in the flood maps,
      additional sites may need to be identified.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 254 of 399
      Objectives: A housing element that is consistent with the rest of the General Plan and other
      important planning and policy procedures.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      H. Employee Housing Act Compliance
      Program Description
      Review the City’s regulations for compliance with the Employee Housing Act, particularly sections
      17021.5 and 17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code regarding farmworker housing. Make
      amendments to the City’s regulations as necessary.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Ensure compliance with the Employee Housing Act.
      Timeline for Implementation: Complete the review and any necessary amendments within one
      year of adoption of the Housing Element.
      Program 7: Emergency Shelter Housing Site Identification
      Program Description
      State law requires that cities identify a zone or zones where emergency shelters (homeless
      shelters) are permitted without a discretionary permit. Additionally, they must encourage and
      facilitate their development. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the City will modify its
      zoning ordinance to permit emergency shelters in its General Commercial zone and develop
      objective standards for their development.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Amend the zoning ordinance to allow emergency shelters by right in the General
      Commercial zone and develop objective standards for their development.
      Timeline for Implementation: Complete zoning ordinance amendments within one year of adoption
      of the Housing Element.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 8: Illegal Unit Conversion
      Program Description
      The City had a large number of accessory living units that were constructed or converted illegally
      (without required permits) and did not meet City codes upon incorporation. Many of these units
      provide affordable housing opportunities that may not otherwise be available. In response to this
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 255 of 399
      issue, the City developed a program for illegal unit conversion. This program allows homeowners
      with illegally established accessory dwelling units on their property to apply for legalization.
      It allows the illegal units to exist in perpetuity provided that the units:
      •    Comply with the current Uniform Building Code and meet City zoning and development
      standards to the maximum extent feasible;
      •    Meet the minimum dwelling unit size standards; and
      The City will continue to operate this program while it explores the feasibility of implementing an
      amnesty program for the remaining illegal units in the city.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to implement the illegal unit conversion program. Research the feasibility of
      implementing an amnesty program.
      Timeline for Implementation: Determine whether an expanded amnesty program is feasible within
      four years of adoption of the Housing Element.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 9: Preserve Existing At-Risk Units
      Program Description
      Based upon research conducted during the update to the Housing Element, it was determined that
      there are only two existing affordable housing units at risk of converting to market rate during the
      current and next Housing Element cycles.
      The City will contact the owners of properties with affordable units at risk of converting to market
      rate to learn of their plans and explore the possibility of purchasing these developments through
      HUD or a non-profit corporation, actively seeking out non-profit housing organizations that could
      assist in the preservation of the at-risk units, and applying for financial assistance from sources
      such as CDBG and HOME funds to attempt to offer financial incentives to extend the terms of the
      affordability restrictions. Once a non-profit is identified, the City will assess the non-profit
      corporations’ capacity to acquire and manage, assist or support funding applications, and provide
      tenant counseling.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to monitor units at risk of conversion, identify non-profit housing
      organizations capable of assisting with the preservation of at-risk units, and identify available
      funding sources. Prevent the one at-risk unit from converting to market rate.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going, prior to 2019 conversion date.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 256 of 399
      Program 10: Section 8 Rental Assistance
      Program Description
      The City will continue to work with the San Diego County Housing Authority to administer the
      Section 8 Rental Assistance Program, and will support the County’s applications for additional
      Section 8 allocations. This program provides rental assistance to eligible very low and low income
      households. The subsidy represents the difference between the rent that exceeds 30 percent of a
      household’s monthly income and the actual rent charged.
      The City will provide flyers in both English and Spanish notifying residents and landlords of the
      availability of Section 8 rental assistance. The City will also seek out project-based Section 8
      vouchers to assist with the operational income of affordable housing projects.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Assist developers in applying for project-based Section 8 rental assistance as
      opportunities arise and continue to work with the County of San Diego Housing Authority regarding
      the administration of the Section 8 Rental Assistance Program.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 11: Capital Improvements Program
      Program Description
      To ensure the adequate delivery of public services and facilities, the City annually prepares and
      adopts as part of its annual budget process a multi-year program of capital improvements. The
      program does not focus on new major infrastructure improvements since the City is already 99
      percent developed. The primary focus of the program is repair and maintenance activities.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Engineering and Public Works Department and
      Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Update the Capital Improvement Program on an annual basis.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 12: Condominium Conversion Policy
      Program Description
      A primary goal of the City is to preserve existing rental housing. Therefore, the City will consider
      requests for the conversion of existing rental housing of ten or more units to condominium units
      only when the rental vacancy rate exceeds 6 percent. The rental vacancy rate shall consider
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 257 of 399
      occupied rental housing, rented but not yet occupied units, vacant for rent units, and rental units
      unoccupied but having received a certificate of occupancy. In the event that a conversion request is
      granted, the project is subject to the affordable (inclusionary) housing ordinance, which requires
      that 15 percent of the units be set aside as affordable.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to implement the ordinance.
      Timeline for Implementation: Ongoing.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 13: Residential Code Enforcement
      Program Description
      The City’s code enforcement program involves several components. The housing stock in need of
      improvement is identified by complaints made to the City and periodic reconnaissance surveys to
      review housing conditions. Obvious code violations are quickly acted on by the staff. The staff also
      works with individual property owners to address problems and discuss any financial assistance
      that may be available. The City will expand its residential code enforcement program by making
      complaint forms available in Spanish and including additional information on the City’s website.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Expand the program to make complaint forms available in Spanish and available to
      download on the City’s website. The City will monitor and review code enforcement activity on an
      annual basis and identify all housing complaints by type, action taken, and results achieved.
      Timeline for Implementation: Post complaint forms in Spanish and update the website within six
      months to one year of adopting the Housing Element. Monitoring activities are on-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 14: Residential Rehabilitation
      Program Description
      The County of San Diego’s Department of Housing and Community Development provides funds for
      the rehabilitation of owner occupied single family units, mobile home units, and multi-family rental
      units for lower income residents of the county. This program is available to residents of Solana
      Beach. As the housing stock in Solana Beach ages, the need for rehabilitation programs will
      increase. In response, the City of Solana Beach provides information regarding the residential
      rehabilitation program. The residential rehabilitation program addresses a wide range of
      rehabilitation needs. These include minor repairs as well as substantial structural, heating,
      electrical, or plumbing modifications, as well as technical assistance with applying for loans,
      housing inspections, and construction inspections.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 258 of 399
      The City provides materials and makes them available at the Planning Department (Permitting
      Counter) and other appropriate public venues. In addition the City promotes the program with
      appropriate applicants as part of the development review process.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to provide informational materials to promote this County program.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 15: Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
      Program Description
      Homeownership can be an asset to maintaining a healthy community. The Mortgage Credit
      Certificate (MCC) program assists low and moderate income first time home buyers. Under this
      program, which is administered by the County of San Diego, qualified first-time home buyers are
      able to take a federal income tax credit of up to 20 percent of the annual interest paid on their
      mortgage. This frees up more capital to buy the home. The City of Solana Beach will continue to
      distribute information on the MCC program.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to provide informational materials regarding this County program.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 16: Distribute Fair Housing Information
      Program Description
      The City of Solana Beach supports fair housing laws and statutes. To promote equal opportunity,
      the City will continue to participate in the Fair Housing Council of San Diego’s (FHCSD) Fair
      Housing Program. The City will stay informed of the current fair housing complaint process,
      continue to distribute the FHCSD’s information on fair housing, and refer fair housing questions and
      housing discrimination claims to the FHCSD. The City will distribute and make available
      informational material at both the Building and Planning Department counters and identify other
      venues (e.g., libraries and other public venues) and opportunities to distribute the information. The
      City will also maintain a record of fair housing inquiries, referrals for fair housing assistance, and
      complaints filed.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Continue to provide informational materials regarding fair housing.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 259 of 399
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 17: Energy Conservation
      Program Description
      The City of Solana Beach is committed to conserving energy and being a sustainable community. It
      has implemented several programs that promote energy conservation and continues to explore
      additional opportunities to reduce the community’s impact on climate change. For example:
      •   The City recently adopted an ordinance to reduce single use plastic bags in grocery stores,
      retailers, and restaurants.
      •   The City will continue to implement the Solana Beach Green Building Incentive, which offers
      expedited permit processing for green building applications, permit fee reimbursement for projects
      that receive GreenPoint Rated certification, and public recognition.
      •   The City will continue to provide information on the City’s website regarding steps residents can
      take to increase their energy efficiency and SDG&E rebate/voucher programs available to Solana
      Beach residents and businesses.
      •   The City will develop an energy efficiency program for the community and continue to monitor
      pertinent legislation which would make it easier to implement solar installations.
      •   The City will continue to utilize the Ad-Hoc Subcommittee on Environmental Sustainability to
      work closely with the Clean and Green committee to develop additional energy conservation and
      sustainability programs.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Complete the development of the energy efficiency program.
      Timeline for Implementation: Implement the energy efficiency program during the housing
      element cycle.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 18: Public Participation
      Program Description
      The City must make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the
      community. As part of the annual review of the housing element, the City will evaluate the
      effectiveness of its public communication strategies.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Keep track of public noticing and participation procedures and as part of the annual
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 260 of 399
      review of the housing element, identify and implement effective public communication strategies.
      Timeline for Implementation: On-going.
      Funding Source: General Fund.
      Program 19: Affordable Housing on City-Owned Property
      Program Description
      Three sites identified in the adequate sites inventory are City-owned properties that are viable for
      affordable housing. Two sites are existing parking lots and the third is occupied by City Hall. One
      site (Site 2) is the subject of an active development application for ten very low income units
      (Hitzke Development). The City will be issuing requests for proposals (RFP) for the development of
      the other two sites (Sites 3 and 4). To encourage development of these sites, the City will offer
      incentives such as a reduced fee schedule, land write-downs, and expedited permit processing.
      Implementing Agency: City of Solana Beach Community Development Department.
      Objectives: Issue RFPs to develop affordable housing on the City-owned sites identified in the
      suitable sites inventory (Sites 3 and 4).
      Timeline for Implementation: Issue an RFP for Site 3 by year four of this Housing Element cycle.
      Issue an RFP for Site 4 by year five of this Housing Element cycle.
      Funding Source: Affordable Housing Impact Fees; developer financing; federal and state
      subsidies, if available.
      C.    Quantified Objectives
      Housing element law requires that quantified objectives be developed with regard to new
      construction, rehabilitation, conservation, and preservation activities that will occur during the
      current housing element cycle. The following table summarizes the City of Solana Beach’s
      quantified objectives for the 2010-2020 housing element cycle. These objectives will be difficult to
      achieve given resource constraints. Nonetheless, the City will make every effort to meet its
      housing needs.
                                                      Table V-1
                                               Quantified Objectives
                                             Solana Beach (2010-2020)
                        Income          New       Rehabilitation
                        Level      Construction                  Conservation/Preservation
                         Extremely       43             3
                         Low
                         Income
                         Very Low        42             2
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 261 of 399
                        Income
                        Low              65                                     1
                        Income
                        Moderate         59
                        Income
                        Above           131
                        Moderate
                        Income
                        Total      340           5                1
      Additionally, there are housing programs and services available to Solana Beach residents that the
      City does not administer. For example, approximately 28 Solana Beach residents receive Section 8
      rental assistance through the County of San Diego. These households pay an affordable rental rate
      while residing in market rate rental housing. These types of programs and services were not
      included in the quantified objectives, as the City does not directly provide support.
      1.   New Construction
      While the City desires to meet its entire lower income housing need, with the loss of redevelopment
      housing funds and reductions in state and federal housing programs, it is highly unlikely that
      adequate subsidies will be available to meet this need. Nonetheless, the City will make every effort
      to meet its lower income housing needs. Regarding moderate and above-moderate income units,
      while these may be more feasibly constructed, meeting this objective will depend on a recovery of
      the housing market, which has been severely depressed since 2008.
      2.   Rehabilitation
      As the City’s housing stock ages, the need for housing rehabilitation to preserve neighborhood
      quality will continue to increase. Therefore, the City will continue to promote the rehabilitation
      programs offered by the County of San Diego. However, no activity occurred in this program during
      the last Housing Element cycle. To supplement this program, the City will rely on its code
      enforcement program to ensure that necessary rehabilitation and repair is completed.
      3.   Preservation/Conservation
      There is one affordable unit at risk of converting to market rate over the next ten years. The City
      will work to identify funding resources and non-profit organizations available to preserve or replace
      this unit.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 262 of 399
                            Appendix A: Evaluation of 2005-2010 Housing Element
      This section analyzes the City’s accomplishments during the 2005-2010 Housing Element cycle.
      This is done by evaluating the City’s progress towards meeting Coastal Zone requirements and by
      evaluating the City’s success in meeting its goals and program objectives. The evaluation is a key
      component in the determination of goals and programs to be included in the 2013-2020 Housing
      Element.
      A.    Evaluation of Progress towards Meeting Coastal Zone Requirements
      Section 65583 of the Government Code requires that coastal jurisdictions document the following:
      •   The number of new housing units approved for construction within the coastal zone after
      January 1, 1982.
      •   The number of housing units for persons and families of low or moderate income required to be
      provided in new housing developments either within the coastal zone or within three miles of the
      coastal zone.
      •   The number of existing residential dwelling units occupied by persons and families of low or
      moderate income that have been authorized to be demolished or converted since January 1, 1982,
      in the coastal zone.
      •   The number of residential dwelling units for persons and families of low or moderate income that
      have been required for replacement either onsite, elsewhere within the locality’s jurisdiction within
      the coastal zone, or within three miles of the coastal zone within the locality’s jurisdiction.
      Because the City was incorporated in 1986, information is not available for units produced between
      1982 and 1986. The following information was obtained from the County of San Diego Department of
      Housing and Community Development and from City records.
      1986-1991
      1.   New construction: 86
      2.   New low and moderate income housing: 1
      3.   Demolished/converted low and moderate income housing: 4
      4.   Replacement low/moderate income housing: 0
      1991-1999
      1.   New construction: 51
      2.   New low and moderate income housing: 4
      3.   Demolished/converted low and moderate income housing: 13
      4.   Replacement low/moderate income housing: 0
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 263 of 399
      1999-2004
      1.   New construction: 37
      2.   New low and moderate income housing: 5
      3.   Demolished/converted low and moderate income housing: 0
      4.   Replacement low/moderate income housing: 5
      2005-2011
      1.   New construction: 82
      2.   New low and moderate income housing: 9
      3.   Demolished/converted low and moderate income housing: 0
      4.   Replacement low/moderate income housing: 0
      B.   Evaluation of 2005-2010 Goals and Programs
      This section describes the City’s progress in meeting the goals and policies of the 2005-2010
      Housing Element. The results of this analysis are important to this element because they were used
      to revise and update the proposed programs for 2013-2020 as described in Chapter V.
      The primary goals of the City of Solana Beach in the 2005-2010 Housing Element were to 1)
      Encourage the adequate provision of a range of housing opportunities that will meet Solana Beach’s
      share of existing and future housing needs in the region while maintaining and preserving
      community and neighborhood character and the quality of residential neighborhoods and
      commercial areas; and 2) Minimize governmental constraints in the development, improvement,
      and maintenance of housing. To this end, the City strived to maintain a reasonable balance between
      rental and ownership housing opportunities, and between senior and family housing, and encourage
      a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, and location of housing throughout the community.
      The 2005-2010 Housing Element contained a series of programs related to new construction,
      rehabilitation, preservation, and housing assistance. The following table reviews progress in the
      implementation of each of these action items and the following text reviews the effectiveness of
      each program and the continued appropriateness of each item for the 2013-2020 Housing Element.
                                                     Table A-1
                                    Evaluation of Program Accomplishments
                               Under Solana Beach’s 2005-2010 Housing Element
                    Program               Objective(s)        Timeframe        Accomplishments
               1. Encourage         Inventory potential       Ongoing      Draft inventory
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 264 of 399
            Mixed-Use         sites, focus on 1-2                 completed; Workshop
            Development       sites depending on                  held 11/13/2008; City
                              their size and unit                 owned site identified at
                              potential, initiate                 APN 298-211-81-00 for
                              planning and regulatory             proposed housing/mixed-
                              procedures to have the              use development of 10
                              sites available before              very low units, an ENA
                              the end of the housing              with developer for the
                              cycle; hold regularly               project was approved by
                              scheduled workshops                 Council on 7/3/2010 and
                              regarding mixed-use                 predevelopment loan on
                              opportunities and                   1/26/2011. A project
                              actions to facilitate               application has been
                              mixed-use; conduct an               received and is in
                              analysis of potential               process of review.
                              constraints.
            2. Encourage      Prepare promotional     Ongoing     Promotional materials
            Accessory Living  materials; evaluate                 were prepared and
            Units             progress and assess                 distributed within 18
                              program’s                           months of adoption of the
                              effectiveness.                      Housing Element; 6
                                                                  accessory living units
                                                                  have been constructed
                                                                  from 2003-2011.
            3. Density Bonus  Update ordinance and    6/27/2005   City amended density
            Program           implement.                          bonus ordinance on
                                                                  1/14/2009 and 3/23/11 to
                                                                  be consistent with State
                                                                  law. Density bonus
                                                                  request received for
                                                                  Hitzke development.
            4. Affordable     Continue to implement   Ongoing     3 inclusionary units have
            (Inclusionary)    program.                            been constructed from
            Housing Program                                       2003 to 2011.
                                                                  Inclusionary Fee Study
                                                                  was completed and
                                                                  Affordable Housing
                                                                  Impact Fee was adopted
                                                                  2/23/2011. Ordinance
                                                                  adopted 3/10/11 to
                                                                  respond to decision in
                                                                  Palmer v. City of Los
                                                                  Angeles.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                         Page 265 of 399
            5. Redevelopment     Identify funding           Adopt        City set aside 3 units
            and/or               strategy for use of        strategy by with RDA funds in June
            Replacement          funds for lower income 8/24/2009        2005; Redevelopment 5
            Housing              housing and adopt                       year implementation plan
                                 strategy by year 3.                     was adopted 1/13/2010;
                                                                         Agency entered into ENA
                                                                         and predevelopment loan
                                                                         agreement for proposed
                                                                         development of 10 very
                                                                         low income units to meet
                                                                         replacement housing
                                                                         obligation – refer to
                                                                         Program 1.
            6. Address and       Review inclusionary        Review       Affordable Housing
            Mitigate             housing program;           inclusionary Impact Fee and
            Constraints to       monitor permit             housing      Inclusionary Ordinance
            Housing              processing procedures; ordinance        amendments adopted;
            Development          clarify transitional       by           Permit processing
                                 housing and temporary 6/31/2007;        ongoing; transitional
                                 shelters are eligible      monitor      housing considered
                                 uses within residential    permit       permitted use within
                                 care facilities; establish processing residential care facility
                                 a formal reasonable        and make     definition; SBMC
                                 accommodation              code         definition of family
                                 procedure; monitor the revisions        conforms to Fair Housing
                                 Housing Element as         by           Law; reasonable
                                 part of the annual         7/31/2006;   accommodations are
                                 general plan               ongoing      provided; annual reports
                                 implementation report.     monitoring   are filed on time.
            7. Homeless          Monitor process to         Ongoing      City reviewed process
            Shelter/Transitional ensure current process                  and determined that
            Housing Site         does not unduly                         transitional housing is
            Identification       discourage or deter                     permitted within the
                                 placement of shelters                   residential care category.
                                 and transitional                        The City participates in
                                 housing.                                the Regional Shelter
                                                                         Program that provides
                                                                         seasonal shelter.
            8. Illegal Unit      Allow homeowners with Ongoing           No applications for
            Conversion           illegally established                   conversion have been
                                 accessory living units                  received.
                                 to apply for
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 266 of 399
                              legalization.
            9. Preserve At-   Monitor determination     Ongoing;    6/23/2009 Solana
            Risk Units        by private property       monitor at  Highlands Apts. owner
                              owners to place           risk units  notified tenants and
                              affordable units at risk. possible    public agencies of
                                                        owner       expiring covenant. The
                                                        decision in property owner was not
                                                        2010        interested in preserving
                                                                    the agreement. Since
                                                                    that time, a conceptual
                                                                    redevelopment plan has
                                                                    been prepared for the
                                                                    site, which would
                                                                    increase the number of
                                                                    units to at least 260 and
                                                                    result in 32 affordable
                                                                    units.
            10. Section 8     Contract with San         Ongoing     Continued to coordinate
            Rental Assistance Diego County Housing                  with County HCD to
                              Authority to administer               implement and
                              the Section 8 Rental                  administer Section 8
                              Assistance Program.                   Rental Assistance.
            11. Capital       Prepare and adopt         Ongoing     Continued to implement
            Improvements      capital improvements                  City’s CIP program,
            Program           to repair and maintain                annual budget adopted
                              public facilities.                    each year.
            12. Condominium   Consider requests for     Ongoing     No applications for
            Conversion Policy the conversion of                     conversion have been
                              existing rental property              received.
                              only when the vacancy
                              rate exceeds 6 percent.
            13. Residential   Respond to complaints Ongoing         Code enforcement efforts
            Code Enforcement made to the City and                   are ongoing. Since 2010,
                              conduct periodic                      there have been 77 total
                              reconnaissance                        code enforcement cases.
                              surveys to check on                   There have only been
                              housing conditions;                   two code violations for
                              work with individual                  affordable housing units
                              property owners to                    in the past two years.
                              address problems and                  Both have been
                              discuss financial                     processed and cleared.
                              assistance that may be                Building permits were
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 267 of 399
                                   available.                            needed for the windows
                                                                         that were being replaced
                                                                         in the units.
              14. Residential      Provide information on   Ongoing      No application has been
              Rehabilitation       County services/HCD                   received.
                                   programs and promote
                                   the program to
                                   appropriate applicants
                                   as part of the
                                   development review
                                   process.
              15. Mortgage         Distribute information   Ongoing      No application has been
              Credit Certificate   on the MCC program.                   received; MCC handout
              (MCC)                                                      is distributed at the
                                                                         permitting counter at City
                                                                         Hall.
              16. Distribute Fair  Continue to participate  Ongoing      The City distributes
              Housing              in the Fair Housing                   brochures at the library
              Information          Council Program and                   and City Hall and
                                   distribute information;               participates in Council
                                   refer questions and                   Program. A Housing Fair
                                   claims to the Fair                    was held in September
                                   Housing Council of San                2008 at a city park. No
                                   Diego (FHCSD).                        complaints have been
                                                                         received or referred to
                                                                         FHCSD.
      1.   Encourage Mixed-Use
      The program to encourage mixed-use has been successful. Since the City has developed this
      program, it has held workshops to increase developer awareness of the potential for mixed-use
      development and has identified several opportunities for mixed-use within the City. Mixed-use is
      permitted and encouraged in the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan Area as well as the
      Commercial, Light Commercial, and Special Commercial zones. In 2006, the City revised its mixed-
      use development standards to incentivize mixed-use. For example, mixed-use projects have
      reduced parking requirements, larger FARs, and smaller setbacks than non-mixed-use projects. In
      addition, the City conducted a preliminary study regarding the redevelopment potential for mixed-
      use along Stevens Avenue, which currently contains light industrial, special commercial, and
      commercial uses. In January 2011, the City entered into a predevelopment loan agreement for a
      mixed-use project with 10 very low income units, which is currently being processed. This program
      should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing Element with continued efforts to monitor mixed-use
      development standards and increase developer awareness of opportunities. The City should also
      continue to monitor and update its adequate sites inventory as sites are developed and additional
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 268 of 399
      properties become viable for mixed-use development.
      2.   Encourage Accessory Living Units
      The City has been successful at encouraging the development of accessory living units. Accessory
      living units account for the majority of new low income units constructed within the City in the last
      seven years. This program should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing Element and the City
      should take steps to increase public awareness by providing informational materials at the
      permitting counter.
      3.   Density Bonus Program
      The City has updated its density bonus ordinance consistent with State law. No additional changes
      to the State Density Bonus Law are anticipated during this planning period; however, the City
      should continue to monitor State law in case future changes are made to the law that require
      revisions to the City’s ordinance. In addition, the City should encourage participation in the density
      bonus program through the development of educational materials.
      4.   Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing Program
      The Affordable Housing Program has been successful. Three units were constructed under this
      program and the City has implemented an Affordable Housing Impact Fee for residential rental
      projects, which must be used to provide or assure the continued provision of affordable housing in
      the city through acquisition, construction, development assistance, rehabilitation, financing, rent or
      other subsidies, provision of supportive services, or other methods, and for costs of administering
      programs that serve those ends. This program should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing
      Element.
      5.   Redevelopment and/or Replacement Housing
      The Redevelopment Agency provided financial assistance for the construction of three affordable
      units and affordability covenants/restrictions were recorded during the 2005-2010 Housing Element
      cycle. The City also adopted a five-year implementation plan in January of 2010 which included an
      aggressive affordable housing program.
      However, redevelopment agencies were dissolved across California on February 1, 2012, resulting
      in the loss to the City of approximately $200,000 per year in funds designated for affordable housing
      purposes. The predevelopment loan agreement remains an enforceable obligation and pursuant to a
      settlement agreement, the City has set aside a replacement housing fund, but the City will need to
      obtain other sources of funds to complete its replacement housing obligation. The City will continue
      to attempt to meet its agreed-upon replacement housing obligations.
      6.   Address and Mitigate Constraints to Housing Development
      The City continues to monitor and mitigate constraints to housing development. Pursuant to SB2,
      changes to the zoning ordinance are required to specifically treat transitional and supportive
      housing the same as any other residential development in the same zone in which it is proposed
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 269 of 399
      and to identify a zone or zones where an emergency shelter may be allowed without a discretionary
      permit. In addition, according to the public questionnaire that was distributed during the
      development of the 2013-2020 Housing Element Update, neighborhood opposition was identified as
      a major constraint to the development of affordable housing. Therefore, this program should be
      expanded to include an educational component.
      7.   Homeless Shelter/Transitional Housing Site Identification
      Although the City participates in the Regional Shelter Program, this only addresses seasonal
      homeless needs. SB2 requires that the City identify a zone or zones where a year-round homeless
      shelter may be established by right with sufficient capacity within that zone or zones to
      accommodate at least one year-round shelter that can accommodate the city’s need. This program
      should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing Element Update in order for the City to amend its
      zoning ordinance to permit homeless shelters by right in the General Commercial zone.
      8.   Illegal Unit Conversion
      At one time, the city had a large number of accessory living units that were constructed or
      converted illegally (without required permits), and did not meet City codes upon incorporation. In
      response, the City developed this program which allows homeowners with illegally established
      accessory living units on their property to apply for legalization. It allows the units to exist in
      perpetuity provided that the units:
      •   Comply with the current Building Code and meet City zoning and development standards to the
      maximum extent feasible;
      •   Meet the minimum dwelling unit size standards; and
      No applications for conversion were received during the 2005-2010 Housing Element cycle. The
      previous Housing Element indicated that the number of units that could potentially take advantage
      of this program have declined because most have complied with the program or converted. Rather
      than expending resources to determine how many illegal units are still in existence, the City is
      considering an amnesty program for those units.
      9.   Preserve At-Risk Units
      One deed restricted affordable housing unit is at-risk of converting to market rate housing during
      the 2013-2020 Housing Element cycle, which is located in the Helix Avenue project. This unit is
      eligible to return to market rate in 2019. One other project – Solana Highlands – had an affordability
      covenant that expired in 2010. The City made an effort to preserve the units, but the property owner
      was not interested. Solana Highlands is now the subject of a pending redevelopment project. No
      formal application has been submitted to the City, but the property owner has been working with the
      City on a concept plan to redevelop the site to its maximum unit potential and set aside 32
      affordable units. The City should continue to monitor affordable units that are at risk of converting
      and continue to contact the property owners of such units in an effort to preserve them. The City
      may actively seek out non-profit housing developers that could assist in the preservation of at-risk
      units, and provide support for applicants who seek financial assistance from CDBG and HOME
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 270 of 399
      funds or State housing funds, for example.
      10.   Section 8 Rental Assistance
      The City of Solana Beach contracts with the San Diego County Housing Authority to administer the
      Section 8 Rental Assistance Program. This program provides rental assistance to eligible very low
      and low income households. The subsidy represents the difference between the rent that exceeds
      30 percent of a household’s monthly income and the actual rent charged. As of the preparation of
      this document, there are 28 Section 8 recipients and 69 waiting list applicants within the City of
      Solana Beach (refer to Table A-2). This program should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing
      Element.
                                                     Table A-2
                                               Section 8 Vouchers
                                              Solana Beach (2012)
                                                 Small         Large
                                                Family (4   Family (5 or
                                              members or        more
                                  Elderly         less)      members)                Total
                  Voucher
                   Leased           221             28            0                   28
                                  Elderly       Disabled       Family        Single         Total
                Waiting List
                 Applicants          10             32            20            7             69
      1.   All 22 elderly households also happen to be small family households.
      Source: County of San Diego Department of Housing and Community Development, 2012
      11.   Capital Improvements Program
      The City of Solana Beach annually prepares a program of capital improvements. Because the City
      is almost completely built-out, the program does not focus on new major infrastructure
      improvements; instead, the primary focus of the program is on repair and maintenance activities.
      The City continued to prepare its annual capital improvements program during the 2005-2010
      Housing Element cycle. This program should be continued in the 2013-2020 Housing Element
      cycle.
      12.   Condominium Conversion Policy
      To preserve existing rental housing, the City of Solana Beach only considers requests for the
      conversion of existing rental housing of ten or more units to condominiums when the rental vacancy
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 271 of 399
      rate exceeds six percent. The rental vacancy rate shall take into account occupied rental housing,
      rented but not yet occupied units, vacant for rent units, and rental units unoccupied but having
      received a certificate of occupancy. In the event that a conversion request is granted, the City shall
      require that 10 percent of the housing units be reserved for occupancy by very low and low income
      households or that a fee be paid in-lieu of the reservation of affordable units. In addition, the
      permittee shall provide relocation assistance equal to one month’s rent to any residential tenant
      who relocates from the building to be converted. This program has been successful in that no
      existing units have been converted to condominiums during this Housing Element cycle. This
      program should be continued.
      13.   Residential Code Enforcement
      The residential code enforcement program involves several components. The housing stock in need
      of improvement is identified by complaints made to the City and periodic reconnaissance surveys
      to check on housing conditions. Obvious code violations are acted upon quickly by staff. The staff
      also works with individual property owners to address problems and discuss any financial
      assistance that may be available. Since 2010, there have been 77 total code enforcement cases.
      The City has only had two code cases in the last two years on affordable housing units and both
      were handled and cleared. These were minor violations involving building permits needed for
      window replacement. This is an on-going program that should be continued in the 2013-2020
      Housing Element.
      14.   Residential Rehabilitation
      The County of San Diego’s Department of Housing and Community Development administers the
      Home Repair Loan/Grant Program for the City of Solana Beach. The program assists single-family
      homeowners or mobile homeowners with residential rehabilitation and repair. To be eligible to
      participate in the program, a household’s annual gross income must be at or below 80 percent of
      San Diego County’s area median income. As the housing stock in Solana Beach ages, the need for
      rehabilitation programs will increase. The City of Solana Beach provides materials regarding this
      program at the permitting counter and other appropriate public venues. In addition, the City
      promotes the program with qualifying applicants as part of the development review process. No
      Solana Beach residents have participated in this program since 2004. This program should be
      continued in the 2013-2020 Housing Element.
      15.   Mortgage Credit Certificate
      Homeownership can be a key to maintaining a healthy community. The Mortgage Credit Certificate
      (MCC) program assists low and moderate income first time homebuyers. Under this program,
      which is administered by the County of San Diego, qualified first-time homebuyers are able to take
      a federal income tax credit of up to 20 percent of the annual interest paid on their mortgage. With
      less being paid in taxes, the homebuyer’s net earnings increase, enabling him or her to more easily
      qualify for a mortgage loan. The City of Solana Beach distributes information regarding the MCC
      program. There has been no activity in this program. This program should be continued with a
      greater effort by the City to provide information about the program to its residents.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 272 of 399
      16.    Distribute Fair Housing Information
      The City of Solana Beach supports fair housing laws and statutes. To promote equal opportunity,
      the City participates in the Fair Housing Council of San Diego’s (FHCSD) Fair Housing Program.
      The City distributes information on fair housing and refers fair housing questions and housing
      discrimination claims to the FHCSD. In addition, a housing fair was held in a Solana Beach park in
      2008. No complaints have been received or referred to FHCSD. The City should continue to
      distribute fair housing information and host housing fairs.
      C.    Quantified Objectives
      Housing Element law requires that quantified objectives be developed with regard to new
      construction, rehabilitation, conservation, and preservation activities that will occur during the
      housing element cycle. The following table summarizes the City of Solana Beach’s achievements
      towards meeting its quantified objectives for the 2005-2010 Housing Element cycle.
                                                     Table A-3
                                              Quantified Objectives
                                           Solana Beach (2005-2010)
                               New Construction Rehabilitation Conservation              Preservation
              Income Level         Obj.       Act.    Obj.    Act.     Obj.     Act.     Obj.    Act.
               Very Low             37         0       0       0        11       28        0       0
               Low                  30         9       5       0        11        0        0       0
               Moderate             25         0       0       0        0         0        0       0
               All Other
               Incomes              39        122      0       0        0         0        0       0
               Total           131           131    5       0        22       28        0      0
      Note: Obj. = objective, Act. = actual
      Source: City of Solana Beach Community Development, 2012
      1.   New Construction
      The new construction quantified objectives exceeded the RHNA allocations in the very low and low
      income categories, matched the RHNA allocation for the moderate income category, and was less
      than the RHNA allocation for the above moderate income category.
      •   The RHNA allocation for above moderate income units was 53. The total number of above
      moderate income units permitted was 122.
      •   The total RHNA allocation for moderate income units was 25 and no units were permitted.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 273 of 399
      •   The total RHNA allocation for low income was 22 and nine low income units were permitted.
      •   The total RHNA for very low income was 30 and no units were permitted.
      The total number of new construction units achieved matched the total objective for new
      construction. However, the units fell short of the objectives for the very low, low, and moderate
      income categories. Because of high costs and small sites, housing developments in Solana Beach
      have difficulty competing for the limited funds available to subsidize lower income housing. The City
      has provided substantial assistance to the Hitzke project, used density bonuses to encourage
      affordable housing, required lower income units in all new developments of five or more units, and
      adopted an Affordable Housing Impact Fee. However, despite the City’s best efforts, it was not able
      to meet its objectives for affordable housing.
      2.   Rehabilitation
      As the housing stock ages, the City recognizes the need for housing rehabilitation to preserve
      neighborhood quality. The City continued to promote the rehabilitation and repair programs offered
      by the County of San Diego; however, this emphasis did not result in any rehabilitation activities.
      3.   Conservation
      Currently, the City has 28 residents receiving Section 8 vouchers. The City continues to participate
      in the County’s program, ensuring that these opportunities are not lost.
      4.   Preservation
      No units were at risk of converting to market rate during the 2005-2010 Housing Element cycle.
      However, Solana Highlands did convert to market rate when its covenant with the Housing Authority
      of the County of San Diego expired in 2010. That property owner is now cooperating with the City
      on a redevelopment proposal that would bring the site up to its maximum unit potential and set
      aside 32 units as affordable. There is one affordable unit at risk of converting to market rate during
      the 2013-2020 cycle and the City should continue its preservation efforts.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 274 of 399
                                     Appendix B: Residential Land Inventory
      Housing Element Law requires a parcel-specific inventory of appropriately zoned, available, and
      suitable sites that can provide realistic opportunities for the provision of housing to all income
      segments within the community. This section evaluates the potential residential development that
      could occur based on the Solana Beach General Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
      A.    Regional Share Goals
      The San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) has identified Solana Beach’s share of
      regional housing needs for 2010-2020 in the Regional Housing Needs Assessment, which was
      adopted on October 28, 2011. Government Code Sections 65583 and 65583.2 require each city and
      county to identify sites within its jurisdiction that are available to meet its share of the region’s
      housing needs.
                                                        Table B-1
                                                    Regional Share
                                              Solana Beach (2010-2020)
                            Income Category                     Goal           Percent of Total
                    Extremely Low Income (≤
                    30%AMI)                                      43                    13%
                    Very Low Income (31-
                    50%AMI)                                      42                    12%
                    Low Income (51-80%AMI)                       65                    19%
                    Moderate Income (81-
                    120%AMI)                                     59                    17%
                    Above Moderate Income
                    (>120%AMI)                                   131                   39%
                    Total                                340                  100%
      AMI = Area Median Income
      Source: SANDAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment Plan, 2011
      The RHNA is an 11-year planning goal. Housing units built, under construction, or approved from
      January 1, 2010 onward can be credited towards meeting the City’s RHNA. These units can be
      subtracted from the City’s share of regional housing needs. The City must demonstrate in this
      Housing Element its ability to meet the remaining housing needs, through the provision of sites,
      after subtracting units under construction or anticipated. Since January of 2010, ten units have
      been constructed including one low income accessory dwelling unit and nine above moderate units.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 275 of 399
      The remaining RHNA for the low income category is 64 and the remaining RHNA for the above
      moderate income category is 122.
      B.   Adequate Sites
      Solana Beach’s evaluation of adequate sites includes an inventory of potential sites that are
      currently zoned to allow multi-family residential and/or mixed-use residential and commercial
      development. The analysis for each site includes the assessor’s parcel number (APN); address (if
      available); current general plan designation; current zoning designation; overlays (if applicable);
      allowable density range; lot/site size; realistic dwelling unit potential; existing use; identification of
      pending development (if applicable); availability of existing and planned infrastructure capacity; and
      a general description of environmental constraints. In addition to these multi-family and mixed-use
      sites, a list of vacant properties that are anticipated to be developed with single-family residences
      based upon the allowable density and zoning designation is included as well as an estimate of the
      number of accessory living units that may be constructed during the planning period based on past
      trends.
      The City’s land inventory was developed with the use of a combination of resources including the
      SANDAG’s GIS database, field surveys, and review of the City’s Land Use Element and Zoning
      Ordinance. The inventory includes both small and large residentially and non-residentially zoned
      parcels which are substantially vacant, underutilized, or have the potential to be redeveloped with
      more intense residential uses. The following inventory includes a map of the city, which identifies
      where the multi-family residential and mixed-use suitable sites are located, as well as a summary
      of each site with aerial imagery and site photos. Vacant properties that have the potential to
      develop with a single-family residence are identified in Table B-2. An overall summary of the
      inventory is included in Table B-3.
                                                      Figure B-1
                                           Adequate Sites Inventory Map
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 276 of 399
      SITE 1
      Characteristics:
           Address: 701 South Nardo Avenue
           APN: 298260330
           Lot Size: 13 acres
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: High Density Residential
           Zoning: High Density Residential (13 – 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): None
           Existing Use: Solana Highlands Apartments (194 units)
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 277 of 399
           Pending Development: See notes
           Development Potential: 260 dwelling units
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
      Notes:
           Preliminary interest has been expressed by the property owner to redevelop this site with 260
           one- and two-bedroom units. This would result in a net increase of 66 dwelling units.
      SITE 2
      Characteristics:
           Address: 0 South Sierra Avenue (no situs address)
           APN: 298211810
           Lot Size: 14,721 sq. ft. or 0.338 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use at 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                          Page 278 of 399
           Existing Use: City-owned parking lot
           Pending Development: CUP/DRP/SDP 17-11-05; Applicant: Hitzke. Mixed-use development
           with 10 very low income housing units.
           Development Potential:
           The applicant is requesting a 35% density bonus, or 10 dwelling units. The City desires a
           mixed-use development on the site and will not permit a commercial-only development.
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                           Page 279 of 399
      SITE 3
      Characteristics:
      Address: 635 South Highway 101
      APN: 298211085
      Lot Size: 56,535 sq. ft. or 1.298 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan; Scenic Areas Overlay on east portion
      Existing Use: City Hall
      Pending Development: None, but the City intends to issue a request for proposals to develop the
      site (See Program #19 in Chapter 5).
      Development Potential:
            14 dwelling units (assumes 1.29 acres at 20 du/ac)
            19 dwelling units with 35% density bonus
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
            Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 280 of 399
           None anticipated.
      Notes:
      Assumes the vacant west portion of property, which is currently a surface parking lot, would be
      developed with residential units and a parking structure to provide parking for both City Hall and the
      new residential units. The combined development would result in a horizontal mixed use
      development.
      SITE 4
      Characteristics:
           Address: 140 South Sierra Avenue
           APN: 298010630
           Lot Size: 43,560 sq. ft. or 1 ac
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial—Allows Mixed Use @ 20 du/ac
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 281 of 399
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
           Existing Use: Paved City parking lot
           Pending Development: None, but the City intends to issue a request for proposals to develop
           the site (See Program #19 in Chapter 5).
           Development Potential:
                20 dwelling units (assumes mixed use at 20 du/ac)
                27 dwelling units with 35% density bonus
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
      Notes:
           City parking lot could be developed with a mixed use development that provides residential
           units and a parking structure that replaces the existing public parking and also provides for
           parking for the mixed use development.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 282 of 399
      SITE 5
      Characteristics:
      Address: 105 North Cedros – NCTD Station
                            APN: 263352040          APN: 263352070
                            APN: 263352050          APN: 263352030 (1.08
                                                    Acres)
                            APN: 263352060          APN: 263342020 (1.77
                                                    Acres)
      Combined Lot Size of Property: 5.67 ac. (of a 9.29 ac. site). Parcel size information is only
      available for APNs 26335203 and 26334202. The lot size information provided for this site is based
      on Record of Survey No. 16694 filed with the County on August 18, 2000.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 283 of 399
      Land Use Considerations: SANDAG has identified this site as a Smart Growth Opportunity Area.
      General Plan: Special Commercial
      Zoning: Special Commercial (allows Mixed Use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
      Existing Use: Train station (building & platform), open space, and parking lot
      Pending Development: No application at this time, but the City has signed a MOU with the
      property owner (NCTD) to explore mixed-use development on the site. NCTD is currently
      evaluating the site and is in the process of developing a plan for it within the context of other
      properties it owns up and down the rail line. The City is committed to this site and is continually
      following up with NCTD to encourage and facilitate its development in a manner consistent with the
      City’s goals and expectations.
      Development Potential:
      113 dwelling units (assumes 5.67 acres @ 20 du/ac)
      152 dwelling units with 35% density bonus
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
      Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
      The site is only accessible from North Cedros Avenue, so limited access is a potential constraint.
      SITE 6
      Characteristics:
            Address: 329 S.          Address: 128 Dahlia Drive
            Highway 101              APN: 298052070
            APN: 298052060 (1.0      Address: 120 Dahlia Drive
            Acre)                    APN: 298052080
            Address: 343 S.          Address: 112-114 Dahlia
            Highway 101              Drive
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 284 of 399
           APN: 298052140           APN: 298052130
           Combined lot size of development site: 83,025 sq. ft. or 1.799 ac. Parcel size information is
           only available for APN 29805206. Prior to 2011, the site was regulated by the state. The lot
           size information provided for this site is based on a land survey done by a survey firm in
           August 2011 and submitted to the City as part of the proposed project for the site in a
           Topographic Survey and Existing Conditions Plan.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan; Scenic Areas Overlay on east portion
           Existing Use: Combination of vacant trailer park, vacant commercial buildings, and occupied
           commercial buildings
           Pending Development: DRP 17-11-32; Applicant: American Assets – Pending application for
           mixed use development, including 36 dwelling units, commercial development, and a parking
           structure.
      Development Potential:
           36 dwelling units (assumes 1.799 ac. @ 20 du/ac)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate with conditions
      Environmental Constraints:
           Potential soils clean-up required.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 285 of 399
      SITE 7
      Characteristics:
           Address: 238 North Cedros (through-lot to North Rios)
           APN: 263341070
           Lot Size: 20,226 sq. ft. or 0.464 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: Special Commercial, Medium High Residential
           Zoning: Special Commercial on west half (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac); Medium High
           Residential on east half (allows 8-12 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan on west half; Scaled Residential Overlay on
           east half
           Existing Use: Single-family residential on west half; vacant on east half
           Pending Development: DRP/SDP/MEC 17-12-21; Applicant: Sheres & Wardell—Pending
           application for mixed use development with commercial and 1 residential unit on west half and
           2 residential units on east half.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 286 of 399
           Development Potential: The zoning on this property is divided between Special Commercial
           and Medium High Residential (Highway 101 Specific Plan). The property is required to be
           developed accordingly, although the development can be integrated. This assumes half the
           property (0.232 ac.) develops per the MHR zone @ 8-12 du/ac or 2 dwelling units; the other
           half (0.232 ac.) develops as mixed use at 20 du/ac or 4 dwelling units. 3 units are currently
           proposed.
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 287 of 399
      SITE 8
      Characteristics:
           Address: 700 block of Ida Avenue (no situs address)
           APN: 298162370
           Lot Size: 0.94 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: Medium High Residential
           Zoning: Medium High Residential (8-12 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): None
           Existing Use: Vacant
           Pending Development: DRP/SDP/SUB 17-07-08; Applicants: Barbara and Jan Ausdemore –
           Pending application for an 8-unit detached residential condominium development. This
           development has the potential for additional units if the inclusionary housing requirement is
           satisfied onsite.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 288 of 399
           Development Potential:
           7 to 11 dwelling units (assumes 0.937 ac. @ range of 8 to 12 du/ac)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate with conditions
      Environmental Constraints:
           Site abuts I-5 Freeway; noise walls will be required by Caltrans. California Department of Fish
           and Game recommends mitigation of loss of non-native grassland, which provides foraging
           habitat for raptors. These mitigation measures will not preclude the planned development from
           occurring on this site within the planning period.
      SITE 9
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 289 of 399
      Characteristics:
           Address: 823 Vera Street
           APN: 298134050
           Lot Size: 20,008 sq. ft. or 0.459 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: Medium High Residential
           Zoning: Medium High Residential (8-12 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): None
           Existing Use: Single-family residence and detached garage
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential:
               3 to 4 dwelling units (assumes 0.459 ac. @ range of 8 to 12 du/ac)
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 290 of 399
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           Due to the slope of site, grading issues may be a potential constraint.
      SITE 10
      Characteristics:
      Address: 700 Stevens Avenue
      APN: 298131220
      Lot Size: 12,954 sq. ft. or 0.297 ac.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      Page 291 of 399
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): None
      Existing Use: Vacant
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential:
            5 dwelling units (assumes 0.297 ac. @ 20 du/ac for mixed use)
            7 dwelling units (with 35% density bonus)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
      Adequate
      Environmental Constraints:
      Lot slopes down from street. South property line is adjacent to La Colonia Park.
      SITE 11
      Characteristics:
            Address: 0 Stevens Avenue (no situs address)
            APN: 298131280
            Lot Size: 6,118 sq. ft. or 0.14 ac.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Page 292 of 399
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): None
           Existing Use: Vacant
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential: 2 dwelling units (assumes 0.14 ac. @ 20 du/ac for mixed use)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Parcel does not have frontage on Stevens Avenue.
      Environmental Constraints:
           Lot slopes down from street.
      Notes:
           Ideally, this property would be combined with the vacant parcel to the west and/or south (see
           Sites 10 and 12, respectively). Lack of frontage on Stevens Avenue makes this site more
           attractive for residential development than commercial development.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 293 of 399
      SITE 12
      Characteristics:
      Address: 0 Stevens Avenue (no situs address)
      APN: 298131270
      Lot Size: 8,254 sq. ft. or 0.189 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: Commercial
      Zoning: Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): None
      Existing Use: Vacant
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential:
           3 dwelling units (assumes 0.189 ac. @ 20 du/ac for mixed use)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                       Page 294 of 399
           Minor down-sloping of lot from street.
      Notes:
           See Site 13.
      SITE 13
      Characteristics:
           Address: 0 Valley Avenue
           APN: 298282070
           Lot Size: 9,673 sq. ft. or 0.222 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: High Residential
           Zoning: High Residential (13-20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Floodplain Overlay (east portion)
           Existing Use: Vacant
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential: 3 to 4 dwelling units (assumes 0.222 ac. at range of densities)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 295 of 399
          A portion of site is located within the Floodplain Overlay, but this will not preclude the site from
          achieving its maximum density.
      SITE 14
      Characteristics:
      Address: 0 Genevieve Street (no situs address)
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 296 of 399
      APN: 298132320
      Lot Size: 9,038 sq. ft. or 0.207 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): None
      Existing Use: Paved parking lot
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential: 4 dwelling units (assumes 0.207 ac @ 20 du/ac)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
      SITE 15
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 297 of 399
      Characteristics:
           Address: 618 Valley Avenue
           APN: 298132310
           Lot Size: 15,139 sq. ft. or 0.348 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): None
           Existing Use: Commercial building and paved parking lot
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential:
                6 dwelling units (assumes 0.348 ac. at 20 du/ac)
                8 dwelling units (with 35% density bonus)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 298 of 399
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
      SITE 16
      Characteristics:
      Address: 636 Valley Avenue
      APN: 298133020
      Lot Size: 11,818 sq. ft. or .271 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 299 of 399
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): None
      Existing Use: Single-family residence
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential:
           5 dwelling units (assumes .271 ac. @ 20 du/ac)
           7 dwelling units (with 35% density bonus)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
      SITE 17
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 300 of 399
      Characteristics:
           Address: 235 South Highway 101
           APN: 298010180
           Lot Size: 10,485 sq. ft. or 0.241 ac.
           APN: 298010190
           Lot Size: 7,857 sq. ft. or 0.180 ac.
           Total acreage: 0.421 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan; Scenic Areas Overlay on east portion
           Existing Use: Commercial (Bike Revolution), constructed in 1952
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential:
               8 dwelling units (assumes 0.421 acres @ 20 du/ac)
               11 dwelling units (with 35% density bonus)
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 301 of 399
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
                Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
                None anticipated.
      SITE 18
      Characteristics:
      Address: 435 North Highway 101
      APN: 263053200
      Lot Size: 9,478 sq. ft. or 0.218 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan; Scenic Areas Overlay
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 302 of 399
      Existing Use: Car wash
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential: 4 dwelling units (assumes 0.218 acres @ 20 du/ac)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
      Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
      None anticipated.
      SITE 19
      Characteristics:
           Address: 0 Acacia (no situs address)
           APN: 263304110
           Lot Size: 8,416 sq. ft. or 0.193 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
           General Plan: General Commercial
           Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
           Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
           Existing Use: Vacant
           Pending Development: None
           Development Potential: 3 dwelling units (0.193 acres @ 20 du/ac)
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 303 of 399
           Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
           None anticipated.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 304 of 399
      SITE 20
      Characteristics:
      Address: 301 North Highway 101
      APN: 263304090
      Lot Size: 3,249 sq. ft. or 0.075 ac.
      Address: 312 Acacia Avenue
      APN: 263304100
      Lot Size: 4,633 sq. ft. or 0.106 ac.
      Land Use Considerations:
      General Plan: General Commercial
      Zoning: General Commercial (allows mixed use @ 20 du/ac)
      Overlay(s): Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan; Scenic Areas Overlay
      Existing Use: Retail
      Pending Development: None
      Development Potential: 3 dwelling units (0.181 acres @ 20 du/ac)*
      Existing and Planned Infrastructure Capacity:
      Adequate.
      Environmental Constraints:
      None anticipated.
      Notes:
      *Assumes the two parcels are developed as one site.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 305 of 399
                                                Table B-2
                Vacant Sites with Potential to Develop with a Single-Family Residence
                                                         GP Category/Density -
            ID    APN          Address       Acres    Dwelling Units/Acre (Du/Ac)   Zone
             1 26302115    0 Circle Dr East   0.144     Medium Residential (5-7)     MR
                           707 Pacific Ave
             2 26304124          North        0.179     Medium Residential (5-7)     MR
                          757 N. Granados
             3 26310203           Ave         0.226        Low Residential (3)       LR
             4 26316060 437 Marview Lane 0.172             Low Residential (3)       LR
             5 26316064 431 Marview Lane 0.315             Low Residential (3)       LR
             6 26318115 580 Marview Lane 0.325             Low Residential (3)       LR
             7 26318116 483 Marview Lane 0.159             Low Residential (3)       LR
             8 26318202       0 Ford Ave      0.334        Low Residential (3)       LR
             9 26322111     580 Canyon Dr     0.334        Low Residential (3)       LR
            10 26331113      0 Pacific Ave    0.118     Medium Residential (5-7)     MR
            11 26331114      0 Pacific Ave    0.121     Medium Residential (5-7)     MR
            12 26340219 0 Nardo Ave South 0.263            Low Residential (3)       LR
                           0 Granados Ave
            13 26340404          South        0.226    Low-Medium Residential (4)   LMR
                             190 Rios Ave
            14 29807242          South        0.318        Low Residential (3)       LR
            15 29807609      438 Rosa St      0.285        Low Residential (3)       LR
            16 29808139     238 Nardo Ave     0.398        Low Residential (3)       LR
            17 29808140      0 Nardo Ave      0.396        Low Residential (3)       LR
            18 29808386 130 Granados Ave 0.558         Low-Medium Residential (4)   LMR
                          134 S. Granados
            19 29808387           Ave         0.230    Low-Medium Residential (4)   LMR
                             511 Rios Ave
            20 29809213          South        0.423        Low Residential (3)       LR
                             521 Rios Ave
            21 29809214          South        0.395        Low Residential (3)       LR
                             533 Rios Ave
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 306 of 399
             22 29809215           South           0.398        Low Residential (3)           LR
                               474 Rios Ave
             23 29809325           South           0.446        Low Residential (3)           LR
                               520 Rios Ave
             24 29809326           South           0.233        Low Residential (3)           LR
             25 29809429       0 Nardo Ave         0.247        Low Residential (3)           LR
             26 29809430       0 Nardo Ave         0.251        Low Residential (3)           LR
                             0 Granados Ave
             27 29809432           South           0.344        Low Residential (3)           LR
             28 29812126 0 Nardo Ave South 0.349                Low Residential (3)           LR
             29 29812165      460 Nardo Ave        0.319        Low Residential (3)           LR
             30 29812166       0 Nardo Ave         0.289        Low Residential (3)           LR
             31 29816225        0 Castro St        0.207     Medium Residential (5-7)         MR
             32 29821240        none found         0.135 Medium-High Residential (8-12)      MHR
             33 29821241        none found         0.126 Medium-High Residential (8-12)      MHR
             34 29827012       0 Highland Dr       0.541 Medium-High Residential (8-12)      MHR
             35 29827018     Beach Front Dr        0.207     Medium Residential (5-7)         MR
                               684 Via del la
             36 29827035           Valle           0.507     Medium Residential (5-7)         MR
             37 29829140      909 Jeffrey Rd       0.578            Estate (0-2)             ER-2
                            1204 N. Genevive
             38 29836021            St             1.059            Estate (0-2)             ER-2
             39 29838101       0 Highland Dr       0.465            Estate (0-2)             ER-2
             40 29839007     723 Avocado Pl        0.506            Estate (0-2)             ER-2
             41 29813311     834 Vera Street       0.147 Medium-High Residential (8-12)      MHR
      Table B-3 includes a summary of the adequate sites inventory.
                                                         Table B-3
                                         Adequate Sites Inventory Summary
      Site    APN      GP/Zone Allowable Acres Realistic         Existing Use       Infrastructure   Environ-
                                  Density             Unit                             Capacity       mental
                                  (Du/Ac)           Capacity                                       Constraints
        1 298260330      HDR       13-20      13.0     661     Apartment complex         Yes           None
                                                                                                    anticipated
        2 298211810       GC         20      0.338     102         Parking lot           Yes           None
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      Page 307 of 399
                                               10
                                                                                          anticipated
        3 298211085     GC      20    1.298     14             City Hall       Yes            None
                                                                                          anticipated
        4 298010630     GC      20      1.0     20           Parking Lot       Yes            None
                                                                                          anticipated
        5 263352040     SC      20     5.67    113     Train station/Parking   Yes          Grading,
          263352050                                        lot/Open space               Noise, Traffic,
          263352060                                                                       Aesthetics
          263352070
          263352030
          263342020
        6 298052060     GC      20    1.799     36              Vacant         Yes     TBD – potential
          298052140                                    buildings/Commercial             issues include
          298052070                                                                        noise, air
          298052080                                                                     quality, traffic,
          298052130                                                                         and soil
                                                                                            hazards
        7 263341070 SC/MHR    20/12   0.464     3           Single family      Yes            None
                                                            home/Vacant                   anticipated
        8 298162370    MHR     8-12   0.937     8               Vacant         Yes       Noise/biology
        9 298134050    MHR     8-12   0.459     3           Single family      Yes       Slope/grading
                                                            home/Vacant
       10 298131220     GC      20    0.297     5               Vacant         Yes     Slope/proximity
                                                                                             to park
       11 298131280     GC      20     0.14     2               Vacant         Yes       Lack of street
                                                                                            frontage
       12 298131270     GC      20    0.189     3               Vacant         Yes       Lack of street
                                                                                            frontage
       13 298282070    HDR    13-20   0.222     3               Vacant         Yes         Floodplain
       14 298132320     GC      20    0.207     4             Parking lot      Yes            None
                                                                                          anticipated
       15 298132310     GC      20    0.348     6      Commercial/Parking      Yes            None
                                                                  lot                     anticipated
       16 298133020     GC      20    0.271     5       Single family home     Yes            None
                                                                                          anticipated
       17 298010180     GC      20    0.241     8            Commercial        Yes            None
                                                                                          anticipated
       18 263053200     GC      20    0.218     4              Car wash        Yes            None
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 308 of 399
                                                                                                          anticipated
        19 263304110        GC          20      0.193       3            Vacant              Yes             None
                                                                                                          anticipated
        20 263304090        GC          20      0.181       3             Retail             Yes             None
             263304100                                                                                    anticipated
       Vacant sites                                       41             Vacant              Yes             None
       with the
       potential to
       develop with a
       single-family
       residence
       (from Table B-
       2)
       Accessory                                            7                                Yes             None
       Living Units
       Net Loss 3                                          -3
       Total                                           364
         1 The potential number of dwelling units for Site 1 represents the maximum potential net
         increase over the existing 194 units based on the property owner’s preliminary proposal, not the
         total potential number of units allowed at the maximum allowable density.
         2 Exceeds maximum density due to a 35% density bonus.
         3 Net loss accounts for the fact that redevelopment of Sites 7, 9, and 16 would result in a loss of
         an existing single-family unit on each site.
      C.     Realistic Capacity Assumptions
      The City utilized the maximum density to determine realistic unit capacity for mixed-use projects
      and the low end of the range of allowable densities for residentially-zoned properties, except for
      sites where a development application is in process for more units. To verify that the maximum
      density is achievable, the City considered and evaluated the implementation of its current
      development standards (e.g. setbacks, building height, parking, etc.) to determine approximate
      density and unit yields. As an example, on an approximately 9,400 square foot site, the imposition
      of 10-foot front and street side yard setbacks, a 35-foot building height, 1.2 FAR, and parking still
      allows for maximum residential density (20 du/ac) to be achieved with a typical site plan design for
      four residential units in addition to retail space. In addition, the City reviewed actual built and
      proposed yields for past and current development applications over the last ten years for both small
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 309 of 399
      and large scale residential projects. In general, projects in the medium to medium-high density
      residential zones tend to build-out at the lower end of the density range and projects within the high
      density residential and commercial zones tend to build out at the higher end of the density range
      (refer to Table B-4). Few projects propose lower densities than permitted; however, those that do
      are usually located on sites that are constrained by steep slopes or have access issues. With the
      possible exception of Site 5, the sites identified in the inventory are not encumbered by such
      constraints. Sites may also develop at lower densities due to market demand, inability to obtain
      financing, or other non-governmental constraints. The conservative approach to the realistic
      capacity analysis and the surplus capacity identified should account for sites that might not build
      out to the maximum unit potential.
      For the purposes of this inventory, the potential units that could be achieved through a density
      bonus were not included in the realistic unit capacity column of Table B-3, except for Site 4, which
      is the subject of an affordable housing development application that is currently being processed
      through the City and seeking a 35 percent density bonus. However, the potential yield with a
      maximum density bonus of 35 percent was included in the inventory for illustrative purposes for
      sites that can accommodate more than five units and are not currently the subject of an active or
      pending development proposal. The City’s inclusionary housing ordinance requires developments of
      five or more units to set aside at least 15 percent of those units as affordable (rental projects have
      the option of paying an in-lieu fee). Developments that provide affordable housing are also eligible
      to apply for a density bonus consistent with the State density bonus law. It is likely that some of
      these sites may develop with a density bonus, but to be conservative, those units are not included.
                                                      Table B-4
                          Sample Proposed/Approved Capacities of Actual Projects
                                                               Range of     Proposed or
                                                               Allowed      Approved      Resulting
              Project Name          Acreage    Zone            DUs          Units         DUs/Ac
               Hitzke                  0.338       GC (20            7          10 w/          29
                                                   du/ac)                      density
                                                                                bonus
               American Assets         1.799       GC (20           36            36           20
                                                   du/ac)
               Sheres & Wardell        0.464       SC (20            6             3           6.5
                                                   du/ac)
               Solana Highlands        13.00    HDR (13-20        169-260         260          20
                                                   du/ac)
               LMC Investment           0.20    HDR (13-20)         2-4            3           15
               Ausdemore               0.937     MHR (8-12         7-11            8           8.5
                                                   du/ac)
               North Cedros             2.18     MHR (8-12         17-26          25          11.5
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 310 of 399
                                                    du/ac)
              Davies                   0.32      MHR (8-12          2-3              3             9
                                                    du/ac)
              Rios Grande              0.50      MHR (8-12          4-6              4             8
                                                    du/ac)
              McNally                  0.22      MHR (8-12           2          2 (plus 1          9
                                                    du/ac)                     accessory
                                                                                   unit)
              Schooler/Jacobson        0.24      MHR (8-12           2               2            8.3
                                                    du/ac)
              Kelly                    1.01        MR (5-7          5-7              3             3
                                                    du/ac)
              Friehauf                 0.33        MR (5-7          1-2             2              6
                                                    du/ac)
      Source: City of Solana Beach, 2012
      1.   Multi-Family Residential Sites
      There is a potential for a net gain of 79 residential units on sites 1, 8, 9, and 13. All of these sites
      are zoned for medium to high density residential development and are either vacant or
      underutilized. A potential redevelopment project may occur on Site 1, which could result in a net
      increase of 66 units. Site 8 is the subject of an active development proposal for an 8-unit detached
      residential condominium development. As of the writing of this document, the affordable housing
      ordinance requirements for that site have not yet been satisfied. One possibility is that the
      affordable units may be proposed onsite to meet the requirements.
      2.   Commercial Sites
      The General and Special Commercial zones allow for mixed-use development at a density of up to
      20 dwelling units per acre. In response to the City’s limited availability of vacant and underutilized
      residential land at densities suitable for supporting affordable housing, the City of Solana Beach
      encourages the provision of residential uses with commercial development in all commercial zones.
      The majority of the City’s vacant and underutilized commercial land is located in close proximity to
      the transit station or along a bus route, which makes them a preferred location for housing
      development. The City’s commercially zoned sites could accommodate substantially more
      residences than has been included in the site inventory; less than eight percent of the total
      commercial land in the City was included in this inventory. The sites included in the inventory are
      vacant or substantially underdeveloped, and are the most likely locations for mixed
      commercial/residential development because of their location. Some of the sites are the subject of
      pending development applications for mixed-use. Additional mixed-use development is anticipated
      in these areas based on developer interest; zoning incentives to develop mixed-use, such as
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 311 of 399
      reduced parking requirements and higher FARs; the City’s Highway 101 streetscape improvement
      efforts, which may attract more residential uses to the area by creating a more vibrant
      pedestrian/bicycle friendly environment; the lack of vacant land in the City for residential
      development; and the high demand for housing in Solana Beach as indicated by low residential
      vacancy rates. Key sites for housing include Site 2, which is the subject of an active development
      proposal for the development of 10 affordable housing units with a 35 percent density bonus, Site 6,
      which is the subject of an active development proposal for 36 units including 15 percent affordable,
      and Site 5, where the City has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the North
      County Transit District (NCTD) and is working towards bringing forward a mixed-use development
      proposal containing 113 units for evaluation. These sites alone, which together can accommodate
      159 units, meet the City’s obligation to provide adequate sites zoned at 20 dwelling units per acre
      for lower income housing. In addition, pursuant to SB2, any of the General Commercial sites in this
      inventory are also suitable for an emergency shelter that can accommodate the City’s homeless
      population of seven persons.
      3.    Accessory Living Units
      Accessory living units (ALUs) are another option for the provision of lower income housing in cities
      with little land available for new residential development. Accessory living units provide housing for
      family members, students, the elderly, in-home care providers, persons with disabilities, or others.
      Existing units are rented to lower income households based on recorded covenants imposed prior
      to the Palmer decision. Based on building permit records, eight accessory living units were
      approved between 2003 and 2012. Considering this track record, the City anticipates that
      approximately seven units will be constructed between 2013 and 2020. This is reflected in Table B-
      2. Because the size of the units is limited, all are expected to continue to be rented to lower income
      households.
      4.    Single-Family Residences
      Vacant sites that have the potential to develop with single-family residences can help to satisfy the
      RHNA requirements for above moderate income housing. These sites are identified in Table B-2.
      For the purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that each of these sites will develop with one single
      family residence, although some sites may have the capacity for two units. During the previous
      planning period, 92 single-family residential units were constructed – an average of 15 per year.
      The number of single family residences constructed during the current planning period is expected
      to decrease to approximately five per year due to less land available for single-family development.
      D.    Zoning Appropriate to Accommodate Lower-Income Households
      High density residential and commercial zones (HR, GC, SC) are the most suitable for development
      of housing affordable to very low- and low-income households because they accommodate
      densities that create economies of scale and potentially lower construction costs. Government
      Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B) allows local governments to utilize a “default” numerical density
      standard for establishing adequate zoning to accommodate lower income housing. The City’s
      zoning for its high density residential and commercial zones is consistent with the 20 dwelling units
      per acre standard for suburban jurisdictions and therefore considered appropriate to accommodate
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 312 of 399
      housing for lower-income households.
      Solana Beach has the capacity to accommodate 273 units on sites zoned for high density
      development and which are considered suitable for lower income housing (sites that only provided a
      net increase of one or two units were considered above moderate and sites that provided a net
      increase of three to five units were considered moderate income). In addition, the projected seven
      accessory living units are included in the table as affordable housing based on past experience and
      their small size. As demonstrated in Table B-5, the City has sufficient sites zoned appropriately to
      accommodate its remaining RHNA of 330 units.
                                                    Table B-5
                                     Comparison of Regional Growth Need
                                              and Residential Sites
                                                                           Minimum         Site
                                                              Net RHNA      Density     Inventory
              Income Group        RHNA          Credits      Remaining Guidelines        Capacity
              Extremely Low          43            0              43                    HDR = 66
              Very Low               42            0              42       20 Du/Ac    MXU = 207
                                                                                         ALU = 7
              Low                    65            1              64
              Moderate                                                                   HDR = 3
                                                                                        MXU = 26
                                     59            0              59       15 Du/Ac     + Excess
                                                                                         capacity
                                                                                       from above
              Subtotal          209          1              208                       309
              Above                                                                      MXU = 4
              Moderate                                                                  MHR = 10
                                                                           Less than     SF = 41
                                    131            9             122
                                                                           15 Du/Ac     + Excess
                                                                                         capacity
                                                                                       from above
              Total            340           10             330                       364
      Note: HDR = high density residential, MXU = mixed-use, ALU = accessory living unit,
      MHR = medium-high density residential, SF = single-family
      E.    Development Considerations
      1.   Public Facilities and Services
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 313 of 399
      Solana Beach is essentially built-out with only a few vacant properties remaining. The City currently
      has adequate public services and facilities to serve all new residential development that may occur.
      The sites are adjacent to existing public roadways and are served by the City’s police department,
      the County Sheriff’s Department, and private companies that provide phone, cable, gas, and
      electric service.
      Water is provided to the City by the Santa Fe Irrigation District. The City’s Engineering/Public
      Works Division maintains the sanitary sewer system. The Santa Fe Irrigation District’s 2010 Urban
      Water Management Plan and the City’s sewer master plan addresses service area needs based on
      ultimate build-out. At present, the City has adequate water supplies and sewer capacity to serve
      existing development as well as new residential development that is anticipated to serve projected
      increases in population.
      State law requires that water and sewer providers develop written policies that grant priority to
      proposed development that includes housing affordable to lower-income households. The legislation
      also prohibits water providers from denying or conditioning the approval of development that
      includes housing affordable to lower-income households, unless specific written findings are made.
      In 2006, the District passed Resolution 06-08 entitled Adopting a Services Priority Policy for Lower
      Income Developments in Accordance with SB 1087, which states that the District shall grant water
      and service priority to any proposed developments that include lower income households. The City
      will provide a copy of the adopted Housing Element to the Santa Fe Irrigation District immediately
      following adoption in accordance with Government Code Section 65589.7(a). The City will also
      continue to work with the Santa Fe Irrigation District and its own Public Works Department to
      ensure priority water and sewer service is provided to affordable housing developments.
      2.    Environmental Constraints
      Site 13 in the adequate sites inventory is partially located within the Floodplain Overlay. This
      overlay zone establishes additional requirements and review considerations for projects within
      special flood hazard areas to ensure that the properties are reasonably safe from flooding. The
      necessity of these requirements is offset by the need for public safety and welfare, and thus the
      City does not consider them to be a constraint to housing development. As part of this analysis, the
      Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA) floodplain limits were identified on this property and it
      was determined that the projected residential unit capacity could still be achieved.
      Any other environmental constraints, such as those related to noise, traffic, air quality,
      environmental hazards, and biology are anticipated to be resolved through the environmental review
      process pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). In Solana Beach, those
      areas planned for higher density are less subject to environmental constraints and hazards.
      Conversely, those areas that are more constrained are planned for lower density to lessen the
      potential for unacceptable impacts on the environment. Typical mitigation measures to address
      environmental impacts should not inhibit development from occurring on these sites within the
      current planning period.
      3.    Small Sites
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 314 of 399
      Development of parcels allowing at least 50-80 dwelling units is desirable in terms of construction
      economies and effective use of State and federal grants. However, compact, built-out cities like
      Solana Beach often do not have a supply of larger lots suitable for residential development. There
      are very few remaining vacant lots in the city and the majority of vacant parcels are less than one
      acre in size. However, based on past trends, residential development on sites of one acre or less
      have been, and continue to be, a key component of the City’s housing production (refer to Table B-
      4).
      Small sites can support densities of 20 dwelling units per acre, more if a density bonus is sought.
      For example, Site 2 is 0.338 acres and is proposing ten affordable housing units in addition to
      approximately 1,300 square feet of commercial space. The residential component would include a
      mix of one-, two-, three, and four-bedroom apartments. The existing 31 public parking spaces would
      be retained above ground and additional parking would be provided in a semi-enclosed underground
      structure. This project results in a density of 29 dwelling units per acre.
      Many of the city’s small sites are zoned for mixed-use development. The development regulations
      are intended to maximize the residential density of these sites by providing reduced parking
      requirements and higher Floor Area Ratios (FARs) for mixed-use development (refer to Chapter 4
      for additional information). The City also encourages lot consolidation to facilitate multi-family
      development and encourages affordable housing through such incentives as offering density
      bonuses, fee reductions or assistance in obtaining financing, funding and development assistance,
      and streamlined permit processing (refer to Chapter 5 for additional information). The City does not
      restrict lot consolidation from occurring and has had lot consolidation proposals come forward. For
      example, Site 6 in the adequate sites inventory is the subject of a development application that is
      proposing the consolidation of lots to facilitate a mixed-use project with a total of 36 dwelling units.
      4.   Existing Development on Underutilized Sites
      Solana Beach is an established community with limited development opportunities on vacant land.
      As such, vacant sites cannot accommodate the City’s entire share of the regional housing need.
      The City must rely on underutilized properties to demonstrate sufficient capacity during the planning
      period. Market conditions such as high land and construction costs, combined with a limited supply
      of available and developable land and a high demand for housing in the community as indicated by
      low residential vacancy rates, suggest that conditions are favorable for redevelopment of existing
      underutilized sites. The City has identified 11 sites that are underutilized and available for
      redevelopment. Although these sites are developed with existing residential or commercial uses,
      the existing uses are not considered to be a constraint to new residential development due to their
      age, their poor or fair condition, the fact that the existing intensity of development is substantially
      lower than allowed by the zoning, and/or the developer interest that has been expressed in
      redeveloping the sites. The City has received applications for development on some of the sites
      and has been working with the property owners on initial concept plans on others. In addition, many
      of the underutilized sites are within commercial zones. As described in Section C.2, above, there
      are incentives for mixed residential/commercial development in these zones such as reduced
      parking requirements and higher FARs. In addition, the City’s Highway 101 streetscape
      improvement efforts are anticipated to attract more residential uses to the area by creating a more
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 315 of 399
      vibrant pedestrian/bicycle friendly environment. Given these existing conditions and the zoning
      capacity for higher density residential, the City feels these sites are the most viable redevelopment
      opportunities to accommodate the housing need within the planning period. These underutilized
      sites have the capacity to yield up to 258 net dwelling units.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 316 of 399
                                    Appendix C: List of Organizations Notified
      In addition to all other noticing, the following stakeholders received written notifications regarding
      the Housing Element update.
              Hitzke Development              Chelsea Investment           Barone Galasso &
              Corporation                     Corporation                  Associates
              Ginger Hitzke                   5993 Avenida Encinas Ste     710 W Ivy
              251 Autumn Drive, Ste 100 101                                San Diego, CA 92101
              San Marcos, CA 92069            Carlsbad, CA 92008
              Affirmed Housing Group          Wakeland Housing and         Las Palmas Housing
              13520 Evening Creek Drive Development Corporation            531 Encinitas Blvd Ste 206
              North Ste 160                   1230 Columbia St Ste 950     Encinitas, CA 92024
              San Diego, CA 92128             San Diego, CA 92101
              BRIDGE Housing                  Community Housing Works San Diego Community
              Corporation                     4305 University Ave Ste      Housing Corporation
              2202 30th St                    550                          6160 Mission Gorge Rd Ste
              San Diego, CA 92104             San Diego, CA 92105          204
                                                                           San Diego, CA 92120
              SVDP Management Inc             Solutions Family Center      City Heights CDC
              3350 E Street                   722 W California Ave         4001 El Cajon Blvd Ste 205
              San Diego, CA 92102             Vista, CA 92083              City Heights, CA 92105
              The Betty and Melvin Cohn Coastal Service Center             Jamboree Housing
              Center                          2195 Oceanside Boulevard Corporation
              550 West Washington             Oceanside, CA 92054          17701 Cowan Avenue Ste
              Avenue, Suite B                                              200
              Escondido, CA 92025                                          Irvine, CA 92614
              LINC Housing Corporation MAAC Project                        Mercy Housing California
              110 Pine Ave., Suite 500        1355 Third Ave               1500 South Grand Ave Ste
              Long Beach, CA 90802            Chula Vista, CA 91911        100
                                                                           Los Angeles, CA 90015
              National Community              North County Solutions for   Pacific Southwest
              Renaissance                     Change                       Community Development
              9065 Haven Ave Ste 100          722 West California ave      Corporation
              Rancho Cucamonga, CA            Vista, CA 92083              16935 West Bernardo Dr
              91730                                                        Ste 238
                                                                           San Diego, CA 92127
              San Diego Habitat for           San Diego Interfaith         San Diego Youth Services
              Humanity                        Housing Foundation           3255 Wing St
              10222 San Diego Mission         7956 Lester Ave              San Diego, CA 92110
              Rd                              Lemon Grove, CA 91945
              San Diego, CA 92108
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 317 of 399
            South Bay Community      Southern California        Townspeople Inc
            Services                 Housing Collaborative      4080 Centre St Ste 201
            430 F Street             9201 Spectrum Center Blvd San Diego, CA 92123
            Chula Vista, CA 91910    Ste 110
                                     San Diego, CA 92123
            Chicano Federation       Community Resource         Regional Task Force on the
            PO Box 5427              Center                     Homeless
            San Diego, CA 92165      656 Second St              4699 Murphy Canyon Rd
                                     Encinitas, CA 92024        San Diego, CA 92123
            Vista Hill Programs -    Paula Shaw Counseling      Cynde Roth, LCSW
            Bridges Service Center   683 S Nardo Ave            740 Lomas Santa Fe Dr
            740 Lomas Santa Fe Dr    Solana Beach, CA 92075     Ste 200
            Ste 200                                             Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Gina Taffi, PhD          San Diego Family           Christauria Welland-Akong
            767 Academy Dr           Counseling                 990 Highland Dr #103
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   341 S Cedros Ave #D        Solana Beach, CA 92075
                                     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Rustin Berlow, MD        Utic James, PhD            Del Mar Learning and
            415 S Cedros Ave         462 Stevens Ave #108       Behavior
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Mark Cooper
                                                                243 N Highway 101 #22
                                                                Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Jonathan Gale, PhD       Business Liaison Member    Business Liaison Member
            990 Highland Dr #103     Carolyn Cohen              Mark Tackabery
            Solana Beach, Ca 92075   PO Box 623                 11455 El Camino Real Ste
                                     Solana Beach, CA 92075     200
                                                                San Diego, CA 92130
            Business Liaison Member  Business Liaison Member    Business Liaison Member
            Peter House              Carl Turnbull              Sean MacLeod
            663 W Circle Dr          777 S Highway 101          444 S Cedros #295
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Business Liaison Member  Clean and Green            San Elijo Lagoon
            Bryan Fuller             Steven Goetsch             Conservancy
            243 N Highway 101        837 Santa Rosita           Doug Gibson
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     PO Box 230634
                                                                Encinitas, CA 92023
            Army Corps of Engineers  California Coastal         22nd Ag District
            Susan Ming               Commission                 Tim Fennell
            915 Wilshire Blvd 15110  Deborah Lee                2260 Jimmy Durante Blvd.
            Los Angeles, CA 90017    7575 Metropolitian Dr Ste  Del Mar, CA 92014
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 318 of 399
                                     103
                                     San Diego, CA 92108
            NCTD                     SD County                  City of Del Mar
            Matthew Tucker           Walt Ekard                 Scott Huth
            810 Mission Ave          1600 Pacific Highway Ste   1050 Camino Del Mar
            Oceanside, CA 92054      209                        Del Mar, CA 92014
                                     San Diego, CA 92101
            City of Encinitas        City of San Diego          Rancho Santa Fe
            Gus Vina                 Jay Goldstone              Association
            505 S Vulcan Ave         202 C Street               Peter Smith
            Encinitas, CA 92024      San Diego, CA 92101        PO Box A
                                                                Rancho Santa Fe, CA
                                                                92067
            SDG&E - Public Affairs   City of Encinitas - Fire   San Diego Sheriff
            Manager                  Scott Henry                Sherri Sarro
            Amber Starbuck           505 S Vulcan Ave           175 N El Camino Real
            8330 Century Park Ct     Encinitas, CA 92024        Encinitas, CA 92024
            San Diego, CA 92123
            Affordable Housing       Assemblymember             Senator of California
            Advocates                Marty Block                Christine Kehoe
            Catherine Rodman         PO Box 942849              2445 Fifth Ave
            4305 University Ave Ste  Sacramento, CA 94249       San Diego, CA 92101
            110
            San Diego, CA 92105
            Assemblyman              Senator of California      Calbeach
            Martin Garrick           Mark Wyland                Jim Jaffee
            1910 Palomar Point Way   1910 Palomar Point Way     738 Seabright Ln
            #106                     #105                       Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Carlsbad, CA 92008       Carlsbad, CA 92008
            California Dept Fish and Solana Beach Civic and     San Dieguito Union High
            Game                     Historical Society         School District
            Bill Paznokas            Carol Childs               Ken Noah
            3883 Ruffin Rd           663 W Circle Dr            710 Encinitas Blvd
            San Diego, CA 92123      Solana Beach, CA 92075     Encinitas, CA 92024
            Solana Beach School      Santa Fe Christian Schools St. James Academy
            District                 Tom Bennett                Donna Kruszona
            Leslie Fausset           838 Academy Dr             623 S Nardo Ave
            309 N Rios               Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Santa Fe Montessori      Bridges Learning Center    Presbyterian Nursery Day
            Nancy Sager              Susan Scott                School
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 319 of 399
            PO Box 745               380 Stevens Ave Ste #215   Pam Dvorak
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     120 Stevens Ave
                                                                Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Waste Management         Budget and Finance         Budget and Finance
            Lori Somers              Commission                 Commission
            2141 Oceanside Blvd      Michael Whitton            Gordon Johns
            Oceanside, CA 92054      320 San Lucas Dr           621 N Granados Ave
                                     Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Budget and Finance       Budget and Finance         Budget and Finance
            Commission               Commission                 Commission
            Anthony Craig            Jeffrey Anderman           Craig Nelson
            256 Barbara Ave          637 Solana Glen Ct         15859 Highland Ct
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Parks and Rec            Parks and Rec              Parks and Rec
            Commission               Commission                 Commission
            Adam Paulsen             Lynn Salsberg              Joy Brinker
            235 Barbara Ave          264 La Barranca Dr         613 Camino Santa Barbara
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Parks and Rec            Parks and Rec              Parks and Rec
            Commission               Commission                 Commission
            Lynne Truong             Susan McEachern            Eliane Lawless
            1045 Santa Queta         1440 Highland Dr           624 E Solana Circle
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Parks and Rec            View Assessment            View Assessment
            Commission               Commission                 Commission
            Rick Fay                 Jack Hegenauer             Georgia Wood
            165 Del Mar Shores       431 Glenmont Dr            609 Sonrisa St
            Terrace                  Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Solana Beach, CA 92075
            View Assessment          View Assessment            View Assessment
            Commission               Commission                 Commission
            Pat Coad                 David Zito                 Paul Bishop
            550 Glenmont Dr          603 Seabright Ln           501 Marvista Dr
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            View Assessment          View Assessment            PAAC Member
            Commission               Commission                 Tara Gordon
            Jewel Edson              John Scales                833c Del Mar Downs Rd
            710 Marsolan Dr          506 N Granados             Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075
            PAAC Member              PAAC Member                PAAC Member
            Nicolle Selby-Thomas     Carol Beth Rodriguez       Sharon Klein
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 320 of 399
            440 Canyon Dr             619 N Rios Ave            172 Las Canas Ct
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            PAAC Member               PAAC Member               PAAC Member
            Michael Swanson           Alli Dixon                Allen Moffson
            1605 Highland Cove        701 Santa Florencia       655 W Circle Dr
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Public Safety Commission Public Safety Commission   Public Safety Commission
            Bernhard Geierstanger     David Bittar              David Ries
            482 Santa Cecelia         1440 Highland Dr          402 W Broadway
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    San Diego, CA 92101
            Public Safety Commission Public Safety Commission   Public Safety Commission
            George Manahan            Kristi Day                Thomas Alexander
            675 S Sierra #36          404 N Granados            691 Dell St
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Public Safety Commission Surfrider                  Solana Highlands
            Vickie Driver             Julia Chunn-Heer          Apartments
            1015 Santa Florencia      PO Box 1511               H.G. Fenton Company
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    7577 Mission Valley Rd
                                                                San Diego, CA 92108
            Las Casitas De Solana -   222 S Helix               Solana Park Apartments
            Vera St                   Solana Beach, CA 92075    679-691 Valley Ave
            San Diego County Housing                            Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Authority
            3989 Ruffin Rd
            San Diego, CA 92024
            Silverado Apartments      Cedros Seaside            Ronald & Brenda Baniaga
            San Diego County Housing Cedros Independent Living 346 S Rios Ave
            Authority                 LLC                       Solana Beach, CA 92075
            805 Valley Ave            403-407 N Cedros
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Berzak Family Trust       Oliver Family Trust       Thomas & Renee Serven
            725 Seabright Ln          701 Seabright Ln          PO Box 136
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Robert Thomas             Shannon Family Trust      Kwasny Trust
            930 Via Mil Cumbres #21   748 Fresca St             PO Box 2764
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Del Mar, CA 92014
            SB Liberty LLC            St. James Church          St. Leos
            313 San Lucas Dr          625 S Nardo               936 Genevieve St
            Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075    Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Solana Beach Presbyterian Calvary Lutheran Church   SHAG Officer
            120 Stevens Ave           424 Via De La Valle       Dick Brown
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 321 of 399
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     522 San Andres Dr
                                                                Solana Beach, CA 92075
            SHAG Officer             Lomas Santa Fe Villas      St. Francis Ct
            Rena Monge               Joe Boyle                  Ann Kraemer Campbell
            139 Iguala Ct            930 Via Mil Cumbres        709 Camino Santa Barbara
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Lomas Santa Fe Country   Allen Frisch               Lomas Del Mar
            Club                     319 Punta Baja Dr          Tom Peay
            Paul Devine              Solana Beach, CA 92075     15864 Caminito Cantaras
            1505 Lomas Santa Fe Dr                              Del Mar, CA 92014
            Solana Beach, CA 92075
            COOSSA                   Brisas Del Mar             Brisas Del Mar
            Mark Tiddens             Evan Lkleber               Richard Johnson
            PO BOX 231               3023 Caminito Sagunto      14736 Caminito Punta
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Del Mar, Ca 92014          Arenas
                                                                Del Mar, CA 92014
            Isla Verde               Isla Verde                 Isla Verde
            William Halsey           John Jump                  Al Haboush
            1434 San Ignacio         1451 San Benito Ct         568 San Lucas Dr
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Las Vistas               Loma Del Cielo W.          Loma Del Cielo W.
            Kenneth Yaros            Gene Ingargiola            Ivor MacFarlane
            14929 Caminito Ladera    1033 Via Mil Cumbres       1129 Cerro Largo Dr
            Del Mar, CA 92014        Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Loma Del Cielo W.        Lomas Santa Fe Estates     Lomas Santa Fe Estates
            Christine MacPhail       Sarah Sleeper              Mary Jane & Roger Boyd
            1045 Via Mil Cumbres     434 Loma Larga Dr          1304 Via Mil Cumbres
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            Lomas Santa Fe Estates   St. Francis Ct.            San Elijo Hills #1
            Septembre Flannery       Frank Warner               Margot Berg
            1137 Via Mil Cumbres     1339 Camino Teresa         748 San Mario Dr
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
            San Elijo Hills #1       San Elijo Hills #1         San Elijo Hills #2
            Bob Coale                Judi Gerber                Douglas Wright
            1161 Santa Luisa Dr      636 San Mario Dr           PO Box 244
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, Ca 92075
            Santa Fe Hills           Santa Fe Hills             Sixth Green
            Mark Bannach             Trudy Synodis              Douglas Hopton
            711 Santa Paula          908 Santa Queta            152 Las Banderas
            Solana Beach, CA 92075   Solana Beach, CA 92075     Solana Beach, CA 92075
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                           Page 322 of 399
              Spindrift Del Mar           Honorary Member             Isla Verde
              Peter Langlois              Marion Dodson               Stella Bolog
              918 Intrepid Ct             PO Box 1990                 1450 Highland Dr
              Del Mar, CA 92014           Rancho Santa Fe, CA         Solana Beach, CA 92075
                                          92067
              Advocacy Law for People     San Diego Housing           Project Turnaround
              with Disabilities           Federation                  Nydia Abney
              Wendy Dumlao                Sean Wherley                309 N Solana Hills #28
              1804 Garnet Ave Ste 213     110 West C Street Ste       Solana Beach, CA 92075
              San Diego, CA 92109         1811
                                          San Diego, CA 92101
              Barona Group of the         Ewiiaapaayp Tribal Office   San Pasqual Band of
              Capitan Grande              Robert Pinto Sr.            Mission Indians
              Edwin Romero                4054 Willows Road           Allen Lawson
              1095 Barona Road            Alpine, CA 91901            P.O. Box 365
              Lakeside, CA 92040                                      Valley Center, CA 92082
              Mesa Grande Band of         Sycuan Band of the          Kwaaymil Laguna Band of
              Mission Indians             Kumeyaay Nation             Mission Indians
              Mark Romero                 Danny Tucker                Carmen Lucas
              P.O. Box 270                5459 Sycuan Road            P.O. Box 775
              Santa Ysabel, CA 92070      El Cajon, CA 92019          Pine Valley, CA 91962
              Viejas Band of Kumeyaay     Inaja Band of Mission       Rincon Band of Mission
              Indians                     Indians                     Indians
              Anthony Pico                Rebecca Osuna               Bo Mazzetti
              P.O. Box 908                2005 S. Escondido Blvd.     P.O. Box 68
              Alpine, CA 91903            Escondido, CA 92025         Valley Center, CA 92082
              San Luis Rey Band of        Ipai Nation of Santa Ysabel
              Mission Indians             Clint Linton
              Tribal Council              P.O. Box 507
              1889 Sunset Drive           Santa Ysabel, CA 92070
              Vista, CA 92081
      1
       National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2012. Out of Reach.
      2
      Joint center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, 2011. America’s Rental Housing: Meeting
        Challenges, Building on Opportunities.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      Page 323 of 399
      3
      Government Code §
        65300.5.
      4
      2006-2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates S1702 Poverty Status in the Last 12
        Months of Families.
      5
      California Economic Development Dept., March 2010 Benchmark
      6
      HCD memo of 4/18/07 (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k7.pdf)
      7
      Affordable rent and purchase prices are based on county median income.
      8
      DataQuick Information Systems, San Diego Union Tribune Zip Code Chart, accessed March 21,
        2012 from http://www.dqnews.com/Charts/Annual-Charts/SDUT-Charts/ZIPSDUT11.aspx.
      9
      US Census Median Gross Rent from 2000 SF3 sample data and 2010 American Community
        Survey 5yr estimates.
      10
      Sales prices retrieved December 3, 2012 from http://www.realtor.com and
        www.luxurysocalrealty.com.
      11
      Median sales prices retrieved December 3, 2012 from
        http://www.dqnews.com/Charts/Monthly-Charts/SDUT-Charts/ZIPSDUT%20PPSQ.aspx.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 324 of 399
                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                         Adopted by Res. 2013-011, passed February 13, 2013.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                       Page 325 of 399
                                                       I. Introduction
      This Circulation Element describes existing circulation, infrastructure, and utility systems in Solana
      Beach and establishes a plan for increasing multi-modal transportation opportunities. Multi-modal
      transportation refers to the many different methods of travel including vehicular, pedestrian,
      bicycle, and transit. This Element is intended to provide for a balanced circulation system that will
      support travel demands associated with land uses in the Land Use Element while maintaining a high
      quality of life for the residents of Solana Beach and all roadway users.
      A.    Content
      The Circulation Element is required by state law. As specified in Government Code Section
      65302(b), the Circulation Element consists of the general location and extent of existing and
      proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, any military airports and ports, and
      other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the Land Use Element of the General
      Plan. In addition, pursuant to the Complete Streets Act (Assembly Bill 1358) that was passed in
      2008, the Circulation Element must also plan for a balanced, multimodal transportation network that
      meets the needs of all users of streets, roads, and highways for safe and convenient travel in a
      manner that is suitable to the local context of the community. “Users of streets, roads, and
      highways” means bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial
      goods, pedestrians, users of public transportation, and seniors. This Circulation Element provides
      new street typologies based on these complete street principles.
      B.    Purpose
      This Circulation Element is intended to better balance the needs of all roadway users by making
      enhancements to existing circulation facilities to establish a comprehensive multi-modal system
      that facilitates more walking, cycling, and transit use. Solana Beach is almost completely built-out,
      with a well-established roadway system that originally was designed primarily to serve vehicular
      traffic. Although there are existing facilities for bicycle, pedestrian, and transit travel, the purpose of
      this Element is to build upon the current roadway system and provide additional multi-modal
      connections without excluding the automobile. Other public infrastructure and utility systems, such
      as water, sewer, and drainage facilities, are located within or along Solana Beach roadways.
      Therefore, this Element also describes those systems and includes goals and policies aimed at
      maintaining adequate performance levels. In addition, this Element is intended to preserve the
      community’s character, enhance alternatives to automobile travel, and ensure an adequate supply
      of vehicular and bicycle parking to meet the needs of residents and visitors.
      C.    Key Issues
      Solana Beach is a charming coastal community that attracts many visitors and beachgoers.
      Because of its location along the Pacific Ocean, the Del Mar Fairgrounds, and Interstate 5 (I-5),
      several key issues impact circulation planning in the City.
      The Del Mar Fairgrounds and race track generate significant traffic and contribute to congestion on
      I-5, Highway 101, and the Lomas Santa Fe interchange. Traffic and parking needs within Solana
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 326 of 399
      Beach also increase during the tourist seasons, particularly around beach access areas. This
      results in undesirable cut-through traffic and parking problems in residential neighborhoods.
      Although visitor activities contribute to these adverse impacts on the community, they also bring
      valuable economic opportunities to Solana Beach. Efforts to maximize the benefits and reduce the
      negative effects are ongoing.
      Solana Beach residents also experience traffic congestion near schools during the morning drop off
      and afternoon pick up hours. Because the local school districts have discontinued busing services,
      more parents now drive their children to school. The City continues to look for and provide suitable
      alternative transportation options for students.
      There are east-west connectivity limitations in Solana Beach. I-5 bisects through the middle of the
      community and Lomas Santa Fe Drive is the only roadway within city limits that provides access
      across the freeway via an underpass. The railroad tracks located just east of Highway 101 also
      restrict east-west travel, as railroad crossing locations are limited. However, the City has taken
      steps to significantly minimize this barrier, such as through grade separation (the tracks were
      lowered in 1999) and the construction of pedestrian overpasses.
      Residents sometimes express concerns regarding the high speed of vehicular traffic throughout the
      city as well as cut-through traffic in residential neighborhoods. This signifies a need for additional
      traffic calming. Traffic calming refers to methods for slowing down vehicular traffic with measures
      such as raised medians, chicanes, bulb-outs, speed bumps, raised crosswalks, and traffic circles.
      Although Solana Beach has been and continues to upgrade transportation and other infrastructure
      facilities, the ability to make improvements is constrained by a number of factors, including: 1)
      financial limitations, 2) the fact that Solana Beach is nearly built-out and adequate right-of-way may
      not be available or attainable, and 3) residents have a desire to maintain the existing character of
      the community and may be resistant to change.
      Coupled with these local issues, several key State and regional planning efforts and legislative
      actions over the past decade have redefined the way community transportation planning is carried
      out. An important unifying theme is to achieve a more balanced, multi-modal transportation system
      that allows people with varying physical abilities and economic circumstances to accomplish daily
      activities via modes other than a single-occupant vehicle. Not everyone has an automobile or the
      desire or ability to drive. For example, children and youth, the elderly, persons with disabilities, and
      those who simply cannot afford a vehicle should be able to move about the city by way of
      alternative convenient, safe, and reliable transportation options that provide them with freedom and
      independence.
      Another part of the movement to reduce reliance on automobiles comes from an increasing
      awareness of global climate change and how human activity is contributing to the greenhouse
      effect. Accelerated fossil fuel combustion and deforestation since the start of the industrial
      revolution have exponentially increased concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
      Vehicle emissions are one of the largest contributors to greenhouse gases. Because of the strong
      link between land use decisions and vehicle miles traveled, local governments can play a leading
      role in reducing emissions by encouraging walkable, compact, and infill development and promoting
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 327 of 399
      alternative modes of transportation.
      One key piece of legislation passed was the Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32), which was
      signed by Governor Schwarzenegger in 2006. AB 32 requires the California Air Resources Board
      (CARB) to adopt rules and regulations that would reduce statewide greenhouse gas emissions to
      1990 levels by 2020.
      Another important legislative action was the adoption of the California Complete Streets Act (AB
      1358), in September of 2008. The goal of AB 1358 is to fulfill the commitment to reduce greenhouse
      gas emissions, make the most efficient use of urban land and transportation infrastructure, and
      improve public health by shifting from short trips in the automobile to biking, walking, and using
      public transit. This legislation amended Government Code Section 65302(b), requiring that any
      substantial revision to the Circulation Element plan for a balanced, multi-modal transportation
      network that meets the needs of all users of streets, roads, and highways.
      Also in September of 2008, Governor Schwarzenegger signed into law the Sustainable
      Communities and Climate Protection Act (SB 375). The purpose of SB 375 is to align regional
      transportation planning efforts, regional greenhouse gas reduction targets, and land use and
      housing plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by promoting higher density, mixed-use
      developments around mass transit hubs. The bill requires metropolitan planning organizations in the
      state to formulate a “sustainable communities strategy” as part of their regional transportation
      plans, specifically identifying how each region will achieve targeted reductions in greenhouse gas
      emissions from automobiles and light trucks.
      Although SB 375 went into effect fairly recently, the basic concepts of the sustainable communities
      strategy have been core components of transportation planning in the San Diego region for many
      years. For example, the San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) adopted a Regional
      Comprehensive Plan referred to as San Diego Forward - The Regional Plan in 2004, which
      integrates land use, transportation, and housing planning and directs new growth to already
      urbanized areas. SANDAG incentivizes projects located in mixed-used nodes served by public
      transit and high quality bicycle and pedestrian improvements through grant funding programs.
      In September 2013, the California state legislature adopted SB 743 which requires the development
      of a transportation metric other than Level of Service (LOS) which is typically based upon vehicle
      delays at intersections during peak travel periods. The State Office of Planning and Research will
      be required to amend the state’s CEQA Guidelines to provide an alternative to LOS for evaluating
      transportation impacts.
      In addition, SANDAG’s 2050 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), adopted October 28, 2011,
      serves as the regional transportation planning tool for the County. It is a long-range advisory vision
      plan for transit, rail, and bus services, express or managed lanes, highways, local streets,
      bicycling, and walking. The RTP seeks to guide the San Diego region toward a more sustainable
      future by integrating land use, housing, and transportation planning to create communities that are
      more sustainable, walkable, transit-oriented, and compact. The RTP also includes a Sustainable
      Communities Strategy (SCS) consistent with SB 375 that details how the region will reduce
      greenhouse gas emissions to state-mandated levels over time. The vision described in the RTP is
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 328 of 399
      intended to support a prosperous economy; promote a healthy and safe environment, including
      climate change protection; and provide a higher quality of life for all San Diego County residents by
      better linking jobs, homes, and major activity centers. This will enable more people to use transit,
      walk, and bike; efficiently transport goods; and provide fast, convenient, and effective
      transportation options for everyone.
      Locally, Solana Beach has also taken many steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
      become a more sustainable community. For example, the City Council adopted a resolution in 2007
      to sign the US Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Agreement. By signing this agreement, the
      Solana Beach City Council committed the City to take measures to reduce greenhouse gas
      emissions from municipal operations and the community at large, including establishing a Cool
      Cities campaign, engaging the community to participate, taking initial solution steps, and performing
      a greenhouse gas audit. Solana Beach also joined the International Council for Local Environmental
      Initiatives (ICLEI), now officially named ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability, which is an
      international membership association made up of local governments dedicated to climate protection
      and sustainable development.
      The growing concern for public health has also influenced efforts to improve opportunities for
      walking and cycling. Regular physical activity is critically important for the health and well-being of
      people of all ages. Millions of Americans suffer from health problems that can be prevented or
      improved through regular exercise, such as coronary heart disease, stroke, obesity, diabetes,
      cancer, stress, and depression. Making it easier, safer, and more attractive to walk or bike to work
      and other common destinations, or for recreational purposes, plays a key role in encouraging
      physical activity and healthy living.
      Such actions and initiatives reflect a growing recognition that we should be working to reduce
      reliance on automobile travel and increase the ease of walking, cycling, and using public transit to
      support daily life.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 329 of 399
                                           II. Existing Circulation System
      The City of Solana Beach, which is located along the central coast of San Diego County, is
      accessed via four primary corridors: Highway 101, the San Diego Freeway (Interstate 5 or I-5),
      Lomas Santa Fe Drive, and Via de la Valle. These four corridors create a grid network of roadways
      that provide inter-regional connections to southern San Diego County, Orange and Los Angeles
      counties, as well as access to surrounding communities along the coast and inland.
      As a mostly built-out community, Solana Beach’s circulation network is already in place. However,
      the City has long recognized that a multi-modal, well-connected, and aesthetically pleasing
      transportation network enhances the quality of life for those to live, work, and visit Solana Beach.
      Through ongoing implementation of the Circulation Element and the Highway 101 Corridor Specific
      Plan, the City has been making significant progress in enhancing both the pedestrian and bicycle
      facilities, supporting the use of transit, and improving connections for all modes of travel.
      The City’s existing circulation system is described in the following section.
      A.    Pedestrian Environment
      Walkability is an important factor in providing mobility and quality of life within a community. The
      degree to which people walk for transportation and recreation is influenced by the comfort, safety
      and convenience of their walking experience. Comfort is influenced by climate, separation from
      through traffic, topography, and the presence of sidewalks and improved paths. Safety is influenced
      by the speed and volume of conflicting vehicle traffic, street widths, traffic control, number of
      conflict points, and infrastructure design. Convenience is influenced by the distance and directness
      of travel. As connectivity increases, travel distances decrease and route options increase for the
      pedestrian.
      The City is bordered by the Pacific Ocean to the west. During low tides, people are able to walk on
      the beach along the full length of the City. During high tides, large portions of the entire beach are
      under water, so walking is not possible.
      Other water bodies nearby include the San Elijo Lagoon to the north and the San Dieguito River to
      the south. Both of these areas have pedestrian trails that are easily accessible by residents of
      Solana Beach, although they are not physically within the City limits.
      The Coastal Rail Trail (CRT) is a major north/south pedestrian and cycling corridor within the City
      of Solana Beach. It includes a Class I Multi-Use Path with a decomposed granite (DG) walking
      surface. The CRT runs the entire length of the City along Highway 101, providing access to
      businesses along Highway 101 and Cedros Avenue, the Solana Beach Transit Center, and the
      City’s four public beach access points (Del Mar Shores Beach, Seascape Beach, Fletcher Cove
      Beach and Tide Park Beach).
      Barriers to east-west pedestrian travel in Solana Beach include I-5 and the railroad corridor.
      Crossing areas are allowed only when pedestrian safety can be accommodated. The Lomas Santa
      Fe interchange with I-5 is the only protected place where pedestrians can cross I-5 in the City of
      Solana Beach. Although pedestrians are able to cross I-5 at Via de la Valle and within the San Elijo
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 330 of 399
      Lagoon, these crossings are located outside the City limits. Pedestrians can currently cross the
      railroad corridor safely at two roadway crossings (Via de la Valle and Lomas Santa Fe Drive) and
      three pedestrian bridge crossings (at Dahlia Street/Rosa Street, at the train station, and at Cliff
      Street). Refer to Figure C-1 for a map of some of the higher pedestrian activity areas in the city.
      B.    Cycling Environment
      Bicycle facilities are an integral component of the City’s transportation system. Adequate bicycle
      facilities encourage non-motorized transportation, enhance recreational opportunities, and help
      attract visitors. Bikeways not only provide local opportunities for cyclists, but also offer regional
      connections. The Highway 101 corridor is one of the most heavily used bicycle corridors in the
      county.
      Bicycle facilities are classified based on a standard typology as follows:
      •    Class I Bikeway (Bike Path) provides a completely separate right-of-way and is designated for
      the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians.
      •    Class II Bikeway (Bike Lane) provides a striped lane on a street or highway designated for
      bicycle use. Bicycle lanes are generally five feet wide.
      •    Class III Bikeway (Bike Route) provides for a right-of-way designated by signs or pavement
      markings for shared use with motor vehicles.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 331 of 399
      There are currently about 6.4 miles of bicycle facilities within the City, with over half being
      comprised of bikeways located along Lomas Santa Fe Drive and Highway 101 (refer to Figure C-2,
      Existing Bicycle Facilities). The Highway 101 corridor has very high levels of cycling activity due to
      its coastal location and the connection it provides to other destinations such as Torrey Pines State
      Park, beach access points, shops, and restaurants. Class III shared bicycle routes are located
      along portions of Highland Avenue and San Andres Drive.
      C.    Public Transit Services and Facilities
      Transit opportunities in Solana Beach are provided by the North County Transit District (NCTD)
      with both commuter train and bus services. Figure C-3 identifies the existing public transportation
      routes and stops within Solana Beach.
      1.   Passenger Rail
      A heavy rail commuter train service called the Coaster connects Oceanside to downtown San
      Diego, with a station at Lomas Santa Fe Drive (the Solana Beach Transit Station). The train station
      also provides a bus transit transfer center connecting the two bus routes in the city (Routes 101
      and 308). Amtrak also stops at the transit station and provides passenger train service throughout
      the United States.
      More than 20 Coaster trains run on weekdays. Trains run less often on the weekends. It takes
      about an hour to travel the entire Coaster route. The Coaster provides connections to numerous
      other transit routes, including bus routes, the Sprinter, the San Diego Trolley, Amtrak (at the Solana
      Beach Transit Center), and Metro Transit (to the Orange and Los Angeles Counties via the
      Oceanside transit center). Service frequency is limited because portions of the route have only a
      single track.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 332 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 333 of 399
      2.   Bus Service
      Bus service, known as the Breeze, is provided on two routes in Solana Beach by the NCTD: Route
      101 and Route 308. Route 101 connects from Oceanside to the University Town Center. It serves
      the northern coastal cities of Del Mar, Solana Beach, Encinitas, Carlsbad and Oceanside. Route
      101 also has a station at the Del Mar Fairgrounds and provides connections to the Coaster,
      Sprinter, Metro, Amtrak and other bus routes. The bus travels along Highway 101 at 30-minute
      headways during the daytime and at 60-minute headways during the evenings. Headway is defined
      as the approximate time between consecutive bus arrivals at a bus stop.
      Route 308 connects the Solana Beach Transit Center with the Escondido Transit Center via the
      unincorporated community of Rancho Santa Fe. Route 308 travels along Lomas Santa Fe Drive in
      the City and provides transit service throughout the day at 60-minute headways.
      The highest ridership levels occur at the Highway 101 and Plaza Street/Lomas Santa Fe Drive bus
      stops, where over 100 boardings and alightings occur at each of the three stops serving this
      intersection. The Route 101 bus stop located at the far side of this intersection in the northbound
      direction has the highest daily boardings and alighting of any stop within the City, with about 160
      average daily boardings and alightings reported for the year 2010.
      D.   Roadways and Freeways
      The roadway network is comprised of regional facilities such as I-5 and Highway 101, as well as
      numerous arterials and local streets. Figure C-4 displays the current geometry of the major
      roadways within the study area, which are also described below. Field verification of the existing
      roadway geometries as well as the collection of traffic count data was completed in May of 2012,
      unless otherwise noted below. Functional roadway classifications are based on County of San
      Diego Public Roadway Standards.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 334 of 399
      1.    Interstate 5
      I-5 is a major north-south regional facility that provides access between Solana Beach and other
      communities in San Diego County such as Del Mar, Encinitas, Carlsbad, Oceanside, and San
      Diego. It also provides a connection to Orange and Los Angeles counties to the north. I-5 has eight
      mixed flow/general purpose lanes (four in each direction), two auxiliary lanes (one in each direction)
      and two carpool lanes (one in each direction). Local access is provided via interchanges at Lomas
      Santa Fe Drive and Via De La Valle.
      The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) maintains and operates I-5. In 2009, I-5
      accommodated 195,000 to 208,000 average daily trips (ADT) through Solana Beach. Trucks
      comprise about five (5) percent of the total traffic on I-5. Caltrans recently extended the High
      Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes on I-5 from Via de la Valle to approximately Manchester Avenue.
      The HOV lane allows for carpool and vanpool vehicles travelling through the City to utilize the HOV
      lane as an alternative to Single Occupancy Vehicle (SOV) lanes. The next extension of the HOV
      lane is being designed and would run to La Costa Avenue. Caltrans and the San Diego Association
      of Governments (SANDAG) are currently designing major improvements to the I-5 corridor (as part
      of the I-5 North Coast Study) that would add highway lanes and operational improvements to a 27-
      mile stretch of the freeway from Oceanside to the Carmel Valley area of San Diego.
      2.    Highway 101
      Highway 101 is a four-lane major arterial. It provides the primary north-south access to numerous
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 335 of 399
      beaches and parks along the coast as well as connections to the communities of Encinitas,
      Carlsbad and Oceanside to the north and Del Mar and La Jolla to the south. Existing (2009) daily
      traffic volumes are approximately 19,500 vehicles per day north of Lomas Santa Fe Drive and
      approximately 16,000 vehicles per day south of Lomas Santa Fe Drive. Highway 101 is also a
      popular route for bicyclists.
      In 2013 a City revitalization project made significant improvements to Highway 101. The Highway
      101 West Side Improvement project includes an increase in the number of parking spaces, creation
      of a bicycle and pedestrian friendly corridor, improvements to the aesthetics of the surrounding
      area, traffic calming along Highway 101, installation of two new traffic signals and two new mid-
      block crosswalks, other hardscape and landscape improvements, and drainage improvements.
      Completion of this project brings a renewed vibrancy to the historic Highway 101 corridor. It also
      supports the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan by enhancing the links between the businesses on
      the west side of Highway 101 and the Coastal Rail Trail and the Cedros Design District. A key
      element of the project is traffic calming. Construction of the project began in 2012 and was
      completed in the summer of 2013.
      3.    Key Arterials and Local Streets
      North-South Roadways
      Sierra Avenue is parallel to and west of Highway 101. It is a two-lane roadway with a posted speed
      limit of 25 miles per hour (mph). It currently carries approximately 3,600 ADTs. Although there is no
      designated bicycle facility along this roadway, it is regularly traveled by cyclists as it provides a
      strong north-south connection parallel to Highway 101 with relatively low vehicular traffic volumes.
      Cedros Avenue is parallel to and east of Highway 101. It is a two-lane roadway with a posted speed
      limit of 25 mph. As such, its primary function is to provide local access to businesses and
      residences adjacent to the roadway. In 2009, Cedros Avenue carried approximately 4,500 ADT. It
      should be noted that South Cedros Avenue between Marsolan Avenue and Via de la Valle is fronted
      entirely by residential properties. There are bicycle sharrows along Cedros Avenue. The existing
      functional classification of Cedros Avenue is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Nardo Avenue is a two-lane roadway that provides north-south access to largely residential land
      uses. It has a posted speed limit of 25 mph and currently carries approximately 3,000 ADTs. There
      are currently no designated bicycle facilities along Nardo Avenue. The existing functional
      classification of Nardo Avenue is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Stevens Avenue is a north-south commercial roadway, extending from Lomas Santa Fe to Valley
      Avenue. It provides access to business and residential areas along both sides of the roadway, as
      well as a middle school, public library, and a private school. The posted speed ranges from 25 mph
      to 35 mph depending on the presence of school zones. Its existing cross-section varies from two
      lanes undivided to four lanes undivided. In 2009, ADT volumes along Stevens Avenue ranged from
      approximately 10,000 near Lomas Santa Fe Drive to approximately 13,000 near La Colonia Park.
      There are no designated bicycle facilities along Stevens Avenue except for a bike lane from
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 336 of 399
      Turfwood Lane south to Via de la Valle. The existing functional classification of Stevens Avenue is
      a four-lane commercial collector roadway.
      Valley Avenue is a north-south commercial collector and local roadway, extending from Genevieve
      Avenue to Via De La Valle. Between Genevieve Avenue and Stevens Avenue, Valley Avenue is
      classified as a residential street and provides access to some businesses, residential areas, and
      La Colonia Park. Posted speeds are 25 mph along this portion of Valley Avenue. South of Stevens
      Avenue, Valley Avenue is classified as a collector street. In this area, Valley Avenue is an
      extension of Stevens Avenue providing access to Via de la Valle and I-5. Its existing cross-section
      is two lanes undivided. Between Stevens Avenue and Via de la Valle, the 2009 ADT for Valley
      Avenue was approximately 13,000. Posted speeds are 40 mph along this portion of Valley Avenue.
      There is a designated bike lane along this portion of Valley Avenue.
      Santa Helena is a two-lane residential roadway with a posted speed limit of 25 mph. It currently
      carries a range of ADTs from 700 to 1,300. It provides a north-south connection between Lomas
      Santa Fe, east of I-5, north into residential neighborhoods in the northeast quadrant of Solana
      Beach. Santa Helena currently has Class II Bike Lanes from Lomas Santa Fe to Sun Valley Road.
      The existing functional classification of Santa Helena is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Las Banderas is a north-south two-lane roadway that intersects with Lomas Santa Fe, east of I-5.
      Its posted speed limit is 25 mph, and it currently carries about 3,700 ADTs. It provides a north-
      south connection between Lomas Santa Fe, east of I-5, north into residential neighborhoods in the
      northeast quadrant of Solana Beach. There are currently no designated bicycle facilities along Las
      Banderas. The existing functional classification of Las Banderas is a two-lane collector roadway.
      San Andres Drive is a two-lane curving collector. It provides secondary access to the southeastern
      quadrant of Solana Beach, which is primarily a residential area. The posted speed limit is 40 mph.
      In 2009, ADT along San Andres Drive ranged from approximately 6,500 ADT south of Highland
      Drive to approximately 3,300 ADT near Las Banderas Drive. There is a designated bike route along
      the southerly portions of San Andres Drive. The existing functional classification of San Andres
      Drive is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Highland Drive is a north-south oriented two-lane collector. It provides important neighborhood
      access in both the southeastern and northeastern portions of the City and connects to the San
      Dieguito County Park. Posted speed limits are 25 mph. There is a designated bike route running
      along Highland Avenue, east of San Andreas; and there is a designated bike lane along the portion
      of Highland Drive near Lomas Santa Fe. North of Lomas Santa Fe, there is a designated bike route
      along Highland Drive. At its northern terminus, Highland Drive intersects with El Camino Real, a
      major regional arterial providing access to a number of surrounding communities. In 2009, Highland
      Drive carried approximately 5,200 ADTs. The use of licensed golf carts on portions of Highland
      Drive between San Lucas Court and San Andres Drive was approved in 2010. In 2013 an
      improvement project was completed on Highland Drive, including construction of a sidewalk on the
      west side of Highland Drive from Lomas Santa Fe Drive to Sun Valley Drive, as well as other traffic
      calming features. The existing functional classification of Highland Drive is a two-lane collector
      roadway.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 337 of 399
      East-West Roadways
      Lomas Santa Fe Drive runs east-west and is a four-lane divided roadway with limited on-street
      parking. It provides coastal and inland access for Solana Beach and access to and from I-5. West
      of I-5, traffic volumes range from 18,000 ADTs near Highway 101 to approximately 26,000 ADTs
      near I-5. East of I-5, traffic volumes drop considerably to about 11,000 ADT near Highland Drive.
      Posted speeds are 35 mph. A bike lane is striped on both sides of the street. The existing functional
      classification of Lomas Santa Fe is a four-lane major roadway.
      Santa Victoria is a two-lane residential roadway with a posted speed limit of 25 mph. It currently
      carries less than 1,000 ADTs and primarily serves as access to residential uses in the northeast
      quadrant of the City. Traffic volumes may be higher during the school year. There are no
      designated bike facilities along Santa Victoria. The existing functional classification of Santa
      Victoria is a two-lane collector road.
      Santa Petra is a two-lane residential roadway that provides a connection between Santa Victoria
      and Highland Drive. It currently carries less than 500 ADTs and has a posted speed limit of 25 mph.
      There are no designated bike facilities along Santa Petra. The existing functional classification of
      Santa Petra is a two-lane collector roadway.
      San Mario is a two-lane residential roadway that provides a connection between Santa Petra and
      San Marino Drive. It currently carries less than 1,000 ADTs and has a posted speed limit of 25
      mph. There are no designated bike facilities along San Mario. The existing functional classification
      of San Mario is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Sun Valley Road is a two-lane residential roadway with a posted speed limit of 25 mph. It provides
      a connection between Santa Victoria and Highland Drive. It currently carries about 3,200 ADTs and
      has a posted speed limit of 25 mph. Sun Valley Road is designated as Class III Bike Boulevard
      which is designated with both signs and sharrows. The existing functional classification of Sun
      Valley Road is a two-lane collector roadway.
      Important Roadways Outside of City Limits
      The following roadways are located outside of City limits, but provide access to Solana Beach or
      serve as major north/south or east/west corridors. The City has no control over these roadways
      since they are located outside of its jurisdiction.
      Jimmy Durante Boulevard provides a north-south extension of Valley Avenue into the City of Del
      Mar at the intersection with Via De La Valle. It is a four-lane roadway with a center-left turn-lane.
      The posted speed limit is 45 mph and it currently carries about 9,100 ADTs. There is a designated
      bike lane along Jimmy Durante Boulevard, south of Via De La Valle. The existing functional
      classification of Valley Avenue is a two-lane collector roadway.
      El Camino Real, is a two-lane roadway with a posted speed limit of 25 mph. In the vicinity of Solana
      Beach, El Camino Real carries about 2,000 to 4,500 ADTs. There are no designated bike facilities
      along the segments of El Camino Real near the City of Solana Beach.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 338 of 399
      Border Avenue is a two-lane east-west roadway within the City of Del Mar. It connects Highway 101
      to the southern end of Sierra Avenue in Solana Beach, and has a posted speed limit of 25 mph.
      There is no designated bike facility along Border Avenue. It currently carries about 3,300 ADTs.
      Via De La Valle runs east-west and is a four-lane divided roadway with limited on-street parking and
      bike lanes. West of Jimmy Durante Boulevard, Via De La Valle is primarily located within the City of
      Del Mar. To the east of Jimmy Durante Boulevard, Via de la Valle is primarily located within the
      City of San Diego. It provides inland and beach access, as well as interregional access via an
      interchange with I-5. Via De La Valle also provides direct access to the Del Mar Fairgrounds, a
      major seasonal traffic generator. Between I-5 and Jimmy Durante Boulevard, traffic volumes
      average about 43,300 ADT. West of Jimmy Durante Boulevard, average daily traffic is 18,200. East
      of I-5, traffic volumes are about 20,000 ADT.
      E.    Airports and Goods Movement
      1.    Airports
      Solana Beach does not have an airport within its jurisdiction, but is serviced by two nearby airports:
      the McClellan-Palomar Airport located in the City of Carlsbad to the north and the San Diego
      International Airport at Lindbergh Field located in the City of San Diego to the south.
      2.    Goods Movement
      Goods movement in Solana Beach occurs both by rail and by truck. The passenger rail tracks
      described in Section C.1 are shared with freight trains that typically run during the late evening
      hours. The primary points of regional truck access are provided along Highway 101, Lomas Santa
      Fe, and I-5. Trucks traveling through the city most likely use these routes unless they have a local
      delivery, in which case they may utilize other local roadways to reach their destination.
      F.    Transportation Demand Management
      A common community concern about traffic conditions relates to speeding, cut-through traffic, and
      safety of local residential streets. The City has established a traffic calming program, which allows
      residents to interact with staff to study and identify potential solutions to neighborhood traffic
      issues. The City has historically provided funding to implement minor capital projects that result
      from the traffic calming program recommendations. The program identifies solutions that involve
      traffic control techniques, neighborhood/driver education, and/or increased law enforcement and
      physical controls. Physical controls include various horizontal and vertical measures such as
      medians, chicanes, bulb-outs, and traffic circles or roundabouts.
      Community members have also expressed concern with traffic congestion near schools. Over the
      past decades, many school districts have discontinued busing services, resulting in more parents
      driving their children to school. This causes short yet pronounced periods of congestion near
      schools during the morning drop-off and afternoon pick-up times. City staff have been working with
      schools and parents to identify operational improvements and educational programs, along with
      infrastructure improvements, in order to improve traffic flow and safety near schools. This includes
      identifying Safe Routes to School for walking and bicycling to cut down on vehicular traffic.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 339 of 399
      G.    Utility Infrastructure
      1.   Water
      Supply
      Solana Beach receives its water from the Santa Fe Irrigation District. The District service area
      contains approximately 10,200 acres, of which 2,850 acres are in Solana Beach, 6,490 acres are in
      Rancho Santa Fe, and 920 acres are in Fairbanks Ranch1. The present population of the District is
      approximately 19,386, of which two-thirds is in the Solana Beach area. The District provides
      potable water service for domestic, commercial, outdoor irrigation, and agricultural demands.
      The District maintains a diverse water supply portfolio. Local water supplies include surface water
      from Lake Hodges that is treated at the District’s Badger Plant, and recycled water purchased
      wholesale from the San Elijo Joint Powers Authority (SEJPA) for resale to District customers. As a
      member agency of the Water Authority, the District’s supplies also include raw imported water that
      the District treats at its Badger Plant, imported treated water, and other wholesale supplies
      available from the Water Authority’s diversified water supply portfolio.
      Demand
      In 2010, actual potable water deliveries totaled 11,208 acre feet2. Approximately 87 percent of the
      potable water use in the District’s service area was for single-family and multi-family residential
      purposes. Potable water consumption totaled four percent to commercial uses, six percent to
      landscape uses, and three percent to industrial, institutional, and agriculture uses. When non-
      potable recycled water is factored into the District’s portfolio, residential uses comprise 83 percent
      and all other uses remain the same. Recycled water used for landscape irrigation comprises four
      percent of total water use in the service area.
      The Santa Fe Irrigation District has based future demands on population projections prepared by
      the San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) utilizing a gallons-per-capita-per-day (gcpd)
      multiplier that relates to the District’s unique demand characteristics. The District assumes that
      projected potable water demands will reach 11,426 acre feet per year by 20353. Recycled water
      demand is anticipated to increase as additional recycled water supplies and transmission
      infrastructure are made available.
      Actual water demand in the District has decreased due to a comprehensive water conservation
      program. Potable water use in 2010 was 740 acre feet per year lower (6 percent) than 2005 potable
      water use3. Diversifying the Water Authority’s supply by reducing imported water and increasing
      new supply sources, such as seawater desalination, will serve to substantially increase the
      reliability of the Water Authority’s future supplies. The Water Authority is currently implementing the
      Emergency Shortage Project (ESP), which would protect the San Diego region from service
      interruptions during emergency situations and ensure reliability of supplies. The ESP is a system of
      reservoirs, interconnected pipelines, and pumping stations designed to make water available to all
      communities in the San Diego region in the event of a disaster that would interrupt imported water
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 340 of 399
      deliveries. In addition, the Water Authority is committed to supporting its member agencies in
      complying with requirements of the Water Conservation Bill of 2009 and therefore reducing urban
      water consumption by 20% by the year 2020. The Water Authority reports that if municipal water
      district, Water Authority, and member agency supplies are developed as planned, along with
      achievement of the retail conservation target, no shortages are anticipated within the Water
      Authority’s service area in a single-dry year through 2035. In average precipitation years, the
      District has sufficient water to meet its customers’ needs through 2035. This is based on continued
      commitment to conservation measures, availability of local supplies, and commitment by the Water
      Authority to meet member agency demands.
      Distribution
      The Santa Fe Irrigation District utilizes its Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to maintain and
      upgrade its distribution infrastructure. As of the writing of this plan, the District has been
      implementing several upgrades to the system including replacement of the Pressure Reducing
      Stations (PRS), replacement of aging pipeline segments, and extension of the existing recycled
      water distribution system4. Figure C-5 identifies the existing water lines in Solana Beach.
      2.   Sewer
      The City of Solana Beach owns and is responsible for approximately 283,000 linear feet of
      wastewater conveyance pipeline and four active pump stations 5. The City’s sewer system is
      comprised of three major individual drainage basins containing gravity pipelines ranging in size
      from four to 24 inches in diameter. The City’s four permanent wastewater pump stations are
      maintained by the San Elijo Joint Powers Authority.
      Average wastewater flow for the city is approximately 1.22 million gallons per day (gpd) resulting in
      a computed wastewater generation rate of approximately 175 gallons per equivalent dwelling unit
      (EDU) per day. For planning and facility sizing purposes, the City utilizes a conservative estimate
      of 200 gpd per EDU to account for increased summertime flows due to activities at the Del Mar
      fairgrounds/racetrack.
      The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) is utilized to maintain and upgrade the sewer
      system. It follows recommendations outlined in the Sanitary Sewer Master Plan, which estimated a
      future population of 15,620 people or a net gain of 688 EDUs at ultimate build-out. This estimate is
      consistent with the build-out projections outlined in this General Plan. Therefore, the City’s
      wastewater infrastructure is considered adequate to accommodate projected growth. Figure C-6
      identifies the existing sewer system.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 341 of 399
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 342 of 399
      3.   Hydrology/Drainage
      Portions of Solana Beach fall within two watersheds: the San Dieguito Watershed and the Carlsbad
      Watershed6. The San Dieguito River watershed is a drainage area of approximately 346 square
      miles in west-central San Diego County. The watershed includes portions of the cities of Del Mar,
      Escondido, Poway, San Diego, and Solana Beach, and unincorporated San Diego County. In terms
      of land area, the majority of the watershed (79.8%) is within the unincorporated jurisdiction. The
      major water bodies within the San Dieguito Watershed include the San Dieguito River, San Dieguito
      Lagoon, and Lake Hodges.
      The Carlsbad watershed is approximately 210 square miles in area extending from the headwaters
      above Lake Wolhford in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west, and from Vista and Oceanside in
      the north to Solana Beach, Escondido, and the community of Rancho Santa Fe to the south. There
      are numerous important surface hydrologic features within the Carlsbad watershed including four
      unique coastal lagoons, three major creeks, and two large water storage reservoirs. The major
      water bodies within the Carlsbad Watershed are Loma Alta Creek, Buena Vista Creek, Buena Vista
      Lagoon, Agua Hedionda Creek, Agua Hedionda Lagoon, San Marcos Creek, Batiquitos Lagoon,
      Escondido Creek, San Elijo Lagoon, and Lake Wolhford. Only a small portion of the San Elijo
      Lagoon falls within Solana Beach city limits. This area is protected with an open space designation.
      Solana Beach developed a Drainage Master Plan in 2004, which was subsequently updated in 2010.
      The plan provides an inventory of all existing public drainage facilities along with hydrologic and
      hydraulic analyses to determine existing system capacities. The City’s Capital Improvement
      Program (CIP) is utilized to maintain and upgrade the drainage system. It follows recommendations
      outlined in the Drainage Master Plan. Figure C-7 identifies the existing drainage facilities in Solana
      Beach.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 343 of 399
      Due to the built-out nature of the city, there are limited possibilities for additional land that can
      accommodate bio-filtration for storm flows. However, the City has a storm water management
      ordinance that establishes standards and minimum requirements for storm water management, site
      design, and best management practices to improve water quality and reduce the adverse effects of
      polluted runoff discharges.
      4.   Waste Disposal/Recycling Facilities
      The City of Solana Beach has agreements with EDCO Waste and Recycling Services for
      commercial trash and recycling collection services, and with Coast Waste Management, Inc., for
      residential trash and recycling collection. Solid waste collected in Solana Beach is transported to
      either the Otay Landfill or the Sycamore Canyon Landfill. Commercial recyclables are processed in
      EDCO’s Material Recovery Facility located in Lemon Grove. Residential recyclables are taken to
      the Waste Management Recycling Center located in Orange, California at 2050 Glassell Street.
      The Otay Landfill is located at 1700 Maxwell Road in Chula Vista and is operated by Allied Waste
      Industries. The landfill can accept a maximum of 5,830 tons per day. Operations are estimated to
      cease at this landfill in 20287. The Sycamore Canyon Landfill is located at 8514 Mast Boulevard at
      West Hills Pkwy in San Diego and is also operated by Allied Waste Industries. It can accept a
      maximum of 3,965 tons per day. Operations are estimated to cease at this landfill in 20311.
      Once the Otay Landfill in Chula Vista and the Sycamore Canyon Landfill in San Diego reach
      capacity, there are two sites that could become potential disposal sites for Solana Beach’s waste:
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 344 of 399
      Gregory Canyon Landfill and the East Otay Mesa Landfill. The construction permit process is
      underway for the Gregory Canyon Landfill, which is proposed on 308 acres south of Highway 76
      and about 3 1/2 miles east of Interstate 15 near Pala. The opening date is uncertain due to
      opposition to the facility. A countywide initiative (Proposition A) to provide for the siting of a new
      recycling center and solid waste landfill in the East Otay Mesa area of unincorporated San Diego
      County was approved by voters on June 8, 2010. The proposed recycling collection center and
      class III solid waste landfill would occupy approximately 340 acres. This project is currently in the
      permitting and environmental review process. There are no plans to provide future solid waste
      disposal facilities within Solana Beach.
      There are three permanent household hazardous waste facilities that accept common household
      hazardous waste products from Solana Beach residents. One facility is located in Vista at 1145
      East Taylor Street at Laguna Lane. Another facility is located in Poway in the South Poway
      Business Park at 12325 Crosthwaite Circle at Stowe Drive. The third facility is located in Escondido
      at 1044 west Washington Avenue. In addition, Solana Beach residents can make an appointment for
      door-to-door collection service for a small co-payment of $10 (the City subsidizes the disposal
      cost). Homebound and elderly residents (over the age of 65) may utilize the door-to-door pickup
      free of charge. E-Waste and SHARPs are free to dispose of either at the permanent facilities or
      through the door-to-door program for all residents.
      5.   Energy
      The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) has the sole authority to regulate privately-
      owned public utilities in California. Its power extends to all aspects of the location, design,
      construction, maintenance, and operation of public utility facilities. The CPUC has provisions for
      regulated utilities to work closely with local governments and consider their concerns.
      The state also regulates energy consumption under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
      Title 24 provides Building Energy Efficiency Standards for heating, cooling, ventilation, water
      heating, lighting, and cool (reflective) roofs in new residential and non-residential structures.
      The primary public utility in the region is San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). SDG&E, operated
      by Sempra Energy, is an investor-owner public utility, which provides energy service to more than
      three million consumers in San Diego and the southern portions of Orange County 8. SDG&E’s
      service area spans approximately 4,100 square miles. The utility delivers both natural gas and
      electricity throughout Solana Beach.
      Natural Gas
      Natural gas is delivered to customers in the city via a network of gas pipelines that runs throughout
      the county. Natural gas is considered a “cleaner” fuel. The burning of natural gas still produces
      nitrogen oxides and carbon dioxide, but in lower quantities than burning coal or oil.
      The number of gas meters in SDG&E’s service area is expected to increase an average of 1.2
      percent annually from 2011 to 20309. However, total load, including electric generation demand, is
      expected to decline from a total of 124 billion cubic feet (Bcf) in 2012 to 116 Bcf in 2030 due to
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 345 of 399
      increased conservation and energy efficiency measures.
      Electricity
      As of 2010, overall consumption in the SDG&E planning area totaled 20,300 gigawatt hours (GWh)
      and peak demand totaled 4,355 megawatts (MW)10. To estimate future electricity demand, SDG&E
      looks at three scenarios – high, mid, and low. The high case is characterized by low electricity
      rates, high population growth, high levels of efficiency, and low self-generation. Inversely, the low
      case is characterized by high electricity rates, low population, etc. Information from the mid
      scenario is presented in this General Plan. The mid demand scenario estimates 2.1 percent
      average annual growth in consumption and 2.0 percent annual growth in peak demand from 2011 to
      202211. This increase is mainly due to population growth. Electricity consumption and peak demand
      savings are estimated to increase due to the 2010 revision to Title 24 building standards as well as
      AB1109 lighting savings and television standard savings. Total consumption savings due to stricter
      building and appliance standards equaled 2,882 GWh in 2010 and are expected to reach 5,635 GWh
      in 2022. Peak demand savings equaled 643 MW in 2010 and are expected to reach 1,261 MW in
      20221.
      Renewable Energy
      In 2011, SDG&E provided 20.79% of their retail electricity sales from renewable power12. Solana
      Beach has limited control over natural gas or electricity delivery in the city. However, the City can
      attempt to reduce energy consumption through conservation education programs and promoting
      self-generation activities such as the installation of solar panels and other alternative energy
      systems.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 346 of 399
                                                III. Goals and Policies
      The following goals and policies are consistent with the requirements and purpose of this element
      and are responsive to the key issues affecting Solana Beach. They are intended to guide future
      circulation improvements within the city.
      Goal C-1.0: Correlated land use and circulation planning.
      Policy C-1.1 Allow, encourage, and facilitate transit-oriented development, mixed-use, and infill
      projects in appropriate locations, especially near the transit station and along key corridors such as
      Highway 101.
      Policy C-1.2 Require new development to provide and enhance connectivity to existing
      transportation facilities via the provision of key roadway connections, sidewalks (where appropriate
      or desired in residential neighborhoods), and bicycle facilities.
      Policy C-1.3 Require new development and redevelopment to provide good internal circulation
      facilities that meet the needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, children, seniors, and persons with
      disabilities.
      Policy C-1.4 Require new development and redevelopment to apply universal design standards to
      the extent feasible.
      Policy C-1.5 Work with state, regional and local transportation entities to improve and expand
      transportation facilities and services that link residents to important land use destinations such as
      workplaces, schools, community and recreation areas, and shopping opportunities.
      Goal C-2.0: A comprehensive circulation network to move people and goods safely and efficiently
      for all modes of travel.
      Policy C-2.1 Utilize multi-modal performance indicators to periodically evaluate the City’s
      transportation system, with attention to the following guiding framework:
      •   Balanced Facilities (Multi-Modal Boulevard and Community Connector) – Seek balanced
      performance of automobile, transit, bike and pedestrian circulation.
      •   Bicycle Prioritized (Bicycle Boulevards) – Prioritize bicycle travel through the provision of
      wayfinding signage, pavement markings every 250 to 500 feet, and traffic calming measures
      approximately every 1000 feet.
      •   Pedestrian Prioritized (Pedestrian Corridors and Multi-Use Path) – Prioritize pedestrian
      circulation through the provision of physically separated bicycle and/or pedestrian facilities.
      Policy C-2.2 Roadway facilities shall be constructed or upgraded, where feasible, to meet the
      design guidelines described in Table C-1. For streets that are not currently built to their ultimate
      design, the City may require the dedication of right-of-way or other improvements as a condition of
      land development consistent with Solana Beach Municipal Code (SBMC) regulations.
      Policy C-2.3 Require new developments to be served by roads of adequate capacity and design
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 347 of 399
      standards to provide reasonable access by cars, trucks, transit, pedestrians, and/or bicycles.
      Policy C-2.4 Provide a roadway system that complements urban development as established by the
      City’s adopted general plan. In implementing this policy, the City shall explore possible road
      extensions and additional roadway links, considering multi-modal forms of transportation.
      Policy C-2.5 Pursue measures to reduce congestion at intersections, while also balancing the
      needs of pedestrians, cyclists and transit riders.
      Policy C-2.6 Cooperate with Caltrans, SANDAG, NCTD, and other responsible agencies to identify,
      plan, and implement necessary transportation improvements.
      Policy C-2.7 Endorse and support I-5 interchange improvement projects with minimal environmental
      impact that provide improved regional access to the Del Mar Fairgrounds.
      Policy C-2.8 Reserve and protect adequate right-of-way to accommodate future multi-modal
      transportation improvement projects.
      Policy C-2.9 Support the preparation of travel demand management plans to reduce peak hour
      commuter traffic impacts.
      Policy C-2.10 Work to reduce vehicular travel demands along Lomas Santa Fe between the eastern
      boundary of the City and Highway 101.
      Policy C-2.11 Study and work with schools to implement methods to reduce automobile congestion
      caused by local school traffic.
      Policy C-2.12 Continue to identify areas allowing for licensed golf carts and other low speed
      vehicles on designated public streets to allow for safe and convenient access to the golf course and
      neighboring uses.
      Policy C-2.13 Develop a program to measure and monitor changes in active transportation/travel.
      Goal C-3.0: Adequate measures to ensure traffic safety.
      Policy C-3.1 Ensure that the development of new private driveways does not pose significant traffic
      hazards for major arterials and residential collector roads.
      Policy C-3.2 Continue to improve roadways and provide ongoing maintenance to ensure the safety
      of all users of the roadway system.
      Policy C-3.3 Enhance connectivity by eliminating gaps and barriers in roadway, bikeway, and
      pedestrian networks.
      Policy C-3.4 Implement traffic calming techniques, where appropriate, as a means to improve
      safety, increase efficiency of pick-up and drop-off operations at schools, and provide greater
      separation between pedestrians and vehicles.
      Policy C-3.6 Maintain a roadway circulation system with multiple alternative routes, to the extent
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 348 of 399
      feasible, to ensure mobility in the event of emergencies, and to minimize the need for capacity
      increases on particular streets. As needed, use signage to direct traffic to alternative routes during
      peak periods.
      Policy C-3.7 Consider traffic circles as an intersection traffic control option, where feasible and
      appropriate.
      Policy C-3.8 Maintain safety throughout the circulation system by taking opportunities to introduce
      a safe design speed to any new roadways or during improvements to existing roads or
      intersections.
      Policy C-3.9 Reduce accident risk on arterial streets by consolidating and minimizing driveways
      whenever possible.
      Goal 4.0: Adequate measures to enforce speed limits in residential neighborhoods and reduce cut-
      through truck and bus traffic.
      Policy C-4.1 Establish designated truck routes located away from residential areas and prohibit
      trucks from traversing through residential neighborhoods.
      Policy C-4.2 Work to discourage through traffic into residential neighborhoods by implementing
      traffic calming measures.
      Policy C-4.3 Enhance the quality of life in the City’s neighborhoods and minimize impacts on
      schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, and other sensitive facilities through the implementation of
      traffic calming measures in these areas to reduce vehicle speeds and discourage cut-through
      traffic.
      Policy C-4.4 Work with responsible and affected agencies to enhance infrastructure to facilitate
      timely movement of goods.
      Policy C-4.5 Enforce the use of designated truck routes for both local and regional goods transport.
      Goal 5.0: Adequate funding to support build-out of the City’s multi-modal transportation system,
      linked to the capital improvements program.
      Policy C-5.1 Develop and maintain a transportation impact fee (TIF) program that collects fees from
      development projects based on the number of additional trips (across all modes of transportation)
      the development is projected to generate. The fees collected from the TIF program will be used to
      fund the construction of CIP projects as well as to administer and maintain the TIF program. In
      support of the TIF program, a comprehensive nexus study will be required to determine the cost
      required to adequately build-out the City’s transportation system, develop a fee structure that fairly
      collects the funds required to build-out the City’s transportation system from development projects
      and demonstrate that participation in the TIF program will mitigate a development projects
      transportation related impacts.
      Policy C-5.2 Encourage improvements that minimize land acquisition and major construction, such
      as, but not limited to, lane restriping, enhanced road markings, synchronized traffic signals,
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 349 of 399
      Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) network management, and left turn lane restrictions.
      Goal C-6.0: Compatibility with the regional mobility system.
      Policy C-6.1 Consult with SANDAG regarding updates to and implementation of the Regional
      Transportation Plan (RTP).
      Policy C-6.2 Consult with SANDAG regarding Active Transportation programs and grant
      opportunities for capital and planning-related bicycle, pedestrian, and traffic calming efforts.
      Policy C-6.3 Work with Caltrans and adjacent jurisdictions to plan and implement future roadway
      connections and circulation improvements.
      Policy C-6.4 Consult with NCTD regarding local bus routes and related activities.
      Policy C-6.5 Support and encourage access to I-5 carpool lanes.
      Goal C-7.0: A public transportation system that is safe, convenient, efficient, and meets the
      identified needs of the Solana Beach community.
      Policy C-7.1 Support the establishment of local transit operations when demand levels are sufficient
      to warrant such service.
      Policy C-7.2 Provide multi-modal support facilities near and to/from transit stops for bicyclists and
      pedestrians, including children and youth, the elderly, and persons with disabilities.
      Policy C-7.3 Encourage responsible agencies to provide a well-designed transit system that meets
      the needs of the community, commerce, and visitors.
      Policy C-7.4 Improve bus stops and shelter facilities to increase the comfort of users.
      Policy C-7.5 Encourage transit providers to post route maps and pick-up/drop-off times at each
      stop.
      Policy C-7.6 Work with transit providers to maintain and enhance services within the City that are
      timely, cost-effective, and responsive to growth and redevelopment.
      Policy C-7.7 Encourage responsible agencies and affected businesses to provide shuttle service
      between transit stations to major activity centers, such as the Del Mar Fairgrounds.
      Policy C-7.8 Work with responsible agencies to provide convenient bus stop locations.
      GOAL 8.0: Safe alternatives to motorized transportation that meet the needs of all city residents,
      reduce vehicle trips, save energy, and improve air quality.
      Policy C-8.1 Encourage businesses to provide flexible work schedules for employees.
      Policy C-8.2 Encourage employers to offer shared commute programs and/or incentives for
      employees to use transit.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 350 of 399
      Policy C-8.3 Require new or expanded uses to provide adequate bicycle parking and support
      facilities.
      Policy C-8.4 Encourage carpooling and other shared commute programs.
      Policy C-8.5 Encourage the use of alternative transportation modes.
      Policy C-8.6 Prioritize attention to transportation issues along routes to schools to reduce school-
      related vehicle trips.
      Policy C-8.7 Seek opportunities to reduce vehicle trips before requiring physical roadway
      improvements.
      Goal C-9.0: A comprehensive and integrated bikeway system, which provides for the safe and
      efficient movement of cyclists.
      Policy C-9.1 Prioritize the development of bicycle facilities along Lomas Santa Fe, Stevens Avenue,
      Highway 101, and near schools.
      Policy C-9.2 Develop a citywide bicycle network consisting of Class I bike paths, Class II bike
      lanes, Class III bicycle routes, and other innovative facilities such as cycle tracks, sharrows,
      buffered bike lanes, and bicycle boulevards.
      Policy C-9.3 Maximize opportunities for citizen input to the process of planning a bikeway system.
      Policy C-9.4 Maximize the use of public property (e.g., utility and drainage easements, railroad
      right-of-way) and lightly traveled roadways for bikeways.
      Policy C-9.5 Expand and improve the bikeway system and facilities by establishing bike lanes,
      separated paths, and bicycle storage facilities at major destinations.
      Policy C-9.6 Require new development and redevelopment to provide safe, secure bicycle parking
      facilities.
      Policy C-9.7 Require new commercial development and redevelopment to provide connections to
      existing and proposed bicycle routes, where appropriate.
      Policy C-9.8 Encourage existing businesses and new development or redevelopment projects to
      promote bicycling and provide bike rack facilities, personal lockers, and shower rooms.
      Policy C-9.9 Encourage bicycling through education and promotional programs, in conjunction with
      the local school districts.
      Policy C-9.10 Keep abreast of bicycle facility innovations in other cities and regions, and seek to
      incorporate these into the bicycle network.
      GOAL 10.0: A universally accessible, safe, and convenient system of sidewalks or pathways
      throughout the city that encourages walking and is harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood.
      Policy C-10.1 Prioritize pedestrian circulation within the vicinity of the Cedros Design District, along
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 351 of 399
      Policy C-10.1 Prioritize pedestrian circulation within the vicinity of the Cedros Design District, along
      Highway 101, along Lomas Santa Fe, and near schools, the transit station, and bus stops.
      Policy C-10.2 Develop a citywide pedestrian network consisting of sidewalks along roadways,
      trails, Class I multi-use paths, and pedestrian bridges.
      Policy C-10.3 Provide connectivity of wide, well-lit walking environments with safety buffers
      between pedestrians and vehicular traffic, when feasible.
      Policy C-10.4 Require new development and redevelopment to provide adequate pedestrian access
      and, where appropriate, incorporate pedestrian-oriented street designs that provide a pleasant
      environment for walking.
      Policy C-10.5 Identify and implement necessary pedestrian improvements with special emphasis on
      providing safe access to schools, parks, community and recreation centers, shopping districts, and
      other appropriate facilities.
      Policy C-10.6 Promote walking and biking as the primary modes of travel to schools.
      Policy C-10.7 Improve pedestrian safety at intersections and mid-block crossings.
      Policy C-10.8 Reduce architectural barriers that restrict full movement and access by less mobile
      segments of the population consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
      Policy C-10.9 Apply universal design standards to the pedestrian system.
      Policy C-10.10 Provide a continuous pedestrian network (which may or may not include sidewalks)
      within and between neighborhoods to facilitate pedestrian travel free from major impediments and
      obstacles.
      Policy C-10.11 Support the development of pedestrian corridors in key activity centers.
      GOAL C-11.0: An adequate supply of private off-street and public parking to meet the needs of
      residents and visitors to the city in a way that balances economic development, livable
      neighborhoods, environmental health, and public safety.
      Policy C-11.1 In general, maintain parking requirements for specified land uses, but allow for a
      reduction in parking requirements for existing buildings that change uses and cannot accommodate
      current parking standards without significantly altering the site. In determining what constitutes
      sufficient parking under these circumstances, the City may take into consideration: 1) the overall
      effectiveness of the circulation system as a whole (i.e., pedestrians, bicyclists, motorized vehicles,
      etc.); 2) the particular needs of a specific location and/or project; 3) the parking generation demand
      of the proposed use; 4) the availability of public parking spaces; and 5) the ability of the project to
      aid in the reduction of personal vehicle use and the corresponding reduction in air pollution, energy
      consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and other environmental effects.
      Policy C-11.2 Ensure balance among visitor, business, and residential parking needs.
      Policy C-11.3 Encourage new development and redevelopment to locate off-street parking facilities
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 352 of 399
      behind storefronts to create a more inviting environment adjacent to the street, where feasible.
      Policy C-11.4 Require parking lots to provide shade through the use of landscaping (i.e., a tree
      canopy) and encourage the use of solar photovoltaic shading to reduce the heat island effect, where
      feasible.
      Policy C-11.5 Where appropriate and feasible, provide on-street diagonal or parallel parking to
      increase the number of spaces and calm traffic to create more pedestrian-friendly streets.
      Policy C-11.6 Require the use of universal design standards in parking design and compliance with
      the Americans with Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines.
      Policy C-11.7 Provide clearly marked pedestrian paths between on-street parking, off-street parking
      facilities, and the buildings they serve, where feasible.
      Policy C-11.8 Maintain parking time limitations, where appropriate.
      Policy C-11.9 Work cooperatively with developers and the business community to develop funding
      mechanisms for the construction of future parking facilities.
      Policy C-11.10 Encourage shared parking, valet parking, special district parking, and joint
      development of parking facilities to the maximum extent feasible.
      Goal C-12.0: Efficient, high quality public infrastructure, facilities, and services and assurance that
      new, upgraded, or expanded facilities and services are phased in conjunction with the development
      they are intended to service.
      Policy C-12.1 Establish and maintain a development strategy relating economic growth and logical
      land use and circulation patterns with the provision of public services and utilities.
      Policy C-12.2 Periodically review and update land use and circulation plans to ensure that a
      balance is maintained between employment and housing opportunities, and to ensure the availability
      of sufficient municipal revenues to maintain adequate levels of public services.
      Policy C-12.3 Develop and implement methods for ensuring that new development does not create
      an adverse economic impact on the City, or a need for new additional or different public facilities
      which have not been provided by the City.
      Policy C-12.4 Require new development and redevelopment to provide fair share contributions
      toward the costs of the public facilities, services, and infrastructure necessary to serve the
      development, including, but not limited to, transportation, water, sewer and wastewater treatment,
      solid waste, flood control and drainage, schools, fire and law enforcement protection, and parks and
      recreation.
      Policy C-12.5 Ensure that development impact fees reflect the costs of improvements.
      Policy C-12.6 Update the capital improvement program for the improvement of existing public
      facilities and the development of new facilities, as needed, and plan for the equitable distribution of
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Page 353 of 399
      infrastructure improvements and public facilities.
      Policy C-12.7 Leverage federal and state funds to support public works projects, as appropriate.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 354 of 399
                                                  IV. Constraints
      In planning for the provision of housing, potential constraints to the development, maintenance, and
      improvement of housing must be analyzed, and jurisdictions must take appropriate steps to relieve
      them, where feasible. Local government cannot control many of these constraints, such as those
      related to general economic and market conditions, but others can be addressed. Actual or potential
      constraints to the provision and cost of housing affect the development of new housing and the
      maintenance of existing units for all income levels. Governmental and non-governmental
      constraints are discussed below.
      A.    Governmental Constraints
      Governmental constraints can limit the operations of the public, private, and non-profit sectors,
      making it difficult to meet the demand for affordable housing and limiting supply in a region.
      Governmental constraints include land use controls, building codes, on- and off-site improvements,
      processing and permit fees, site improvement costs, growth management measures, and
      inclusionary housing requirements.
      1.    Land Use Plans and Regulations
      General Plan
      Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide
      its future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
      development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, General Plan elements must be
      internally consistent and the City’s zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land
      use plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing
      Element.
      The Solana Beach General Plan Land Use Element provides for six residential land use
      designations. Residential uses are also permitted within the commercial zones when integrated into
      a mixed-use development (Refer to Table IV-1.)
                                                     Table IV-1
                         General Plan Residential and Mixed-Use Land Use Categories
                    Residential Land Use          Density                 % of Total City
                          Categories             (DUs/ac)      Acres         Acreage      Max. Units
               Estate                               0-2        288.8           13.1           577
               Low Density                           3         234.6           10.7           796
               Low-Medium Density                    4         327.8           14.9         1,311
               Medium Density                       5-7        164.3            7.5         1,150
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 355 of 399
               Medium-High Density                  8-12        84.3          3.8          1011
               High Density                        13-20       130.3          5.9          2,606
               General Commercial                    20        108.2          4.9          2,164
               Light Commercial                      12         2.2           0.1            26
               Special Commercial                    20         34.2          1.6           684
               Total                                 n/a      1,374.7        62.5%        10,325
      Source: City of Solana Beach General Plan
      The City of Solana Beach General Plan allows more than enough units to accommodate the 6,540
      existing units and the 340 needed to accommodate the City’s fair share. Adequate sites with
      appropriate densities have been identified to permit the construction of the 340 housing units
      adopted by SANDAG for the 2010-2020 RHNA, as shown in Appendix B.
      Densities range from about 1 unit per acre in the Estate category to a maximum of 20 units per acre
      in the High Density and Commercial categories. These densities are typical for many communities
      in San Diego County.
      Specific Plans
      North Rios and Tangaroa Estates Specific Plans
      In 1997, the North Rios Specific Plan was adopted to rezone agricultural land to low-density
      residential. The intent of the Specific Plan was to create a compatible and complimentary land use
      adjacent to the existing residential neighborhood and to produce aesthetically pleasing design
      elements for sustainable neighborhood planning. The Specific Plan allowed for the development of
      approximately 10 acres owned by Isao and Midori Nakatani and Rios Drive Associates, located at
      the northeast corner of Rios Avenue and Patty Hill Drive in the City of Solana Beach. The subject
      land is located approximately 300 feet south of the San Elijo Lagoon.
      The Tangaroa Estates Specific Plan allowed for the residential development of nine lots located
      east of Rios Avenue on the northern edge of the San Elijo Lagoon. The Specific Plan satisfied the
      terms of Resolution No. 96-94, dated September 3, 1996, which amended the City’s General Plan
      Land Use and approved rezoning of the subject property from a combination of Agricultural (A) and
      Open Space/Recreational (OS/R) to a combination of Low Residential (LR/SP) and Open
      Space/Recreational (OSR/SP).
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 356 of 399
      Together, these specific plans apply to only 33 units and are completely built out.
      Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
      The Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan is a plan for the physical development and redevelopment
      of the Highway 101 roadway area that significantly defines Solana Beach. Highway 101 has grown
      over the decades to serve as a vital commercial corridor for the region. With extensive community
      participation, the adopted plan envisions revitalization of the Plaza, Beach Park, and the Highway
      101 corridor as the heart or downtown of Solana Beach.
      The Specific Plan identifies the types, intensity, location, standards, criteria and implementation
      measures for future development and conservation of the 163-acre project area. It was originally
      adopted by Ordinance No. 303, effective June 19, 2003 and later amended by Ordinance No. 346,
      effective July 28, 2006.
      With most of the land area built out, the future development and redevelopment of this vital
      commercial corridor is essential to the long term economic stability of the community. The urban
      design concepts for the area are intended to focus on pedestrian access, create a distinctive but
      rustic and natural setting, encourage a variety of architectural styles to enhance the eclectic
      character of the community, frame and preserve views, minimize the dominance of traffic and
      asphalt parking areas, and establish distinct business districts.
      The provision of residential development with commercial development is encouraged in integrated
      mixed-use developments. Residential dwellings are permitted on the upper floors, in basements,
      and on the rear 50 percent of the ground floor. Alternatively, residential dwellings may be permitted
      in any portion of the building (or buildings) pursuant to a development review permit, provided that
      the total residential development does not exceed 40 percent of gross allowable floor area.
      The development standards provide incentives to incorporate residential uses into commercial
      developments by providing for a higher floor area ratio (FAR) for mixed-use developments as well
      as reduced parking. The standard FAR is 1.0 while the FAR for mixed-use is 1.2. Within the Plaza
      District, retail and office uses that are integrated into a mixed-use development are required to
      provide 3.2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet while retail and office uses that are not
      incorporated into a mixed-use development are required to provide 3.35 parking spaces per 1,000
      square feet. Similarly, restaurants that are integrated into a mixed-use development are required to
      provide seven parking spaces per 1,000 square feet while stand-alone restaurants are required to
      provide 7.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet. In addition, the City is currently in the process of making
      streetscape improvements to the Highway 101 Corridor. These improvements, which include such
      features as decorative lighting and street furniture, additional pedestrian crosswalks, public art, and
      enhanced landscaping, are anticipated to attract residential uses to the area by contributing to a
      more pedestrian and bicycle friendly environment.
      The following tables generally summarize the development standards outlined in the Specific Plan.
      Refer to the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan for full content.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 357 of 399
                                                 Table IV-2
                                   Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                   Residential Development Standards
                      Development                Residential Low          Residential
                      Standard                Medium and Medium Medium High
                       Minimum Lot Area               10,000SF              6,000SF
                       Setbacks
                         Front                           25’                   20’
                         Side                            10’                    5’
                         Rear                            25’                   25’
                       Height                            25’                   30’
                                                 Table IV-3
                                   Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                  Commercial Development Standards
                    Development                 Light         Special           General
                    Standard                Commercial Commercial Commercial
                    Minimum Lot Area          6,000SF         6,000SF           6,000SF
                    Setbacks
                      Front                       15’             10’               0’
                      Side (Interior)             10’              0’               0’
                      Side (Street)               10’             10’               0’
                      Rear                        15’              0’               0’
                    FAR                           1.0             1.0              1.2
                    Height                                    35’ / 2-3         35’ / 2-3
                                           25’ / 2 stories      stories          stories
                                                 Table IV-4
                                    Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                   Mixed-Use Development Standards
                           Development                  Special         General
                           Standard                  Commercial Commercial
                            Minimum Lot Area           10,000SF         6,000SF
                            Setbacks
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      Page 358 of 399
                               Front                        10’               0’
                               Side (Interior)               0’               0’
                               Side (Street)                10’               0’
                               Rear                          0’               0’
                             FAR                            1.2              1.2
                             Height                      35’ / 2-3        35’ / 2-3
                                                          stories          stories
                                                    Table IV-5
                                     Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                            Office/Professional, Public/Institutional, and Open
                                Space/Recreation Development Standards
                 Development                                                          Open
                   Standard     Office/Professional Public/Institutional Space/Recreation
                 Minimum Lot
                 Area                  6,000SF                   n/a                   n/a
                 Setbacks
                   Front                  25’                    25’                   25’
                   Side
                   (Interior)             10’                     5’                    5’
                   Side
                   (Street)                5’                     5’                    5’
                   Rear                   15’                    25’                    5’
                 FAR                      1.0                    2.0                   0.7
                 Height             35’ / 2 stories       30’ / 2 stories        15’ / 1 stories
                                                    Table IV-6
                                     Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan
                                    Plaza District Parking Requirements
                                                              Plaza District
                                                                Non-Mixed- Plaza District
                                                                     Use         Mixed-Use
                           Land Use              City-wide    Development Development
                    Retail/                        5/KSF
                                                                 3.35/KSF         3.2/KSF
                    Office                         4/KSF
                    Restaurant                    10/KSF          7.5/KSF           7/KSF
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 359 of 399
                       Hotel                      1/Room         0.75/Room      0.75/Room
                       Multi-Family
                       Residential                1.7/Unit        1.25/Unit      1.25/Unit
      Note: KSF = 1,000 Square Feet
      Zoning
      The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the
      Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are
      designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Zoning
      Ordinance also helps to preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Zoning
      Ordinance and Zoning Map set forth residential development standards for each zoning district.
      The seven zoning districts that allow residential units as a permitted use are as follows:
                                   ER1           Estate (1 du/ac)
                                   ER2           Estate (2 du/ac)
                                   LR            Low Residential (3 du/ac)
                                                 Low Medium Residential (4
                                   LMR           du/ac)
                                                 Medium Residential (5-7
                                   MR            du/ac)
                                                 Medium High Residential (8-
                                   MHR           12 du/ac)
                                                 High Density Residential (13-
                                   HR            20 du/ac)
      A summary of the development standards for the seven major zoning districts permitting residential
      development is provided in Table IV-8. Refer to the Section 17.20.030 of the City’s zoning
      ordinance for full content. These development standards are reasonable to protect the public health,
      safety and welfare and maintain the quality of life, and are not considered to be constraints to the
      development of housing. Based on the City’s experience, these standards do not prohibit projects
      from achieving the allowable residential densities. Current pending applications for residential and
      mixed-use projects are proposing maximum unit yields. See Appendix B for further information.
                                                    Table IV-7
                                    Generalized Development Standards for
                                               Residential Zones
                                                             Setbacks2
                                                                                              Bldg.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 360 of 399
                                                                                               Bldg.
                   Zone          FAR1                                    Street
                                              Front5,8       Side                   Rear7     Height
                                                                         Side8
              ERI            0.6 for first       35’          15’         10’        50’        25’
              ER2            5,000SF;
                                                 25’          10’         10’        40’        25’
                             plus 0.3 for
              LR                                 25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
                             5,000-
              LMR            20,000SF;
                                                 25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
                             plus 0.15 for
              MR             >20,000SF          25’6        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’
              MHR                 0.75           25’        10’/5’3       10’        25’        25’4
              HR                  0.75          25’           5’          10’        25’        25’4
        1.   Each primary dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 650SF in size.
        2.   Additional setback standards for coastal and inland bluffs, as well as the canyon rim in the
        Canyon Drive vicinity apply.
        3.   See Zoning Map for specific setback.
        4.   May be increased to 30’ by City Council review.
        5.   Lots less than 100 feet in depth or fronting on public rights of way greater than 55 feet in
        width have 20 foot front yard setbacks.
        6.   Staggered/incremental setbacks for lots on west side of Pacific Avenue exist.
        7.   Where any lot has a depth of less than 90 feet, the minimum required rear yard shall be 15
        feet.
        8.   All required front and street side yards shall be measured from the edge of the ultimate
        right-of-way.
      A summary of the residential development permitted by Section 17.12.020 of the City’s zoning
      ordinance is provided in Table IV-8, below.
                                                      Table IV-8
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 361 of 399
                           Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District
                                                           Zone
              Residential Use
                                ER1ER2 LR LMR MR MHR HR C SC LC OP PI LI           A OS
            Single-Family         P   P   P   P    P   P  P    E   E  E   E    E E P PL
            Dwellings
            Two-Family            E   E   E   E    P   P  P   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Dwellings (Duplex)
            Multiple-Family       E   E   E   E    P   P  P   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Dwellings
            Residential/Mixed-    E   E   E   E    E   E  E   PL PL PL E       E E E  E
            Use Buildings
            Residential Care      P   P   P   P    P   P  P    P   P  E   E    E E E  E
            Facilities (6 or
            fewer persons)
            Residential Care      C   C   C   C    C   C  C    C   C  E   E    C E E  E
            Facilities (7-12
            persons)
            Residential Care     CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC E             E CC E   E  E
            Facilities (13 or
            more persons)
            Family Day Care       P   P   P   P    P   P  P    P   P  E   E    E E E  E
            Homes (6 or fewer
            persons)
            Group Residential     E   E   E   E    E   C  C CC E      E   E    E E E  E
            Facilities
            Senior                E   E   E   E   CC CC CC E       E  E   E    E E E  E
            Citizen/Congregate
            Care Housing
            Mobile Home and      PL PL PL PL PL PL PL E            E  E   E    E E PL E
            Manufactured
            Housing (individual
            lots)
            Mobile Home          CC CC CC CC CC CC CC E            E  E   E    E E E  E
            Parks
            Guest Houses         PL PL PL     E    E   E  E    E   E  E   E    E E PL E
            Accessory Living     PL PL PL PL PL        C  C    E   E  E   E    E E PL E
            Units
            Caretaker Units       E   E   E   E    E   E  E   PL PL PL PL C PL E CC
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 362 of 399
               Home Occupations PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL PL E                        E   E PL PL
               Live/Work Uses         E  E    E    E    E     E     E C   C     E  E   E   E   E    E
      P= Permitted; PL= Permitted subject to limitations; C= Subject to a conditional use permit issued
        by Community Development Director; CC= Subject to a conditional use permit issued by the
        City Council; E= Not permitted
      Table IV-8 abbreviates the zoning districts as presented below:
                                    ER1        Estate (1 du/ac)
                                    ER2        Estate (2 du/ac)
                                    LR         Low Residential (3 du/ac)
                                    LMR        Low Medium Residential (4 du/ac)
                                    MR         Medium Residential (5-7 du/ac)
                                               Medium High Residential (8-12
                                    MHR        du/ac)
                                               High Density Residential (13-20
                                    HR         du/ac)
                                    C          General Commercial
                                    SC         Special Commercial
                                    LC         Limited Commercial
                                    OP         Office Professional
                                    PI         Public/Institutional
                                    LI         Light Industrial
                                    A          Agricultural
                                    OS         Open Space/Recreation
      The zoning ordinance provides for a variety of housing types including single-family homes (both
      attached and detached), multi-family (both rental and condominiums), mixed-use, manufactured
      housing, accessory dwelling units, and live/work units. Low-income housing can be accommodated
      in all residential districts.
      As identified in Table IV-8, residential uses are permitted in the City’s General, Special, and Light
      Commercial zones. The provision of residential development with commercial development is
      encouraged in a mixed use integrated development. Residential dwellings are permitted on the
      upper floors, in basements, and on the rear 50 percent of the ground floor. Alternatively, residential
      dwellings may be permitted in any portion of the building (or buildings) pursuant to a development
      review permit, provided that the total residential development does not exceed 40 percent of gross
      allowable floor area. Residential dwellings approved pursuant to a development review permit shall
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 363 of 399
      be compatible with the intent of the commercial zones to preserve and enhance street level
      pedestrian oriented commercial frontages.
      The maximum residential density allowed within the General Commercial and Special Commercial
      zones is 20 dwelling units per acre. The maximum residential density within the Light Commercial
      zone is 12 dwelling units per acre.
      A summary of the commercial development standards is provided in Table IV-9, below. Refer to
      Chapter 17.28 of the City’s Municipal Code for full content.
                                                     Table IV-9
                                     Generalized Development Standards for
                                                Commercial Zones1
                                                           Setbacks2
                                                                                               Bldg.
                   Zone          FAR                                 Street
                                           Front        Side                        Rear      Height3
                                                                      Side
               C              1.2             0’          0’4           0’           0’4         35’
               SC             1.0/1.25                                                        35’/25’6
                 North and                    0’          0’            5’           0’
                 South
                 Cedros
                 All Other                   10’          0’            5’           0’
                 Streets
               LC             1.0            10’          0’4          10’           0’4         25’
        1The  Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan has established superseding standards.
        2In the South Cedros Avenue district, a minimum 15-foot rear or side yard shall be required
        where any portion of the rear or side yard abuts a residentially zoned property. If permitted,
        each story above two (one in the Stevens Avenue district) shall be set back an additional five
        feet from the required setback of the story below it. In the North Cedros Avenue district and the
        Stevens Avenue district, a minimum 10-foot rear or side yard shall be required where any
        portion of the rear or side yard abuts a residentially zoned property. Architectural features, such
        as eaves, steps, balconies, and stairways, may not project more than five feet into any required
        setback area. In the South Cedros Avenue district, upper level architectural relief, such as
        raised elements, slightly offset upper levels, and/or artificial or real windows, etc., is required;
        and front setback of 10 feet from face of curb to building, with a three-foot wide parkway and a
        seven-foot-wide sidewalk.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                        Page 364 of 399
        3Up   to 15 percent of the roof plane may exceed a height of 35 feet to allow for architectural
        projections of exceptional quality and merit.
        4A  minimum 10 foot rear or side yard shall be required where any portion of the rear or side yard
        abuts a residentially zoned property. Each story above two shall be setback an additional five
        feet from the required setback of the story below it.
        5FAR    is increased to 1.2 for mixed-use projects in the Highway 101 Corridor Specific Plan area.
        6Height   limit is 35’ within the Steven’s Avenue district and north of Lomas Santa Fe and 25’
        south of Lomas Santa Fe.
      These development standards are not considered to be a constraint to the establishment of
      residential uses in commercial zones. The City is currently in the process of reviewing two
      applications for mixed-use developments within the General Commercial zone. In addition, the City
      is working with the North County Transit District on a mixed-use development proposal adjacent to
      the transit station.
      Special Needs Housing
      Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, emergency shelters,
      transitional and supportive housing, housing for persons with disabilities, elderly housing,
      farmworker housing, and single room occupancy units. The City’s provisions for these housing
      types are discussed below.
      Residential Care Facilities
      Residential care facilities are defined as any family home, group care facility, or similar facility, with
      or without food services(s) and kitchen facilities, for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of
      personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or
      for the protection of the individual including, but not limited to, alcoholism or drug abuse recovery
      facilities, congregate living facilities, community care facilities, or intermediate care facilities for the
      disabled, which are licensed by the State of California, excluding housing for the elderly, nursing
      and convalescent homes. Consistent with state law, small residential care facilities that serve six
      or fewer persons are permitted by right in all residential zones. Residential care facilities that serve
      seven to twelve persons are allowed with the Community Development Director’s approval of a
      conditional use permit in all residential zones; residential care facilities with thirteen or more
      persons require approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council. The City has no
      concentration requirements for residential care facilities and imposes the same parking
      requirements as required for similar uses in the zone. The City will be amending its zoning
      ordinance to ensure that the definition of a residential care facility is distinct from that of transitional
      or supportive housing.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 365 of 399
      Emergency Shelters
      Senate Bill 2 requires local governments to identify one or more zones that will allow for emergency
      shelters (year round shelters for the homeless) without a conditional use permit or other
      discretionary action. The identified zone(s) must have sufficient capacity to accommodate at least
      one year-round emergency shelter and accommodate the city’s unsheltered homeless population.
      The statute permits the City to apply objective development regulations to emergency shelters
      related to the maximum number of beds, off-street parking, the size and location of waiting and
      intake areas, the provision of onsite management, the proximity to other emergency shelters, length
      of stay, lighting, and security.
      The City of Solana Beach’s zoning ordinance does not explicitly address emergency shelters.
      Therefore, the City will amend its zoning ordinance within one year of adoption of the Housing
      Element to allow emergency shelters by right in the General Commercial zone. The General
      Commercial zone is the most appropriate zone for an emergency shelter since it allows for similar
      uses, is close to public transportation, and provides convenient access to services and retail uses.
      There are approximately 4.6 acres of vacant land in the General Commercial zone, with the
      smallest lot sized at around 6,800 square feet. This is more than sufficient to establish an
      emergency shelter that can accommodate the estimated homeless population of seven persons in
      Solana Beach. In addition, there are numerous opportunities for redevelopment within this zone.
      Transitional and Supportive Housing
      Senate Bill 2 also requires that transitional and supportive housing be treated like any other
      residential use in the same zone. Transitional housing is rental housing for stays of at least six
      months where the units are re-circulated to another program recipient after a set period. It may
      include supportive services to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of
      independent living. Supportive housing has no limit on the length of stay, provides onsite or offsite
      services, and is occupied by a target population such as low income persons with mental
      disabilities, people with substance abuse or chronic health conditions, or people with developmental
      disabilities. Services typically include assistance designed to meet the needs of the target
      population in retaining housing, living and working in the community, and/or improving health.
      Currently, the City of Solana Beach zoning ordinance does not list transitional and supportive
      housing as separate residential uses. Consistent with state law, the zoning ordinance will be
      revised to specifically treat transitional and supportive housing as standard residential uses
      permitted in all zones where residential uses are permitted.
      Housing for Persons with Disabilities
      Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination – significantly limit the supply of
      housing available to households of persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need for
      persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs. Most single-family homes are
      inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to
      widened doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered countertops, and other
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    Page 366 of 399
      features necessary for accessibility. Location of housing is also an important factor for many
      persons with disabilities, as they often rely on public transportation to travel to necessary services
      and shops.
      The City has conducted a review of its zoning laws, policies, and practices and has not identified
      zoning or other land use regulatory practices that could discriminate against persons with
      disabilities or impede the availability of housing to such individuals. The City permits housing for
      special needs groups, including for individuals with disabilities, without regard to distances between
      such uses or the number of uses in any part of the City. The Land Use Element of the General Plan
      does not restrict the siting of special needs housing. The City is also in the process of updating its
      General Plan to include policies that encourage universal design standards to create environments
      that are usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone, regardless of age, ability, or situation.
      Section 17.08.030 of the City’s zoning ordinance defines family as, “two or more persons living
      together as a bona fide single housekeeping unit.” This definition does not limit the number of
      unrelated adults in a household and is consistent with the California Supreme Court’s decision in
      Adamson v. City of Santa Barbara, which does not allow limits on the number of unrelated persons
      who live together as a single housekeeping unit.
      The City does not impose special permit procedures or requirements that could impede the
      retrofitting of homes for accessibility. The City’s requirements for building permits and inspections
      are the same as for other residential projects and are fairly simple and straightforward. City officials
      are not aware of any instances in which an applicant experienced delays or rejection of a retrofitting
      proposal for accessibility to persons with disabilities. The City does not impose special occupancy
      permit requirements for the establishment or retrofitting of structures for residential use by persons
      with disabilities.
      The City will continue to take actions to accommodate the approval of housing for persons with
      disabilities, ADA retrofit efforts, ADA compliance and/or other measures through the implementation
      of Title 24 as well as provide flexibility in the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
      The City has established the following procedures for obtaining reasonable accommodation
      pursuant to ADA:
      •   Ensure Reasonable Accommodations. Individuals with disabilities can telephone the City,
      send an email, write a letter, stop by City offices, or appear at a City meeting to request special
      accommodation or variance from the requirements of the City zoning or building codes due to a
      disability. The City has variance and encroachment permit processes to accommodate special
      structures or appurtenances, such as handicapped access ramps or lifts, needed by persons with
      disabilities. The City recently granted a reasonable accommodation to its affordable housing
      policies to allow a severely disabled person to reside with a caregiver.
      •   Variance Permit Procedure. The City can grant variances from zoning standards to
      accommodate the legitimate needs of persons with disabilities. Applications involving variances can
      be advertised as a public hearing and heard by the Director of Community Development. A request
      for a variance to accommodate handicapped access needs can be handled in four weeks or less.
      The Community Development Director’s decision to approve such a variance may be appealed to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 367 of 399
      the City Council at a public hearing. The City has worked closely with all applicants, but has never
      received a variance application for ADA issues. The City will be revising its procedures to eliminate
      the need to obtain a variance to grant reasonable accommodations (See Program 6D in Chapter 5).
      •   Encroachment Permit Procedure. Encroachment permits for structures within public rights-of-
      way also are handled administratively by the Public Works Department. Such permits are typically
      approved in less than 30 days for minor encroachments of the type needed for disabled
      accessibility. The Public Works Director’s decision to deny an encroachment permit may be
      appealed by the applicant to the City Council, which must conduct a public hearing and make a final
      decision within 45 days of an appeal.
      •   Residential Retrofitting. The City also allows residential retrofitting to increase the suitability
      of homes for persons with disabilities in compliance with ADA requirements. Such retrofitting is
      permitted under Chapter 11 of the 1998 version of the California Code. The City works with
      applicants who need special accommodations in their homes to ensure the application of building
      code requirements does not create a constraint. The City’s Zoning Ordinance has been reviewed
      for Chapter 11 compliance and has been found to be compliant.
      •   Information Regarding Accommodation for Zoning, Permit Processing, and Building
      Codes. The City implements and enforces Chapter 11 of the California Code, which is very similar
      to ADA. The City provides information to applicants or those inquiring of City regulations regarding
      accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of building codes for persons with
      disabilities.
      •   Building Codes. The City provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in
      the enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits through its flexible
      approaches to retrofitting or converting existing buildings and construction of new buildings that
      meet the shelter needs of persons with disabilities.
      Housing for the Elderly
      Senior citizen/congregate care housing developments are subject to a Conditional Use Permit
      issued by the City Council in the MR, MHR, and HR zones. The zoning ordinance allows a 25
      percent density bonus as an incentive to construct senior citizen/congregate care housing. In
      addition, such developments have fewer parking requirements. They are subject to the regulations
      included in Section 17.20.040 (E) of the City’s zoning ordinance, which are intended to protect
      health, safety, and welfare. Those regulations are summarized as follows:
      •   The parcel upon which the senior group housing facility is to be established shall conform to all
      standards of the underlying zone.
      •   The senior group housing shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.
      •   The main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the parking facility shall
      be provided with handicapped access.
      •   Indoor common areas and living units shall be handicap adaptable and be provided with all
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 368 of 399
      necessary safety equipment (e.g., safety bars, etc.), as well as emergency signal/intercom
      systems as determined by the Director.
      •    Adequate internal and external lighting, including walkways, shall be provided for security
      purposes.
      •    Common recreational and entertainment activity areas of a size and scale consistent with the
      number of living units shall be provided. The minimum size shall equal 100 square feet for each
      living unit.
      •    Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility, consistent with the number of
      living units and the Uniform Building Code, shall be provided.
      •    Off-street parking shall be provided in the following manner:
      o    One covered parking space for each dwelling unit for the exclusive use of the senior citizen
      residents plus one space for every five units for guest parking.
      o    Three parking spaces for every four dwelling units for employee and guest use for congregate
      care residences.
      o    All off-street parking shall be located within 150 feet of the front door of the main entrance.
      o    Adequate and suitably striped paved areas for shuttle parking. Shaded waiting areas shall be
      provided adjacent to the shuttle stops.
      o    Design standards relating to handicapped parking, access, surfacing, striping, lighting,
      landscaping, shading, dimensional requirements, etc. shall be consistent with the standards
      outlined in The City of Solana Beach Off-Street Parking Design Manual.
      o    Senior citizen/congregate care parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project
      basis, subject to a parking study based on project location and proximity to services for senior
      citizens including but not limited to medical offices, shopping areas, mass transit, etc.
      •    All parts of all structures shall be within 150 feet of paved access for single-story and 50 feet for
      multistory.
      The Density Bonus provisions outlined in Section 17.20.050 of the Solana Beach zoning ordinance
      also specify that Senior Citizen Housing Developments, as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil
      Code, are permitted to receive density bonuses or equivalent financial incentives pursuant to State
      Government Code Section 65915.
      Farmworker Housing
      As discussed in Chapter II, the City of Solana Beach does not have major agricultural areas, and
      only 11 part-time seasonal agricultural workers were found to be residing in the City. The City’s
      overall efforts to provide and maintain affordable housing opportunities will help to provide housing
      for any farmworkers that may choose to reside in the city.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 369 of 399
      Single-Room Occupancy Units
      Single-room occupancy units, or SROs, are one-room units intended for occupancy by a single
      individual. They are similar to studios or efficiency units. Although the zoning ordinance does not
      specifically identify this housing type as a permitted use, it falls within the category of multi-family
      housing. Subject to the same development standards as multi-family dwellings, SROs would be
      allowed by right in the MR, MHR, and HR zones, and permitted subject to limitations in the C, SC,
      and LC zones. The zoning ordinance will be amended to include clarifying language that specifies
      that SROs are considered a multi-family use.
      Accessory Living Units
      Accessory living units, which are a tool in facilitating affordable housing, are permitted by-right
      (subject to limitations) in the ER, LR, LMR, and MR districts. The passage of AB 1866 requires
      cities to use a ministerial process to consider accessory dwelling units in an effort to facilitate the
      production of affordable housing statewide. Accessory dwelling units must also comply with Section
      17.20.040 (D) of the City’s zoning ordinance; those development standards are summarized as
      follows:
      •   A detached primary dwelling unit shall exist on the lot or premises.
      •   The lot on which an accessory living unit is proposed shall have a minimum area of 6,000
      square feet, not including any commonly owned area.
      •   The accessory living unit shall be attached to or contained within the primary dwelling in such a
      manner as to avoid the appearance of the add-on unit. For the purposes of this regulation,
      “attachment” shall include second story additions to (a) the principal structure, (b) an attached
      garage, or (c) a detached garage. The accessory living unit shall be architecturally integrated with
      the structure to which it is attached. The entrance to an accessory living unit shall not be visible
      from the street adjacent to the front yard setback.
      •   The maximum allowed area of the accessory living unit shall be 640 square feet. The minimum
      allowed area of the accessory unit shall be 350 square feet.
      •   The total floor area of all structures shall not exceed the maximum floor area (FAR) for the site.
      •   The owner of the property must continually occupy either the main dwelling unit or the
      accessory living unit. For purposes of this section, “owner” includes a lessee if the leasehold
      includes both the main dwelling and accessory living unit.
      •   One off-street parking space shall be provided for the accessory living unit and all off-street
      parking deficiencies shall be corrected.
      •   Any construction of an accessory living unit shall conform to all property development
      regulations of the zone in which the property is located as well as all fire, health, safety and building
      provisions of this title.
      •   The City may offer incentives to encourage development of accessory dwelling units. If owners
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 370 of 399
      of accessory units elect to file a 30-year deed restriction to rent the unit to lower income
      households, the City will consider waiving fees and reducing parking and development standards or
      providing other incentives consistent with the Costa Hawkins Act.
      Eight accessory living units were constructed in Solana Beach from 2003 to 2010.
      Off-Street Parking Requirements
      The City’s parking requirements for residential uses vary by residential type. Single-family
      dwellings require 2 parking spaces per unit. Multi-family dwellings require 1 parking space per
      studio unit, 1.5 spaces per one bedroom unit, and 2 spaces for two or more bedroom units, in
      addition to guest parking. The parking requirements, specified in Section 17.52.040 of the City’s
      zoning ordinance, are summarized in Table IV-10, below.
                                                    Table IV-10
                                       Residential Parking Requirements
                             Use                              Number of Spaces Required
              Single-family dwellings             2 spaces
              Two-family dwellings, multiple      For rental apartments - a minimum of 50 percent
              family dwellings, and mobile        of required parking spaces shall be covered
              homes
                 Studios                          1 space per unit
                 One Bedroom                      1.5 spaces per unit
                 Two or More Bedrooms             2 spaces per unit
              Mobile Home Parks                   2 covered spaces per unit within an enclosed
                                                  garage which may be tandem, and 1 uncovered
                                                  guest space for each 4 units
              Group Residential                   1 space for each resident in accordance with
                                                  total permitted occupancy plus 1 guest space for
                                                  each 4 residents of permitted occupancy
              Accessory Living Units              1 space in addition to those required for primary
                                                  residence
              Caretaker Units                     2 spaces in addition to those required for primary
                                                  use
              Residential Day Care                2 spaces in addition to those required for primary
                                                  residence
              Residential Care Facilities         The use should comply with all property
                                                  development regulations of the underlying zone,
                                                  including parking, unless a variance is granted in
                                                  conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit for
                                                  facilities serving 7 or more persons
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 371 of 399
      The required parking is typical for most cities in San Diego County and is not considered to be a
      constraint on the production of affordable housing because applicants of affordable housing
      developments may request reduced parking requirements as a density bonus concession. The City
      Council also has the ability to grant reduced parking for senior housing through the Conditional Use
      Permit process. In addition, in all zones, applicants may request a reduction in the total number of
      required off-street parking spaces if the parking facilities may be shared by multiple uses whose
      activities are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when hours of peak use vary. This
      is also accomplished through the Conditional Use Permit process.
      Density Bonus
      The City of Solana Beach has adopted a density bonus ordinance (Section 17.20.050 of the zoning
      ordinance) that complies with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915 et seq. Under the
      City’s ordinance, a density bonus of 20 percent is available to senior housing developments as
      defined by Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code and a density increase of up to 35 percent over
      the otherwise maximum allowable residential density is available to developers who agree to
      construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households. An
      applicant for a qualifying development may also submit a proposal for up to three additional
      incentives including, but not limited to, the reduction of zoning ordinance requirements, approval of
      mixed-use development in conjunction with the multi-family residential project, or any other
      regulatory incentives or concessions which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
      cost reductions. An applicant may also request a density bonus and/or incentives for land donation,
      child care, and condominium conversions.
      Affordable (Inclusionary) Housing
      Chapter 17.70 of the Solana Beach zoning ordinance specifies the City’s affordable inclusionary
      housing requirements. Developers of for-sale residential projects providing five or more dwelling
      units, or five or more lots for sale for residential purposes, shall construct and set aside 15 percent
      of all units or lots for sale to very low or low income households at sales prices affordable to such
      persons or families. As an alternative, the development may provide an affordable accessory living
      unit (ALU) for each for-sale affordable unit otherwise required, provide rental affordable units rather
      than for-sale affordable units, construct and operate an affordable housing development on other
      property within the city for occupancy by low or very low income households, or acquire existing
      housing units within the city for occupancy by very low or low income households.
      For rental residential projects of five or more dwelling units, prior to the issuance of a building
      permit for each market-rate rental dwelling unit, affordable housing impact fees shall be paid to
      mitigate the rental residential project’s impact on the need for affordable housing in the city. As an
      alternative, the developer may enter into a development agreement with the City pursuant to
      Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. to provide rental affordable units rather than paying the
      affordable housing impact fee.
      In August 2010, Keyser Marston Associates prepared an “Economic Study of Affordable Housing
      Need” for the City and concluded that the City’s affordable housing requirements were not a
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 372 of 399
      significant additional constraint on residential development. The analysis noted that Solana Beach’s
      inclusionary program was adopted in 1994, that residential development had proceeded at a
      reasonable rate since 1994, that land prices had long adjusted for the inclusionary requirement, and
      that developers who assembled sites in Solana Beach were aware that the inclusionary
      requirements must be taken into account in determining project economics. The report noted that a
      more important constraint is the absence of large developable sites because the City is largely built
      out.
      Mobilehomes/Manufactured Housing
      State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile homes on
      permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also requires that a mobile home park be a permitted
      land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use and prohibits requiring the average
      density in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code.
      In the City of Solana Beach, manufactured housing and mobile homes are allowed in all residential
      zones as a permitted use provided the following requirements, outlined in Section 17.20.040 (B) of
      the zoning ordinance, are met:
      •   The structure has been certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
      Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and has not been altered in violation
      of applicable codes.
      •   The structure is occupied only as a single-family detached residential dwelling.
      •   The structure is attached to a permanent foundation system in compliance with the provisions of
      Section 18551 of the state of California Health and Safety Code.
      •   The structure is covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventional dwellings.
      The exterior material shall extend to the ground, except that when a skirt or solid concrete or
      masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top
      of the foundation.
      •   The structure has a roof pitch of not less than two inches vertical rise for each 12 inches of
      horizontal run and consists of shingles or other material customarily used for conventional
      dwellings.
      •   Prior to installation of a mobile home on a permanent foundation system, the owner or a
      licensed contractor shall obtain a building permit from the department of community development.
      To obtain a permit, the owner or contractor shall comply with all requirements of Section 18551(a)
      of the Health and Safety Code.
      Mobile home parks are allowed as a conditional use within all residential zones and the agricultural
      zone. The City of Solana Beach currently has no mobilehome parks.
      Condominium Conversions
      In order to reduce the impacts of condominium conversions on residents of rental housing and to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  Page 373 of 399
      maintain a supply of rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons, the City only considers
      requests for the conversion of existing rental property when the vacancy rate exceeds 6 percent. In
      addition, Chapter 17.69 of the City’s zoning ordinance provides for the following:
      •   All tenants must receive notices consistent with State law.
      •   Relocation assistance equal to one month’s rent shall be supplied to any residential tenant who
      relocates from the building after receipt of notice from the subdivider, except when the tenant has
      given notice of his intent to vacate prior to receipt of the notification from the applicant.
      •   The project must conform to all current development standards and requirements including
      parking requirements, setbacks, requirements for recreational facilities, and other zoning
      standards.
      •   All residential conversion projects shall comply with or be conditioned to meet the current
      building standards and requirements.
      •   As part of the application submittal, a building evaluation report is required to be submitted to
      the planning department.
      •   For a development consisting of 10 or more dwelling units, 10 percent of the units shall be
      reserved in perpetuity for sale or rental to qualified very low and low-income households.
      •   For a development consisting of less than 10 dwelling units, the applicant shall pay a fee in an
      amount established by City Council resolution in lieu of reserving units.
      2.   Building Codes and Enforcement
      The City of Solana Beach adopted and enforces the Title 24 California Building Code, which
      ensures that all housing units are built to specified standards. The code is determined by the
      International Conference of Building Officials and the State of California. The only significant local
      amendments that the City has adopted are: (1) requiring multi-family housing to be sprinklered and
      (2) requiring Class A roof materials due to high fire hazard. Both of these amendments are
      necessary to ensure public safety.
      Code enforcement is conducted by the City and is based on systematic enforcement in areas of
      concern and on a complaint basis throughout the city. The Code Enforcement Division works with
      property owners and renters to assist in meeting state health and safety codes. Since 2010, there
      have been 77 total code enforcement cases. There have only been two code violations for
      affordable housing units in the past two years. Both have been processed and cleared. Building
      permits were needed for the windows that were being replaced in the units.
      3.   Permit Processing Procedures
      The processing time for permits varies in Solana Beach based upon the scope and type of project
      and the applicant’s compliance with the City’s ordinances and completeness of applications.
      Certain types of applications/permits are discretionary and require a public hearing, while others
      are processed administratively. Projects needing discretionary review typically involve significant
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 374 of 399
      grading activity or buildings over 500 square feet in size. On average, permit processing for
      discretionary projects takes between two and four months. Administrative approval takes between
      several days to two or three weeks. A significant portion of the permit processing in the City is
      associated with single-family remodels.
      Projects that take a longer time to secure final approval generally have significant environmental
      impacts or involve general plan amendments or rezonings. The developers may be responsible for
      delays by failing to provide information or requesting continuances. Permit approval under these
      circumstances requires more time for public notice, public hearings, and negotiation of design
      modification to resolve problems.
      For a discretionary development review permit, the City automatically proceeds with a development
      proposal hearing at the next scheduled City Council meeting once four requirements are met: (1)
      the proposed development is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable requirements,
      including special regulations, overlay zones, and specific plans; (2) the proposed development
      complies with the development criteria; (3) environmental review as required by CEQA is
      completed; and (4) all required permits and approvals, including Variances, Conditional Use
      Permits, comprehensive Site Plans, etc., are processed concurrently with the development review
      permit. Once the criteria are met, the City continues to apply the State of California Streamlining
      Act requirements to ensure continued timely and predictable permit processing. The process is
      further expedited in the City of Solana Beach because the City has no Planning Commission; the
      Council acts as the Planning Commission and; thereby, reduces the steps in the process and
      removes uncertainty of Planning Commission-City Council policy interpretations.
      Solana Beach is located entirely within the state’s coastal zone and all Coastal Development
      Permits must be heard by the State Coastal Commission. The City is in the process of preparing a
      Local Coastal Program (LCP), which will consist of a Land Use Plan (LUP) and Local
      Implementation Plan (LIP), which together will meet the Coastal Act requirements for a
      comprehensive planning and regulatory program. On March 7, 2012, the Coastal Commission
      approved the City’s first LCP/LUP. The LCP/LUP represents a collaborative planning effort initiated
      by the City and developed over the course of many years with the participation of various interests,
      including environmental groups and property owners. The next step is for the City Council to ratify
      the LCP/LUP. In addition, the LIP still needs to be approved by both the Coastal Commission and
      the City Council.
      Once both the LCP/LUP and LIP are ratified, permit authority to review and approve development in
      Solana Beach will be transferred to the City, which will apply the requirements of the LCP/LUP and
      LIP in reviewing new development proposals. The Coastal Commission will still act on appeals from
      local government coastal permit decisions and review and approve any amendments to the
      previously certified LCP/LUP and LIP.
      The general process for obtaining an administrative building permit in Solana Beach is as follows:
      •   One set (1) of building plans are initially reviewed by the Planning Department. Once the
      planning department has reviewed and noted required revisions or comments, the plans are marked
      to proceed with plan check. The applicant is advised to submit four (4) additional sets to the
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 375 of 399
      Building Department, which is managed by Esgil, an independent firm that provides plan check
      services to the City of Solana Beach. The Engineering, Environmental and Fire Departments
      conduct their reviews at the same time. The plans are reviewed for compliance with both the City’s
      Municipal Code and applicable State laws.
      •   The Building Department plan check process may require plan revisions and subsequent
      rechecks until the plans are determined to meet all California Building Codes.
      •   The final set of plans must then be resubmitted to the City of Solana Beach for a “Re-Stamp.”
      This Re-Stamp is required to allow each department the opportunity to review the final plan to
      confirm that required revisions were made, and to evaluate whether changes required by a different
      department did not create additional comments. Once the building permit plans have been placed in
      stamp out, the City sets no longer than ten days to sign off. Generally, the Re-Stamp proceeds
      more quickly than the initial review.
      The City operates a permit and processing counter with daily hours and provides extensive
      technical assistance to project proponents to ensure that their applications are complete and
      correct. In this manner, the City is able to provide a high degree of certainty and process proposals
      within seven to eight weeks.
      The City does not require a use permit for, nor does it have any additional permit or processing
      requirements for higher density, multi-family, and mixed-use proposals in comparison to single-
      family residential development.
      4.   Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
      Within the San Diego region, a variety of fees are charged to new developments. These fees
      include, but are not limited to, development impact fees, permit issuance fees, engineering and
      public works fees, and subdivision processing fees. Each of these fees is used to pay for the
      necessary local infrastructure needed to support the development and cover the cost of processing
      the permits.
      Development impact and permit issuance fees are used to support a variety of functions including
      checking submitted plans, paying local facilities management fees, special road assessments, and
      public service related fees for other agencies such as school districts, water districts, and utility
      providers. Engineering and public works fees perform a similar function. Subdivision processing
      fees are used to cover the City’s administrative costs incurred through the processing of
      subdivision applications and plans. Table IV-11, on the following page, summarizes the most
      common planning and development fees. These fees are comparable to the fees required by other
      jurisdictions and, in many cases, are substantially less than other North County coastal
      jurisdictions.
                                                    Table IV-11
                                     Planning and Development Fees (2012)
                                                    Permit Fees
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 376 of 399
            Pre-Application Review                       $1,546 (50% is credited against future
                                                            fees if the project goes forward)
            Conditional Use Permit                                        $9,300
            Variance                                                      $2,163
            General Plan Amendment                                   $10,000 deposit
            Rezoning Review/Specific Plan                            $10,000 deposit
            Zoning Text Amendment                                     $5,000 deposit
            Development Review Permit                      Residential $3,030 / Others $6,058
                                                           Projects with EIR $10,000 deposit
            Major Subdivision Tentative Map                              $10,858
            Major Subdivision Final Map                                   $5,777
            Minor Subdivision Tentative Map                               $8,674
            Environmental Review: In-House Initial            $291 + any additional costs
            Study – Exempt
            Environmental Review: Non-Exempt, with                     Cost + 15%
            Negative Declaration, or with EIR
            Structure Development Permit (for            $744 – not charged in conjunction with
            structures exceeding 16’ in height)              a Development Review Permit
            Public Improvement Plans                      Between 3% and 5% of construction
                                                                         valuation
                                                                 Minimum fee is $1,020
            Grading Plans                                 Between 3% and 5% of construction
                                                                         valuation
                                                                 Minimum fee is $1,020
            Encroachment Permit – Street Cut                               $611
            Encroachment Permit – Standard                                 $261
            Building Plan Check & Inspection                Based on construction valuation
            Fire Building (Non-Sprinkler) Plan Check                        $70
            Review
            Fire Sprinkler Plan Check & Inspection        Between $45 and $600 depending on
                                                                      the # of heads
                                            Impact/Capacity Fees
            Regional Transportation Congestion               Single-Family: $3,623 per unit
            Program (RTCIP) Fee                               Multi-Family: $2,889 per unit
            Park Development Fees                              Flat Fee (Vacant Lot) $600
            Public Facilities Fee                                1% of project valuation
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 377 of 399
              Public Art Fee                                           0.5% of project valuation
              Sewer Initial Hook Up Fee                                    $4,500 per EDU
              Sante Fe Irrigation District Capacity Fee            $4,492 to $873,327 depending on
                                                                              meter size
              School District Fees:
              Solana Beach Elementary                                  Residential - $1.41 / sq.ft.
                                                                     Commercial - $0.22 per sq.ft.
              San Dieguito Union High                                 Residential - $1.68 per sq.ft.
                                                                     Commercial - $0.27 per sq. ft.
              Affordable Housing Impact Fee                                $25.28 per sq. ft.
      Source: City of Solana Beach, 2012
      An analysis of permit costs and fees a housing developer can expect to pay was conducted using
      information from a local developer that is currently processing a new housing project in Solana
      Beach. The analysis shows that the cost of permits and fees is approximately six percent of the
      total project cost. Based on information from developers and a comparison of the City’s fees to
      other jurisdictions, Solana Beach’s fees are not considered a constraint to housing development.
      Site improvements in the City consist of those typically associated with development for on-site
      improvements (fronting streets, curbs, gutters, sewer/water, and sidewalks), and off-site
      improvements (drainage, parks, traffic, schools, and sewer/water). Minimum street widths have
      already been established as part of the Circulation Element. There are no new streets identified in
      the Circulation Element since the City largely is built out. The existing widths would not impact any
      proposed residential and non-residential development because any improvements would occur
      within the existing ROW footprint. These improvements add little to the cost of housing; the costs
      associated with the provision of services are necessary for the health and safety of the public.
      5.   Growth Management Measures
      In the General Election of 2000, Solana Beach’s voters passed Proposition T, which requires voter
      approval to change, alter, or increase General Plan land use categories. Proposition T amended the
      General Plan to specify that without approval by a majority of voters in the City, no General Plan
      Amendment, including a Specific Plan adoptions or changes, shall be adopted which would 1)
      change, alter, or increase the General Plan Residential Land Use Categories, or 2) change any land
      use designation to any other, except changes to land already designated residential and which
      clearly result in a reduction in intensity or density of said land use designated as residential.
      This provision does not apply to amendments necessary to comply with state or federal law, or
      which are necessary to implement or obtain certification of the Local Coastal Program. Proposition
      T does not interfere with rights to obtain density bonuses (which do not require a general plan
      amendment), or limit rights or other entitlements available under affordable housing law.
      Proposition T does not act as a constraint to housing production or to the dispersal of low and
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 378 of 399
      moderate income housing opportunities throughout the city because the City’s entire RHNA can be
      accommodated under the existing General Plan’s Land Use policies. Solana Beach can meet its
      regional share goals through higher density mixed-use development in its existing multi-family
      residential and commercial designated areas.
      B.   Non-Governmental Constraints
      A number of private sector factors contribute to the cost of housing: land costs, construction costs,
      financing, and environmental constraints, all of which affect the availability of affordable housing.
      The following is a discussion of these factors and their impact on affordable housing development.
      1.   Land Costs
      High land costs are a significant constraint to the development of affordable housing in the city.
      Land values fluctuate with market conditions and the recent downturn in the housing market has
      affected land values negatively. However, land values within the North County coastal cities
      continue to remain significantly higher than in other areas of San Diego County. Based on the
      current sales prices of vacant lots in Solana Beach, the cost of land ranges from approximately
      $66.22 to $103.51 per square foot10. In October, 2012, the median cost of a single-family home was
      $412 per square foot and the median cost of a condominium was $348 per square foot11.
      Per-unit land cost is directly affected by density – higher density allows the cost to be spread
      across more units, reducing the total price. Solana Beach contains residentially zoned property that
      permits up to 20 dwelling units per acre, which is considered an adequate density to permit
      affordable housing development.
      2.   Construction Costs
      Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards and general
      market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes
      and development standards in Solana Beach are not substantially different than most other cities in
      San Diego County and the State of California. Based on information from local developers,
      construction costs are approximately $105 per square foot.
      3.   Cost and Availability of Financing
      The recent crisis in the mortgage industry has affected the availability and cost of real estate loans,
      although the long-term effects are unpredictable. The credit “crunch” resulted when “sub-prime”
      lenders made it possible for low-income families or others who could not qualify for standard
      mortgages to become home owners even though they might not have had the credit history and
      income to support repayment of the loans. The problem typically occurs with adjustable rate
      mortgages (ARMs) after the initial fixed interest rate period expires (often three years) and the
      interest rate converts to market. Because ARMs often offer “teaser” initial interest rates well below
      market for the first few years, monthly payments may increase by several hundred dollars when the
      loan converts to market rate. When property values were increasing, as was the case from 2000 to
      2006, homeowners had the option of refinancing to a new loan when the initial rate expired.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 379 of 399
      However, in the current market with declining values, homeowners may owe more than the resale
      value of their home, making refinancing impossible. As a result of these conditions, there has been
      a significant rise in foreclosure rates. In addition, changes in mortgage underwriting standards is
      likely to have greater impacts on low-income families than other segments of the community
      because banks have become much more cautious about offering ARMs and subprime loans. Even
      though interest rates are at historic lows, it has become much more difficult to obtain a loan
      because of stricter lending standards and requirements for qualified buyers.
      Table IV-12 summarizes Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data to analyze mortgage lending patterns
      in San Diego County. The data indicates that, in general, a higher percentage of applications from
      higher income groups are approved and a higher percentage of applications from lower income
      groups are denied.
                                                      Table IV-12
                                San Diego County Mortgage Lending Rates (2010)
                                                             Approved
                                       Total      Loans       But Not       %      Apps         %
               App. Income Group Apps. Originated Accepted Approved Denied                   Denied
               Less than 50% AMI       1,262        627         127      59.7%      319       25.3%
               50-79% AMI              3,574       2,149        272      67.7%      642       18.0%
               80-99% AMI              2,522       1,583        218      71.4%      376       14.9%
               100-119% AMI            2,337       1,575        181      75.1%      290       12.4%
               More than 120%
               AMI                    14,440       9,678       1,046     74.3%     1,741     12.1%
      Source: Mortgage Home Disclosure Act Aggregate Table 5-2: Disposition of Applications for
         Conventional Home Purchase Loans
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 380 of 399
                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                         Adopted by Res. 2013-011, passed February 13, 2013.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 381 of 399
                                                  1.0 Introduction
      1.1 Overview
      The past few years have seen a growing awareness by City leaders and officials throughout
      California that every City governmental action and policy concerning physical development has an
      effect on the local economy. As a result, cities which are concerned about developing a tax base
      with which to support vital services, stimulating quality local development activity, promoting the
      quality of life in the community generally, and providing employment opportunities for local
      residents are moving to adopt policies and effect changes which will lead to positive results in
      these areas.
      Such awareness has given rise to public/private partnerships, where local government and private
      sector developers and property owners cooperate in achieving mutually satisfactory developments
      in the community. The starting point in any such cooperation is the planning process. By
      incorporating economic considerations into the General Plan, the City formally recognizes the
      importance of economic development and lays the groundwork for future cooperation between the
      City and the private sector in developing and maintaining an economically healthy community.
      Moreover, the Economic Development Element functions as a yardstick by which to evaluate the
      economic implications of land use, circulation, and housing decisions made by the City Council as
      actual development activities are proposed by the private sector.
      1.2 Purpose
      The Economic Development Element is provided as an optional element of the Solana Beach
      General Plan. Its purpose is to set forth general guidelines for the development and maintenance of
      a sound economic base in the community, recognizing that the achievement of a sound economic
      base is interdependent upon related policies and objectives identified in the various elements of the
      Solana Beach General Plan.
      1.3 Legislative Authority
      The preparation of an Economic Development Element to a General Plan is authorized by Section
      65303 of the government code of the State of California. This section states: “The General Plan
      may include any other elements or address any other subjects which in the judgement of the
      legislative body relate to the physical development of the County or City.”
      1.4 Relationship to Other Elements of the General Plan
      Inclusion of an Economic Development Element in a general plan underscores the interplay
      between the Land Use Element, Circulation Element, and Housing Element, the policies and
      objectives of which are major considerations in the development of a sound economic base in the
      community. Further, the Economic Development Element identifies appropriate City roles to
      stimulate beneficial economic development.
      1.5 Plan Period
      The policies and objectives set forth in this Economic Development Element are based upon local
      and regional economic trends and determination of opportunities and constraints relevant to the City
      of Solana Beach identifiable as of 1988. Because of external influences and unforeseen events, the
      continuation of current trends, opportunities, and constraints cannot be assured. As a result, the
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 382 of 399
      policies and objectives identified in the Solana Beach Economic Development Element should be
      reviewed and modified as needed at least every ten years, and more frequently if significant
      problems with or obstacles to the achievement Element objectives are encountered.
      1.6 Technical Appendix
      To simplify the content and format of this Economic Development Element, presentation of detailed
      statistical information utilized in formulating the Element has been intentionally limited. Statistical
      data are presented herein only to the extent necessary to provide an overview of economic
      information upon the Element is based. Two reports have been prepared, containing detailed
      statistical information and comprehensive analyses upon which development of this Element is
      based:
      ■    Market Factors--Solana Beach General Plan; November 4, 1987.
      ■    Fiscal Impact Analysis--City of Solana Beach, November 4, 1987.
      These reports are available for review at the City Hall. They are identified as Technical Appendix A
      and Technical Appendix B respectively, which by this reference are made a part of the Solana
      Beach General Plan documentation.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 383 of 399
                                     2.0 Existing Conditions/Issues Analysis
      2.1 Economic Base
      As a suburban community, Solana Beach’s economic base is keyed primarily to the economy of the
      Greater San Diego region. In particular, the City’s residential and industrial facilities are sustained
      primarily by the Greater San Diego economic base. Its local-serving commercial facilities are
      keyed to this regional economic base as well. However, significant portion of the City’s commercial
      base is supported by several local economic generators:
      ■    Del Mar Fairgrounds.
      ■    Beach tourism.
      ■    Floriculture in the City and nearby.
      However, these are relatively minor in relation to the City’s total economic base. This analysis is
      keyed in large measure to the regional economy. However, special consideration has been given to
      commercial potentials arising from beach and fairgrounds proximity.
      2.2 Land Use
      The City of Solana Beach contains 2,211.5 acres. The General Plan specifies that at time of full
      development the City’s urbanized land use will be primarily residential and commercial, as indicated
      by the following tabulation:
                                                                        % Of Total
                                                            # Acres        Acres
                                Residential                  1,276.50           57.72
                                Commercial                     150.40            6.80
                                Office/Professional             22.40            1.01
                                Light Industry                  13.10            0.59
                                Public/Inst.                    79.30            3.59
                                Sub-Total                    1,541.70           69.71
                                Open Space/Rec                 231.14           10.45
                                Vacant                              --              --
                                Roads                          337.39           15.26
                                Rights of Way (I-               88.50            4.00
                                5/Railroad)
                                Agriculture                     12.83            0.58
                                Total                        2,211.56          100.00
      During the general plan evaluation process, 17 potential development sites were identified within the
      City. This list is by no means all inclusive, but provides a tangible indication of the small amount of
      land to be developed within the City‑‑about 2.2 per cent.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      Page 384 of 399
      Of these 17 sites, 11 are situated on or very near Highway 101 and Cedros Avenue. For the most
      part, these sites reflect opportunities for higher intensification of older existing uses. These sites
      can be a major asset to the City, particularly with respect to attracting specialized high-dollar
      commercial development, including hotel development.
      2.3 Residential Community
      The General Plan will allow the following residential uses at full development:
                                                                                  % Of Total
                                                            # Acres    # Units       Units
                         Estate (0-2 DU/Ac)                     280.5       280           4.28*
                         Low Density (3 DU/Ac)                  253.2       760           11.63
                         Low/Medium Density (4                  375.5     1,502           22.98
                         DU/Ac)
                         Medium Density (5-7 DU/Ac)             147.0       882           13.49
                         Med-High Density (8-12                  80.5       805           12.32
                         DU/Ac)
                         High Density (13-20 DU/Ac)             139.8     2,307           35.30
                         Total                                1,276.5     6,536          100.00
      *    Midpoint of density range used for calculating residential units.
      The prospective 6,536 residential units at full buildout reflect a 4.7% increase over current levels,
      which are estimated at 6,245 units. Essentially, Solana Beach will remain primarily a detached
      single-family community, with over half of its units of this type. Basically, the residential community
      is largely built out at this point in time. The only significant new development of residential units will
      be of a multiple-unit type, primarily in several vacant parcels and to a lesser extent in replacement
      parcels.
      2.4 City Population
      As noted earlier, at full build out the general plan will accommodate an estimated 6,536 residential
      units per year. Residential in turn will accommodate an estimated population of 16,897, computed
      as follows:
                                                                Population
                                                     # Units     Per Unit    Population
                                 Single-Family          3,424           2.89       9,895
                                 Multiple-Family        3,112           2.25       7,002
                                 Mobile Homes               --          2.00           --
                                 Total                  6,536                    16,897
      The above projections are predicated upon current per unit population densities, as identified in the
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     Page 385 of 399
      market report. They assume that all additional residential growth will be of a multiple-family type,
      and that all existing mobile-home uses will be replaced.
      2.5 Market Areas
      The market analysis utilized in preparing the Economic Development Element identified economic
      growth potentials in four principal areas, ranging from a localized 2.5-mile ring to the County region
      as a whole. Projected population growth levels for these four defined market areas are as follows:
                                                    1987          2002       % Increase
                             2.5-Mile Ring            28,000         35,000          25.0
                             5.0-Mile Ring            84,000       143,000           70.2
                             10.0-Mile Ring          225,000       390,000           73.3
                             San Diego             2,188,000     2,747,000           25.5
                             County
      As indicated, the immediate local market area has projected growth approximately equal to that of
      the region as a whole. However, the surrounding 5.0-mile and 10.0-mile rings have projected growth
      substantially in excess of that of the region. These two market areas are of significant importance
      to many of the City’s commercial establishments.
      2.6 Commercial and Industrial Community
      Full buildout of the general plan will provide for approximately 2.5 million square feet of commercial
      building space in the City, as follows:
                                                             # Acres        # SF
                                 General Commercial             114.76    1,262,360
                                 Light Commercial                 1.90        20,900
                                 Special Commercial              33.70      505,500
                                 Office/Professional             22.40      448,000
                                 Light Industrial                13.10      248,900
                                                     Total      185.86    2,485,660
      This amount of space will represent approximately 3.25 times the existing building space, estimated
      at 764,000 square feet.
      A major potential for new commercial development is hotel/motel usage. Much of this usage would
      likely be located in parcels currently designated for commercial usage, located primarily along
      Highway 101. The market analysis indicates the capability for development for up to four to six new
      high-quality hotel complexes, in the range of 600 to 800 units.
      Light industrial usage is and will continue to be a relatively minor land use factor in the City. At full
      build out, the General Plan allows for 13.1 acres of such usage, which is projected to accommodate
      approximately 249,000 square feet of building space.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 386 of 399
      2.7 Commercial/Industrial Employment Base
      Based upon Southern California averages, the City’s commercial/industrial building space allowed
      by the General Plan at full buildout will accommodate an estimated 7,600 employees.
      2.8 Fiscal Impacts
      A fiscal model has been created to evaluate the fiscal impacts of future residential and commercial
      development upon the City’s finances. This model demonstrates that the City can be comfortable in
      knowing that long-term implementation of the General Plan will result in positive fiscal impacts. To
      illustrate, future residential development will “pay its way” under existing service levels. This is
      indicated by fiscal model estimates of five prototypical residential types at anticipated housing
      value levels, which estimate the following estimated annual surplus generated by one acre of
      residential development:
                                                                                One-Time
                                                                      Net         Devel
                                                                    Annual       Control
                                                        # Units    Cash Flow      Fees
                           $ 75,000 Apartment                   30      $ 87       $11,250
                            150,000 Condominium                 18     1,661        13,500
                            225,000 Condominium                 18     4,331        20,250
                            250,000 Single-Family                5        882         6,250
                            350,000 Single-Family                3     1,084          5,250
      The model also indicates that the City’s principal opportunity for creation of substantial additional
      surplus revenues lies in commercial development. This is illustrated by the following estimates of
      annual surplus (to the City of Solana Beach) generated by one acre each of eight types of
      prototypical commercial development:
                                                                                 One-Time
                                                                 Net Annual Devel Control
                                                        # SF     Cash Flow         Fees
                         Retail
                             $100/SF Taxable Sales      11,000       $12,010          $6,600
                              150/SF Taxable Sales      11,000        18,514            7,700
                              200/SF Taxable Sales      11,000        25,018            8,800
                         Restaurant
                              250/SF Taxable Sales       7,000        19,729            5,600
                              300/SF Taxable Sales       7,000        24,080            7,000
                         Hotel (50 Rooms)               22,500        84,344          17,500
                         3-Floor Garden Office          20,000           772          16,000
                         Light Industry                 18,000         4,522            5,400
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 387 of 399
      The above projection results point with favor to the City’s future financial health. None of the
      prototypical developments indicate a negative cash flow--including residential--and commercial
      development has a highly favorable cash flow. Prospective new commercial development can add
      significantly to the City’s fiscal resources, estimated at approximately $2.6 million annually as
      follows:
                                                               Annual
                                                            Surplus Per        Annual
                                                # Acres         Acre           Surplus
                            Hotel                       10        $84,000       $ 840,000
                            Other                       90         20,500       1,800,000
                            Commercial
                                          Total        100                      2,640,000
      From a planning standpoint a principal point to be drawn from fiscal analysis is that fiscal
      considerations should not be a major negative factor in judging the desirability of any particular type
      of development. This means that the City and its residents have the choice to select the types of
      developments they want, based upon a variety of non-fiscal factors as well as financial
      considerations. In particular, this fiscal situation means that the City should be able to dictate that
      all new development in the City meet the highest quality standards. The City should not be forced to
      accept less than the highest quality development because of fiscal considerations.
      On the other hand, the above projections indicate that one form of commercial development has a
      particularly high level of cash flow return to the City. This is hotel development, which yields a
      projected favorable annual cash flow (in 1988 constant dollars) of about $85,000 per acre – more
      than triple the levels returned by retail and restaurant uses. Thus, selective hotel development
      which can meet other community criteria can be a major benefit to the City’s future finances.
      The above tabulations also indicate that one-time development control fees should be in the range
      of $5,250 to $20,250 per acre. The fiscal model assumes that such fees are offset by direct
      development control costs.
      2.9 City Roles in Economic Development
      The realization of General Plan objectives will not be automatic. Rather, the City will need to take a
      pro-active stance, working as a partner with the private sector in implementing these objectives.
      Realization of General Plan objectives will require future City participation. Key areas of City
      partnership participation should include the following:
      ■     Maintenance of commercial development opportunities, through strong ongoing restriction of
      commercially designated sites for high quality future commercial use only.
      ■     Encouragement of an optimum amount of hotel facilities within the City, with particular
      emphasis in the upgrading of Highway 101 sites, consistent with development controls.
      ■     Encouragement of deeper-lot commercial development--with its attendant better site planning
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 388 of 399
      opportunities--on the City’s principal commercial arterials, with particular emphasis on Highway 101
      and Cedros Avenue.
      ■     Assistance in related site assembly, including utilization of redevelopment procedures
      allowable under California law.
      ■     Provision of financial assistance to obtain public facilities and private improvement, through
      utilization of such implementation means as: (1) California Redevelopment procedures, (2) special
      assessment district procedures, and (3) allocation of gas taxes and other available City funding.
      ■     Assistance to the Solana Beach business community in planning and promoting a most viable
      commercial sector.
      Section 3.0 of this Economic Development Element sets forth goals, objectives, and policies which
      establish the general course for City action to implement its General Plan.
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 389 of 399
                                      3.0 Goals, Objectives, and Policies
      GOAL 3.1
      TO PROVIDE FOR THE LONG-TERM ECONOMIC HEALTH OF SOLANA BEACH THROUGH
      DEVELOPMENT OF AN EXPANDED COMMERCIAL BASE
      Objective 1.0
      Encourage greater visitor-serving (including regional-serving) commercial facilities,
      particularly hotel, restaurant, and retail facilities.
      Policy 1.a   The City shall provide for the development of visitor-serving commercial uses during
      the next 20 years within appropriate areas of the City.
      Objective 2.0
      Encourage greater retail, office, and other commercial facilities to serve local resident needs.
      Policy 2.a   The City shall provide for the development of local-serving commercial uses during the
      next 20 years within appropriate areas of the City.
      Objective 3.0
      Support organizational efforts to maintain and/or increase commercial volume and quality.
      Policy 3.a   The City shall encourage the strengthening of existing and prospective marketing
      organizations within Solana Beach through financial and administrative assistance.
      Policy 3.b   The City shall support private marketing efforts aimed at increasing commercial
      volume by providing relevant land use and demographic information to marketing organizations.
      GOAL 3.2
      TO PROMOTE THE CITY’S ECONOMIC HEALTH BY UPGRADING ITS COMMERCIAL BASE.
      Objective 1.0
      Adopt a regulatory program aimed at securing only highest-quality new development.
      Policy 1.a   The City shall establish land use controls to ensure high-quality--yet practical--levels
      of new development, encompassing such items as site planning, setbacks, screening, and noise
      control.
      Objective 2.0
      Ensure adequate access to accommodate existing and future levels of commercial visitors
      and employees, through the Circulation Element of the Solana Beach General Plan.
      Policy 2.a   The City shall ensure the provision of adequate parking facilities to serve new
      commercial development.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 390 of 399
      Policy 2.b    The City shall implement circulation improvements as necessary pursuant to the
      Circulation Element of the General Plan, to improve automobile access to the City’s principal
      commercial areas.
      Policy 2.c    The City shall implement the provisions of the Circulation Element to improve--where
      possible--the pedestrian-oriented environment within the City’s key visitor-serving and other
      commercial areas.
      Objective 3.0
      Identify the potential for establishing measures to revitalize the area along the Highway 101
      corridor and Cedros Avenue, including the possible formation of a redevelopment area.
      Policy 1.a    The City shall complete a feasibility study which evaluates the effectiveness of
      potential revitalization measures for the area along Highway 101 and along Cedros Avenue.
      GOAL 3.3
      TO ASSURE CONTINUED DELIVERY OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES TO
      CITY RESIDENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS, WITHIN THE LIMITS POSED BY FISCAL
      RESOURCES.
      Objective 1.0
      Establish procedures and mechanisms to encourage and give priority to commercial uses
      providing greatest financial resources to the City.
      Policy 1.a    The City shall give greatest priority and emphasis in terms of economic development
      to hotel, restaurant, retail, and office uses, in that order.
      Policy 1.b    The City shall give least emphasis in terms of economic development to residential
      and industrial development.
      Objective 2.0
      Establish procedures for the continued assessment of fiscal impacts of development.
      Policy 2.a    The City shall utilize its fiscal model through the establishment of appropriate
      procedures for its use to evaluate the fiscal impacts of proposed developments and annexation.
      Policy 2.b    The City shall establish a development monitoring program to track development
      activities as they relate to the need for expanded public services and facilities.
      Policy 2.c    The City shall continue a developer fee structure for providing development services.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 391 of 399
                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                         Adopted by Res. 2013-011, passed February 13, 2013.
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 392 of 399
                                                    I. Introduction
      This chapter includes a discussion of State housing element requirements and identifies where
      these requirements are addressed in the document. It also includes a summary of the relationship
      between the Housing Element and the other General Plan elements and a description of the public
      participation efforts involved in the preparation of this Housing Element update.
      A.    City Profile
      The charming, seaside community of Solana Beach is nestled along the northern coast of San
      Diego County, and is approximately 23 miles from downtown San Diego. Its main access routes
      include Interstate 5, Highway 101, Lomas Santa Fe Drive, and Via de la Valle. The city enjoys
      temperatures that average 62 degrees in the winter and 77 degrees in the summer. It offers 1.7
      miles of coastline for swimming and surfing. It is a favorite destination for those seeking eclectic
      shops, great dining, golfing, nightlife, and nearby hiking.
      Solana Beach was incorporated in 1986. It has the second smallest population (12,867) of all
      jurisdictions within the region. The City covers approximately 3.5 square miles along the Pacific
      Ocean. It is bordered by the cities of Del Mar and San Diego to the south, the City of Encinitas to
      the north, and the unincorporated community of Rancho Santa Fe to the east.
      The North County Transit District (NCTD) provides public transportation service to the area and
      operates the bus system as well as a commuter light rail service, the Coaster, which runs between
      Oceanside to the north and downtown San Diego to the south. Amtrak also provides rail service to
      Solana Beach as it spans the distance from San Diego to Los Angeles and other northbound
      destinations. Trains stop at the station located in Solana Beach at 105 N. Cedros Avenue.
      Solana Beach is bisected north to south by Interstate 5 and east to west by Lomas Santa Fe Drive,
      which creates four quadrants. Additionally, there is a fifth area bordered by Highway 101 to the east
      and the Pacific Ocean to the west. Residents typically view the City in terms of these five distinct
      areas.
      The City’s proximity to the ocean and its unique community character have resulted in high land
      and housing values. The community is nearly built out, with very little vacant, developable land.
      Solana Beach is an affluent community with a median income of $86,908 and a median home price
      of $840,500.
      B.    State Authorization and Requirements
      The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable living
      environment for every Californian as the State’s main housing goal. Recognizing the important part
      that local planning programs play in pursuit of this goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities
      and counties prepare a housing element as part of their comprehensive general plans. The housing
      element is an important planning tool that identifies the housing needs of the city and establishes an
      action plan to meet those needs.
      Planning to provide housing opportunities for all income levels is extremely important because, in
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Page 393 of 399
      many cases, there is a wide gap between the cost of housing and a person’s ability to pay for it.
      The cost of housing has risen significantly faster than salaries over the years and the recent
      economic downturn has not improved the situation. Depressed incomes and a higher demand for
      rental housing have widened the gap. There is no state in the U.S. where a full time minimum wage
      worker can afford a two bedroom apartment and very few places in this country where one can
      afford a one bedroom apartment1. “Affordable housing” means that no more than 30 percent of a
      household’s income is spent on housing. According to the 2010 Census, 53 percent of all U.S.
      renters are paying more than 30 percent of their income on housing. In 1960, only 25 percent of
      renters faced such a burden2.
      When people cannot afford their housing expenses, there are ripple effects such as overcrowded
      households; dilapidated housing conditions as residents are unable to afford to maintain their
      properties; an increased homeless population; longer commutes and associated air quality
      problems as people try to find more affordable housing farther away from where they work; and
      potential economic impacts if businesses, unable to find employees that can afford to live in the
      area, relocate to other communities.
      Section 65583 of the California Government Code sets forth the specific components to be
      contained in a community’s housing element. Table I-1 summarizes these State requirements and
      identifies the sections in the Solana Beach Housing Element where they are addressed.
                                                      Table I-1
                                       State Housing Element Requirements
                                                                                      Reference
               Required Housing Element Component                                     Page Begins
               A.   Housing Needs Assessment, Resources, and Constraints
                    1.   Analysis of population trends and projections.                11
                    2.   Analysis of employment trends and projections.                32
                    3.   Quantification of existing and projected housing needs for    44
                         all income levels, including extremely low income
                         households.
                    4.   Analysis and documentation of household characteristics,      20
                         including level of payment and ability to pay, overcrowding,
                         and housing stock condition.
                    5.   An inventory of land suitable for residential development     115
                         including vacant sites and those having redevelopment
                         potential and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
                         public facilities and services to those sites.
                    6.   The identification of a zone or zones where emergency         68
                         shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a
                         conditional use permit or other discretionary permit and
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                     Page 394 of 399
                     which have sufficient capacity to accommodate at least one
                     year round shelter.
                7.   An analysis demonstrating that existing or proposed permit 68
                     processing, development, and management standards are
                     objective and encourage and facilitate the development of,
                     or conversion to, emergency shelters.
                8.   An analysis of potential and actual governmental              60
                     constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or
                     development of housing for all income levels, including
                     multi-family rental housing, factory-built housing,
                     mobilehomes, housing for agricultural workers, supportive
                     housing, single-room occupancy units, emergency shelters,
                     and transitional housing, and for persons with disabilities.
                9.   Efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder        69
                     meeting the regional housing need allocations and from
                     meeting the need for persons with disabilities, supportive
                     housing, transitional housing, and emergency shelters.
                10. An analysis of potential and actual non-governmental           81
                     constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or
                     development of housing for all income levels, including the
                     availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of
                     construction.
                11. An analysis of special housing needs, such as those of the 21
                     elderly; persons with disabilities, including developmental
                     disabilities; large families; farmworkers, families with
                     female heads of households; and families and persons in
                     need of emergency shelter.
                12. Opportunities for energy conservation.                         58
                13. An analysis of existing assisted housing developments that 44
                     are eligible to change from low-income housing uses during
                     the next 10 years due to termination of subsidy contracts,
                     mortgage pre-payment, or expiration of restrictions on use.
            B.   Goals and Policies
                1.   A statement of the community’s goals, quantified              84
                     objectives, and policies related to the maintenance,
                     preservation, improvement, and development of housing.
            C.   Programs
                1.   A program that sets forth a schedule of actions during the    87
                     planning period, each with a timeline for implementation,
                     which may recognize that certain programs are ongoing,
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                Page 395 of 399
                       such that there will be beneficial impacts of the programs
                       within the planning period.
                       a.    Identify actions that will make sites available with      N/A
                             appropriate zoning and development standards to
                             accommodate the City’s RHNA.
                       b.    Assist in the development of housing to meet the          87
                             needs of extremely low, very low, low, and moderate
                             income households.
                       c.    Address, and where possible, remove governmental          91
                             constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and
                             development of housing.
                       d.    Conserve and improve the condition of the existing        96
                             affordable housing stock
                       e.    Promote housing opportunities for all persons             100
                             regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, or
                             disability.
                       f.    Preserve assisted housing developments identified as 97
                             “at risk” of converting to market rate.
                       g.    Identify agencies and officials responsible for the       95
                             implementation of the various actions and means by
                             which consistency will be achieved with other general
                             plan elements and community goals.
                       h.    Include a diligent effort to achieve public participation 8, 101
                             of all economic segments of the community in the
                             development of the housing element.
      State housing element law changed in 2008 as a result of Senate Bill 375 to require housing
      elements to be updated at least every eight years (previously it was every five years) to reflect a
      community’s changing housing needs and better synchronize the Regional Transportation Plan
      (RTP) process with the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). Any local government that
      does not adopt a housing element within 120 days of the statutory deadline falls out of the eight
      year cycle and must adopt an element every four years. The statutory deadline for this Housing
      Element cycle is April 30, 2013.
      C.   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      The Solana Beach’s General Plan contains elements addressing Land Use, Circulation, Housing,
      Conservation and Open Space, Noise, Safety, and Economic Development. The content of this
      Housing Element is consistent with the goals and policies of all other elements of the General Plan.
      The City must ensure that the General Plan and its elements form an integrated, internally
      consistent, and compatible statement of development policies 3. All elements of a general plan,
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   Page 396 of 399
      whether they are mandatory or optional, are regarded as equally important. In addition, the goals
      and policies within each element are consistent with each other and with the other elements of the
      plan. The City will ensure that the Housing Element remains consistent with any
      amendments/updates to other elements of the General Plan during this Housing Element cycle.
      D.    Public Participation
      As part of the Housing Element update process, the City utilized a variety of methods to engage the
      public including workshops, City Council update meetings, an online questionnaire, a General Plan
      Update website, public review of the draft document, and public hearings prior to adoption. The first
      public workshop was held on May 10, 2012. The City issued a press release regarding the
      workshop and it was also noticed through announcements at City Council meetings; through
      Facebook, Twitter, and Email blasts; a mass mailing to a number of stakeholders including, but not
      limited to, non-profit and for-profit housing developers, service providers, housing advocates, and
      citizen committees (see Appendix C); and flyers posted throughout the City at public parks, the
      library, apartment complexes, and churches. There were approximately 15 attendees and the
      meeting was broadcast online so people could watch from home. The workshop included a
      presentation to provide an overview of the purpose of the Housing Element and the State
      requirements for the document. Following the presentation, participants were organized into small
      groups and given questions to consider from the perspectives of different people, including those
      with special needs, such as the elderly, large households, single mothers, farmworkers, homeless
      individuals and families, persons with disabilities, etc. to identify potential similarities and
      differences in their housing needs or choices. They were also asked to consider the best way for
      Solana Beach to accommodate its regional housing needs given the community’s constraints. A
      number of suggestions were provided including encouraging underground parking to maximize the
      developable area of a lot, encouraging lot consolidation of smaller sites to facilitate more effective
      multi-family housing, and encouraging redevelopment of the single-story structures along Highway
      101 to include residential uses on upper floors.
      The City also launched a General Plan Update website to keep people informed of the process. The
      website also includes additional opportunities for the public to respond to questions regarding the
      Housing Element update and email comments to staff.
      An online questionnaire was released in May of 2012 and is still available for people to respond to.
      The City noticed the availability of the online questionnaire through announcements at City Council
      meetings; through Facebook, Twitter, and Email blasts; through a press release and notice posted
      in the local newspaper; flyers posted throughout the City at public parks, the library, apartment
      complexes, churches, coffee shops, a grocery store, the golf course, and train station; flyers
      distributed by the local school district; hard copies of the questionnaire available at the permitting
      counter; and flyers distributed during Fiesta del Sol, a major annual family and community event
      featuring live music, arts & crafts, children’s activities, and food and drinks. The questionnaire asks
      respondents to review the existing Housing Element goals, policies, and programs and identify
      additional considerations for the update. To date, there are 84 responses to the questionnaire.
      Responses have ranged from not wanting any new development, to wanting more mixed-use
      development, especially at the train station, to create an identifiable downtown area. Specific
            The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 Page 397 of 399
      suggestions included, but were not limited to:
      •   Ensuring that community character is preserved,
      •   Providing incentives for energy efficiency,
      •   Reducing development fees,
      •   Preserving existing affordable and rental housing,
      •   Encouraging mixed use,
      •   Providing housing for lower income residents and relatively inexpensive housing for people who
      work in Solana Beach,
      •   Reducing residential densities,
      •   Developing over the train station parking lot,
      •   Integrating affordable housing throughout the community rather than concentrating it in one area,
      •   Letting the market decide what to build,
      •   Not building any more affordable housing, and
      •   Not changing anything.
      A public City Council Update meeting was held on June 13, 2012 to provide an update on the
      existing conditions research and public outreach efforts to date. A presentation was given that
      summarized 2010 Census data and feedback received from the first public workshop and online
      questionnaire.
      The second public workshop was held on July 18, 2012. It was noticed the same as the first public
      workshop with additional flyers posted around the city at coffee shops, a grocery store, the train
      station, and the golf course. There were 31 attendees and the workshop was broadcast online so
      people could watch from home. The second public workshop began with an introductory
      presentation regarding the status of the update, the State requirements, and the public input
      received to date. Following the presentation, participants were asked to organize into small groups.
      They were given the draft goals, policies, and programs to consider as well as a hypothetical
      affordable housing project intended to help generate discussion. In general, the community
      expressed concern over the State’s density bonus law, which permits developers to request
      deviations to development standards and concern over potential parking and traffic impacts
      associated with new residential development. There was a desire to require more bicycle parking
      and bike facilities if a reduction in vehicular parking is requested, provide incentives for bicycle
      use, and implement a bike share program. Opportunities to encourage sustainable development,
      including such features as renewable energy, use of recycled materials, and drought tolerant
      landscaping were looked upon favorably. Suggestions for accommodating affordable housing
      included integrating it into a mixed-use project or converting existing market-rate apartments to
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               Page 398 of 399
      affordable units. There was also a request to facilitate aging in place in the policies and address
      sexual orientation in the anti-discrimination policies.
      The results of the public participation efforts have been posted on the City’s website and many of
      these comments have been incorporated into the Housing Element, such as encouraging
      sustainable green building practices, promoting opportunities to age in place, and continuing to
      encourage accessory living units. There will be additional opportunities for public comment as the
      update process continues. The draft document has been released for public review. The City of
      Solana Beach, as the lead agency, has also prepared a Negative Declaration (ND) in accordance
      with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). A subsequent notice and draft ND has been
      released for public review. Additionally, a noticed public hearing(s) will occur prior to the City
      Council’s adoption of the Housing Element. In Solana Beach, the City Council performs the
      Planning Commission functions.
           The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.

Solana Beach Municipal Code AMENDMENT HISTORY                                                   Page 399 of 399
                                      AMENDMENT HISTORY
      A  Resolution List
      B  Ordinance List
          The Solana Beach Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 484, passed January 10, 2018.
