      Town of Los Altos Hills
CIRCULATION & SCENIC ROADWAYS
           ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
          Introduction                                               C-1
          Circulation in Los Altos Hills                             C-5
          Roadway Classifications                                    C-6
          Complete Streets, Roadways and                            C-12
          Private Roadways                                          C-15
          Driveways                                                 C-16
          Bikeways                                                  C-17
          Pedestrian Facilities                                     C-23
          Traffic Safety                                            C-24
          Scenic Roadway Design                                     C-27
          Emergency Vehicle Access                                  C-29
          Drainage and Utilities                                    C-31
          Public Transportation and Ridesharing                     C-33
          Regional Coordination                                     C-34
                                 TABLE OF FIGURES
          Figure C-1 Non-Residential Destination                     C-4
          Figure C-2 Roadway Classifications                         C-9
          Figure C-3 Bikeways                                       C-21
          Figure C-4 Emergency Road Connections                     C-30
                        Draft Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                    Adopted June 18, 2015
     INTRODUCTION
101. Purpose-the purpose of the Circulation and Scenic Roadways Element is to
     provide the policy framework for regulation and development of the circulation
     system in Los Altos Hills. The goal of this element is to encourage designs that
     enhance safety for all users in balance with the preservation of the semi-rural
     residential character of the community.
102. The roadways of Los Altos Hills were initially intended only to filter automobiles
     down out of the hills and into the valley where people work and shop. The
     construction of Interstate 280 through Town in the 1960s resulted in added
     pressure on the local roadway system. In addition, commercial and industrial
     development in Palo Alto and on Stanford University lands has resulted in
     increased through traffic on Town streets. Being that the roadway system and land
     in the Town is substantially built out, such traffic increases are likely to impact the
     Town’s existing residents.
103. State Requirements-California Government Code Section 65300 requires every
     city and county to draw up and adopt “a comprehensive, long-term general plan
     for the physical development” of the community. The Town’s Circulation Element
     is one of seven mandatory General Plan Elements. California Government Code
     Section 65302 (b) specifies that all General Plans shall include a circulation plan
     intended to designate the “location and extent of existing and proposed major
     thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and
     facilities.”
104. The California Complete Streets Act of 2008 (Assembly Bill 1358, Leno) states that
     upon any substantive revisions of the Circulation Element, the legislative body
     shall modify the Circulation Element to plan for a balanced, multimodal
     transportation network that meets the needs of all users of streets, roads and
     highways for safe and convenient travel in a manner that is suitable to the rural
     suburban or urban context of the General Plan. Based on this requirement, the
     Town seeks to incorporate locally appropriate Complete Streets guidelines into the
     Circulation Element. The term “complete streets” refers to a transportation network
     designed and operated to encourage enhanced safety together with attractive, and
     comfortable access and travel for all users in a well-balanced manner suitable to
     the Town’s semi-rural character.
105. Existing Conditions-Los Altos Hills, a semi-rural, very low-density residential
     community, takes pride in its narrow, winding roadways which maintain and
     enhance the scenic qualities and rural ambiance of the Town while providing
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 1

     access to and from residential neighborhoods. The broad right-of-ways allow
     residents to walk, ride or run along the roads or along road-side paths, which often
     are connected to off-road paths between neighborhoods.
106. Los Altos Hills is predominantly residential, with virtually no commercial
     development. It is almost fully developed, with few areas available for new homes
     or subdivisions. The Town contains several public and private schools, including
     Foothill Community College located just west of Interstate Highway 280 (I-280) at
     El Monte Road, religious facilities and public facilities such as Town Hall, the Town
     corporation yard, parks, and a fire station. Figure C-1 depicts the non-residential
     destinations within and adjacent to Los Altos Hills.
107. The Town is generally dependent on other parts of the San Francisco Bay Region
     for a variety of commercial, cultural and recreational facilities and employment
     opportunities are similarly scattered throughout the region within commute
     distance of the working residents of the community. The primary mode of
     transportation between Los Altos Hills and other parts of the Peninsula and Bay
     Area is the automobile, as feeder buses and shuttle systems to the Bay Area’s
     overall mass transit network (Caltrain, SamTrans, VTA, BART, etc.) provide only
     limited service to Los Altos Hills.
108. Town roads are typically narrow and winding, reflecting the many constraints
     imposed by moderately steep terrain, significant natural vegetation, and several
     creeks and their tributary drainage channels. I-280 carries the highest levels of
     traffic in the community and is primarily an inter-city freeway that is also used for
     intra-community trips. Traffic flows well on this facility during most periods, with
     some congestion experienced during morning and evening commute hours. The
     bulk of the Town's traffic is generated at the local residential road level and then
     flows to the arterials that connect to the freeway and the adjacent expressways.
     Expressways that serve the community are the Page Mill and Foothill
     Expressways. Most of the transportation facilities within the Town operate at
     relatively good service levels, except for some congestion experienced during the
     morning and evening commute periods in the vicinity of the primary connections
     from I-280 to the Town’s road system. These include Page Mill Expressway,
     Arastradero Road, El Monte Road and Magdalena Avenue. The Town engages in
     ongoing collaboration with both Caltrans and neighboring jurisdictions to address
     traffic problems and work toward ways to relieve congestion and to facilitate
     enhanced levels of safety for all users. In 2014, the Town began discussions with
     Caltrans and the County of Santa Clara regarding future improvements to the
     existing I-280/Page Mill Road/Arastradero Road Interchange. In addition, the
                             Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page C- 2

Town will continue to actively review and provide input to the Santa Clara County
Expressway Plan 2040 to ensure that future improvements to Page Mill
Expressway and Foothill Expressway are compatible with the rural character of the
community.
                 Directional sign at El Monte Road and Moody Road
                      Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                       Page C- 3
Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
      Los Altos Hills General Plan
               Page C- 4
                          CIRCULATION IN LOS ALTOS HILLS
                                         GOAL 1
             The Town’s goal is to maintain its quiet residential roads:
                     • In good condition;
                     • In a visually pleasing state;
                     • In a safe condition;
                     • As a part of a transportation network that meets the needs of
                        all users;
                     • In a condition that discourages through-traffic; and
                     • As a road system that accepts private roads into the public
                        road system only when they have met Town standards.
Policy 1.1  The circulation system should be compatible with the semi-rural nature of
            the community, a system that makes the community relatively
            impermeable to vehicular through traffic and open and safe to those on
            foot, bicycle and horseback.
Policy 1.2  The Town should develop and maintain corridors for travel for motorists,
            bicyclists, pedestrians and equestrians through Town in which the user
            can enjoy and view the natural environment and open spaces that provide
            a buffer from adjacent land uses. These corridors should include
            pathways proposed or existing in the Pathways Element.
Program 1.1 The Town should maintain roadway classifications appropriate to the
            semi-rural and winding nature of Town roads. These classifications should
            be developed with an understanding of the origin, destination and mode
            of transportation of the user, reflecting the residential character of streets
            in Los Altos Hills.
Program 1.2 The Town should work with surrounding communities and agencies to
            improve access to the regional transportation system with minimal
            impacts on the Town’s local roadways.
Program 1.3 The Town should develop a concept of “Complete Streets” that is
            compatible with its semi-rural residential character.
Program 1.4 The Town should consider alternative designs for the proposed
                           Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 5

               improvements to the Interstate 280/Page Mill Road/Arastradero Road
               Interchange including a non-signalized option.
                         ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
109. Four basic types (classifications) of roadways are defined within the Town: Local
     (Residential) Roads, Neighborhood Connector Roads, Collector Roads, and
     Arterial or "Main" Roads. In addition, there are emergency roads that provide
     secondary emergency access to and from residential areas. The following text
     discusses these roadway types. Roadway classifications are shown on Figure C-
     2. While most roadways are small and semi-rural, the Town will continue to require
     wide rights-of-way in order to avoid large cuts and fill, maintain vegetation and
     accommodate paths, drainage, and utilities.
110. Local Roads. Local Roads serve as access to a limited number of residential
     uses. These roads include the many cul-de-sacs throughout the Town. Local roads
     would be expected to carry volumes on the order of less than 1,000 ADT (average
     daily trips).
111. Neighborhood Connector Roads. Akin to collector roads, Neighborhood
     Connector Roads connect adjacent land uses and generally connect one
     neighborhood area with another, and in some cases connect to arterials.
     Neighborhood Connector Roads would be expected to carry volumes on the order
     of 1,000 ADT to 5,000 ADT.
     Taaffe Road is an example of a Neighborhood Connector Road. It connects the
     Taaffe Road/Altamont Road neighborhood with the Taaffe Road/Elena Road
     neighborhood. Other examples include Natoma Road, Altamont Road, Prospect
     Avenue and Stonebrook Drive. Some of these roads, such as the north end of
     Elena and the south end of Robleda, take on added significance where they cross
     under I-280 to connect the two sides of Town.
112. Collector Roads. The function of collector roadways is to collect traffic from local
     and neighborhood connector roads serving neighborhoods to roadways of higher
     classifications. Within the Town, collector roads are intended to connect adjacent
     land uses to the limited arterial roadway system. Collector Roads are also
     designed with limited driveway access to provide principal connections from
     residential areas to arterials or expressways.
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 6
     These roadways would be expected to carry volumes on the order of 5,000 ADT
     to 10,000 ADT. The main collector roads in the Town are:
         • Arastradero Road
         • Page Mill Road
         • Moody Road
         • Fremont Road between Edith Avenue and Arastradero Road
113. Arterials. This classification is defined as a traffic way for inter-community and
     local traffic, providing connections to freeways and expressways. Current design
     guidelines for arterials stipulate that access to abutting properties be limited to the
     greatest extent feasible, with signals at major intersections, stop signs on side
     streets and parking generally prohibited. Volumes on these roadways would be
     expected in the 10,000 ADT to 15,000 ADT range for two-lane roads and 15,000
     ADT to 35,000 ADT for four-lane roads.
                                                                       Length
                                     Classification
                                                                       (miles)
                                          Local                        69.8
                                     Neighborhood
                                                                       21.4
                                       Connector
                                        Collector                      10.3
                                         Arterial                       1.4
                                      Expressway                        1.2
                                 Town Road Mileage by Classification
                            Source: M-Group-(2013) and Santa Clara Valley Transportation
                                             Authority GIS Data (2009)
     Very few true arterials exist in Los Altos Hills, as most of the Town’s roadways
     provide access to abutting residential land uses. The following roadways are
     included in the Arterial designation:
         • Portions of El Monte Road
         • Magdalena Avenue (east of I-280)
114. Freeways & Expressways. Regional transportation facilities that provide inter-
     community access to Los Altos Hills include the I-280 freeway and the Page Mill &
     Foothill Expressways. The latter two are generally located along the periphery of
     the Town and are primarily external to the Town's roadway system.
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page C- 7

115. Emergency Roads. Emergency roads connect local roads to provide secondary
     emergency access to residential areas. These roadways are typically closed to
     through traffic and are designed to be used by vehicular traffic only in the case of
     an emergency. These roadways may also serve as off-road path connections for
     non-motorized travel (bikes, pedestrians, equestrians, etc.) where appropriate
     easements are provided. Figure C-4 in the Emergency Vehicle Access section
     shows the location of the Town’s existing network of emergency roads.
                             Page Mill Road near Arastradero Road (collector road)
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 8

Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
      Los Altos Hills General Plan
               Page C- 9
                                          GOAL 2
              Los Altos Hills enjoys its quiet semi-rural roadways and
                       wishes to preserve its current character.
Policy 2.1  Provide adequate space in public right-of-ways to accommodate semi-
            rural roadways, pathways, utilities, drainage, and vegetative buffers.
Policy 2.2  Through traffic should remain on non-residential thoroughfares (i.e
            freeways, expressways, and arterials) to the maximum extent possible.
Policy 2.3  Collectors, neighborhood connectors and local roads shall not be
            designed or improved to an extent that would encourage through traffic.
Policy 2.4  Cul-de-sacs and loop-type roads shall be encouraged as a means of
            reducing traffic.
Policy 2.5  The intensity of existing or proposed land uses shall not provide
            justification for widening roadway pavement widths.
Policy 2.6  New or expanding development that will impact a road, whether private or
            public, should be required to improve the roadway surface and width to
            provide for adequate emergency access, and shall repair damage caused
            by construction.
Policy 2.7  The Town shall pursue cost-effective maintenance of the roadway
            network. Roadways shall be maintained in a priority order based on traffic
            levels and cost effectiveness while preventing long-term deterioration.
Policy 2.8  Roadway maintenance should not interfere with pathways or drainage.
Program 2.1 Develop right of way standards to generally accommodate roadway
            pavement, drainage, vegetative screening, utilities, slopes, and pathways,
            and to avoid excessive cuts or fills. A general guide for width would be 60
            feet, although this will vary depending on conditions. Additional
            easements for slope or line of sight may be required.
Program 2.2 Identify existing and desirable emergency access connections.
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 10
Program 2.3 Continue a roadway maintenance program, based on an ongoing
            Pavement Management Program (for example the Metropolitan
            Transportation Commission’s Pavement Management Program).
            Implement this program through the Town’s annual Capital Improvement
            Program budget.
                   Narrow paved roadway and roadside pathway along Concepcion Road
                         Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                               Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                       Page C- 11

         COMPLETE STREETS, ROADWAYS AND PATHWAYS
116. The term “Complete Streets” refers to a transportation network designed and
     operated to enable safe, attractive, and comfortable access and travel for
     motorists, users of public transportation, bicyclists, equestrians and pedestrians,
     including children, the elderly and the disabled in a well-balanced manner suitable
     to the Town’s semi-rural character.
117. The Complete Streets concept recognizes that a transportation network should
     account for multiple users with different abilities. In Los Altos Hills, the extensive
     pathway system in conjunction with the streets and roadways have accommodated
     the full range of users since the Town’s inception.
118. Los Altos Hills has a very low density, rural residential setting, so the
     implementation of Complete Streets policies will differ from that in other more
     urban communities. Some of the factors unique to Los Altos Hills with regards to
     Complete Streets include:
         • Relatively narrow, winding roadways which make implementation of
             complete street elements such as separate designated bike lanes very
             difficult and cost prohibitive on most roadways within the community;
         • A rural development pattern established over the past 60 years that includes
             roads with no paved sidewalks, natural vegetated shoulders along many
             roads, and an extensive roadside pathway system utilizing natural materials
             that serves multiple users (pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians);
         • A primarily rural residential community with no commercial or industrial
             zoned land and a very limited number of non-residential uses with only one
             substantial employment center (Foothill College);
         • A completely built-out roadway network with no future expansions planned
             or anticipated other than new local residential streets for new housing
             subdivisions;
         • The location of all primary and secondary schools on collector and arterial
             streets near the edge of the Town’s limits;
         • No streetlights or signalized intersections within Town limits except on El
             Monte Road at the Foothill College entrance, at Stonebrook Drive and at
             Voorhees Drive;
         • Recreational bicyclists utilizing the roadway network.
                             Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 12

                                          GOAL 3
 Provide “Complete Streets” that meet the needs of all users, consistent with the other
                       goals, objectives, and policies of this plan.
Policy 3.1   In all roadway projects, consider how the project will fit within the overall
             network of accommodations that improve transportation options for all
             users: motorists, users of public transportation, bicyclists, equestrians and
             pedestrians, including children, the elderly and the disabled.
Policy 3.2   Recognize the semi-rural setting of Los Altos Hills in applying the
             complete streets concept. Pedestrian facilities may include roadway
             shoulders and unpaved paths and bicycle facilities may include unpaved
             paths, roadway shoulders, shared roadways and bike lanes where
             appropriate (Figure C-3).
Policy 3.3   Provide routes for walking or bicycling to school that are designed to
             encourage safety and are in keeping with the Town’s semi-rural character.
Program 3.1  Consider Complete Streets
             guidelines in the planning,
             design, and approval of street,
             roadway and pathway projects.
Program 3.2  Consider Complete Streets
             guidelines in the operation,
             construction,       reconstruction,
             retrofit, maintenance, alteration,
             and repair of streets and
             bridges.
Program 3.3  Explore partnering with Santa
             Clara Valley Transportation
             Authority (VTA) to enhance and
             expand       public      transportation
             services to the surrounding region.
Program 3.4  Work with VTA to ensure that public transportation is fully accessible to
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 13

              persons with disabilities.
Program 3.5   Construct Phase II of the multi-use pathway along Fremont Road from
              Town Hall to Arastradero Road to serve Pinewood School students as
              outlined in the Valley Transportation Plan 2040.
                       Multi-use roadside pathways recently constructed along Fremont Road.
            Bike pathway is on the left side of the road – Pedestrian/equestrian pathway is on the right side
                                                Pathway adjacent to Town Hall
                                  Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                           Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                     Page C- 14

                                   PRIVATE ROADWAYS
119.   Private roads account for approximately one third of the length and number of all
       roads in the Town’s road system.
       According to the California Street and Highways Code §1806:
       “No city shall be held liable for failure to maintain any road until it has been
       accepted into the city street system… [The] city may, by ordinance, designate a
       city officer to accept, on behalf of the governing body, streets or roads or portions
       thereof, into the city street system and to record conveyances to the city of real
       property interests for street and road uses and purposes. The designee shall, prior
       to recording any conveyance under this section, affix a certificate to the instrument
       stating the acceptance into the city street system and designating the name or
       number, or both, of the street or road.”
120.   The Town adopted a policy in 2008 that details a process for acceptance of private
       roadways which identifies the role of the Town and responsibility of private road
       owners. Inherent in the policy is the potential public cost of accepting and
       maintaining streets as public. Roads may be accepted as public if they are
       improved to public road standards. Private roadways should have maintenance
       agreements among the respective property owners.
                                             GOAL 4
            Many of the Town’s roadways are privately owned and vary in their
             level of maintenance. The Town encourages consistent roadway
                        maintenance and quality throughout the Town.
Policy 4.1       Private roadways should be accepted as public when requested by
                 affected property owners, provided they have been upgraded to current
                 Town standards and where all necessary dedications have been offered
                 by adjacent property owners.
Policy 4.2       For every private road not intended to be dedicated to public ownership,
                 the formation of maintenance agreements among property owners
                 responsible for monitoring and maintaining their respective private
                 roadways should be required.
Policy 4.3       Dedication will be considered only when the road is maintained and, if
                 necessary, improved to a level acceptable to the Town.
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 15

Policy 4.4       Private, gated roadways shall be prohibited.
Policy 4.5       Private road status may be appropriate for new cul-de-sacs serving six or
                 fewer residences. Roads serving seven or more residences may be
                 considered by the Town for dedication as public roads.
Program 4.1      Create and maintain a list of all public and private roads in Town and
                 update as changes occur.
Program 4.2      A sample road maintenance agreement shall be prepared and provided
                 to interested residents on private roads.
Program 4.3      Prepare a policy that establishes standards for conversion of private roads
                 to public roads.
                                      DRIVEWAYS
121.   A driveway is defined as “a way or place in private ownership and used for
       vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from
       the owner but not by other members of the public”. The design of driveways is
       important for safety and aesthetic reasons. Because most development in Los
       Altos Hills is on steep terrain, driveways tend to be long and driveway intersections
       with roadways are more critical than in more urban settings.
                                             GOAL 5
          Driveways should be compatible with the natural terrain, should have
      minimal impact on grades and vegetation, and should be designed to provide
                        safe access to and from the individual parcels.
Policy 5.1       Driveways shall be of a minimum width, as required by the Fire
                 Department in order to accommodate emergency vehicles.
Policy 5.2       New driveways should generally not exceed a maximum grade of fifteen
                 percent in order to allow for safe travel, including access for emergency
                 vehicles.
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 16

Policy 5.3      Driveway design shall allow for adequate and safe development of
                pathways near roads. This will include a roughened surface at pathway
                crossings to allow safe equestrian use.
Policy 5.4      Driveways shall provide safe and adequate ingress and egress to private
                parcels. Driveways shall have adequate sight distance to allow for safe
                entry onto the roadway.
Policy 5.5      Driveway design shall be required to minimize cut and fill and impacts on
                vegetation, consistent with providing for safe access.
Policy 5.6      Driveways should be designed with adequate drainage.
Policy 5.7      Driveways for adjoining properties should be located to provide for
                landscaping space, to protect privacy, and to maintain a safe distance
                between adjacent driveways.
Policy 5.8      Street addresses should be based on the street where the driveway
                access is located.
Program 5.1     Driveway standards shall be incorporated into the Town’s Site
                Development and Subdivision codes.
Program 5.2     The Town may consider exceptions to standards for allowed minimum
                widths and maximum grades in order to limit impact on the natural terrain
                and vegetation.
                                     BIKEWAYS
122.   The bikeways in Los Altos Hills provide for both inter and intra-town travel. Within
       limits imposed by safety, the bikeways vary considerably according to their use
       and the nature of the terrain. The Town has designated two types of bikeways
       within the Town limits: Regional and local (see Figure C-3).
123.   Regional Bikeways. Regional bikeways are designed to provide bicycle routes
       for commuting from residential areas to employment centers and to provide bicycle
       links between communities. These bikeways are generally designated as either
       Class I (roadside paved dedicated bike path) or Class II bicycle facilities (marked
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page C- 17

and signed bike lane on paved road shoulder). Typical users of regional bikeways
are bicycle commuters and experienced recreational cyclists. Arastradero Road,
El Monte Road, Old Page Mill Road and Page Mill Road east of Baleri Ranch Road
are designated as regional bikeways. These regional bikeways correspond to the
County of Santa Clara regional bikeways map which also includes Foothill
Expressway and Magdalena Avenue (roadways at the perimeter of the Town but
not within Los Altos Hills jurisdiction). With the exception of small sections of Page
Mill Road and El Monte Road, the designated regional bikeways within the Town
limits are either Class I or Class II bikeways.
The following provides a summary of the existing bicycle facilities on the
designated regional bikeways within Los Altos Hills:
                                                   Arastradero Road - Class II bikeway in
                                                   both directions from the Page Mill
                                                   Road to Purissima Road. Class I
                                                   bikeway from Purissima Road to the
                                                   Palo Alto City limits.
                                                   El Monte Road – Class I bikeway from
                                                   Moody/Elena Road to Foothill College
                                                   entrance.        Shared bicycle and
                                                   pedestrian path down the middle of the
roadway between Foothill College and
Voorhees Drive (includes the I-280
freeway interchange) with unmarked
paved shoulders with “Share the
Road” signage located at the
beginning of the freeway interchange.
Unsigned and unmarked paved
shoulders from Voorhees Drive to the
Los Altos City Limits.
Old Page Mill Road - Very low-volume
residential roadway that provides a two-way bypass for the Page Mill Expressway.
No bicycle facility signage or road markings.
Page Mill Road - Narrow roadway with no shoulders from Baleri Ranch Road to
Berry Hill Court (approximately 0.1 miles) with “Share the Road” signage in
westbound direction. Erosion from Matadero Creek has resulted in the placement
                        Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                      Page C- 18

     of concrete barriers which further restrict the roadway. Class II bike lane from
     Berry Hill Court to Arastradero Road in both directions. Class II bike lane on the
     westbound direction from Old Page Mill Road to Arastradero Road. Paved
     unmarked shoulder in the eastbound direction from Arastradero Road to the Palo
     Alto City limits.
124. Local Bikeways. Local bikeways are designated as unpaved roadside paths along
     neighborhood connector and collector roadways that provide local residents with
     a means of travel from one neighborhood to another, to local schools and parks,
     or to a regional bikeway. Typical users of local bikeways are Town residents and
     schoolchildren. Widening and/or striping of the paved roadway section on these
     neighborhood connector and collector roads for bike lanes is not contemplated
     because the cost to widen these roadways is prohibitive, the roadways wind
     through hillside terrain, and the established pathway system consists of multi-use,
     roadside pathways.
             Class II Bike Lane on Page Mill Road at
                          Berry Hill Court                               Old Page Mill Road
     In order to accommodate bicyclists, roadside pathways along both sides of the
     paved roadway would be constructed with one side designated for bicycles to
     separate those users from pedestrians and equestrians. Dual roadside pathways
     along Fremont Road from Conception Road to Miranda Road were recently
     completed using Town funds and a grant from the Safe Routes to School program
     in order to improve access to the public elementary school on Fremont Road. A
     second phase (included in the Valley Transportation Plan 2040), is planned for
     Fremont Road from Conception Road to Arastradero Road, which will provide
     improved access to a private school located on Fremont Road (see Figure C-3).
     The Pathways Element in the General Plan currently designates pathways on both
     sides of the road on the following designated local bikeways:
                                    Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                           Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                   Page C- 19
   •   Fremont Road from Edith Avenue to Arastradero Road;
   •   La Paloma Road from Purissima Road to Fremont Road;
   •   Purissima Road from Robleda Road to Arastradero Road.
On Elena Road, where a pathway on both sides is not feasible, a wider, multi-use
path should be provided on one side of the road or as an alternative, provide a
dedicated local bikeway route through Foothill College.
  Roadside Bike Path on Fremont Road                           Widened Multi-use roadside Paved Path
                                                                        on Fremont Road
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 20

Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
      Los Altos Hills General Plan
              Page C- 21
                                            GOAL 6
        Provide for well-maintained, safe bikeways that recognize and encourage
                         safety for bicyclists throughout the Town.
Policy 6.1     Support the provision of safe bicycle
               routes that will encourage safety for
               bicyclists     in      balance         with
               encouraging safety and reducing
               conflicts for all others users of the
               road.
Policy 6.2     The Town shall encourage bikeway
               connections to regional bikeways in
               adjacent jurisdictions.
Policy 6.3     The Town shall support connections to schools with local bikeways and
               paths that are designed in a manner to encourage safety
Policy 6.4     The pathway system should provide for off-road bicycle connections
               between roads where feasible on school access routes to enhance safe
               school access.
Program 6.1    Designated regional bikeways within the road right-of-ways may consist
               of either Class II bike lanes or Class I dedicated paved path separated
               from the roadway with clearly signed bike designations.
Program 6.2    Provide bicycle support facilities, such as lockers or racks, at Town
               buildings and open spaces, where and when a need is demonstrated.
Program 6.3    Implement roadway design which provides safe transitions for bicyclists
               at the edge of the paved surface, including minimal use of curbs and
               obstructions.
Program 6.4    Seek funding to stabilize and repair Page Mill Road near the bridge over
               Matadero Creek and upgrade the roadway to complete the bike lanes on
               Page Mill Road.
Program 6.5    Develop a community awareness program to encourage local use of safer
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page C- 22
                bicycle routes, including referring residents to the Santa Clara County
                Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee’s bicycle route map. The
                Town will include bicycle and pedestrian safety and enforcement when
                developing community awareness programs.
Program 6.6     The Town shall coordinate with Caltrans on future bicycle facility
                improvements to the I-280/Page Mill Road and I-280/El Monte Road
                interchanges.
                                  PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
125.   The Town’s semi-rural setting create an environment where walking on the sides
       of some roadways or road-side paths is enjoyable for many residents. The Town's
       pathway system is extensive and provides for safe and convenient non-vehicular
       travel within Town. School children, walkers, joggers, and equestrians use this
       system extensively. Pedestrian and equestrian paths are generally located along
       neighborhood connector and collector roads. In addition, off-road paths not only
       provide connections via easements, in critical areas where roads are not feasible,
       but also have intrinsic recreational value. The Town’s General Plan includes a
       separate Pathways Element, which thoroughly describes the types of pathways in
       town and identifies separate goals and policies related to the development and
       maintenance of the pathway system.
                                            GOAL 7
               Provide for safe pedestrian routes in appropriate locations.
Policy 7.1      Work with the public and private schools to promote safe driving and
                pedestrian circulation around or near the schools.
Policy 7.2      Ensure that the design of pedestrian improvements is consistent with the
                semi-rural character of the Town.
Program 7.1     Continue to require implementation of the Pathway Element in new
                development and in capital improvements.
Program 7.2     Coordinate with the school district and other entities to develop
                “Suggested Routes to School Plans” for all schools in the Town. Plans
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page C- 23

                shall identify all pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and traffic control devices
                for residents to determine the most appropriate travel routes. The plans
                shall also identify existing easements for potential use for off-street
                pedestrian pathways.
Program 7.3     Consider improvements to pedestrian facilities through Safe Routes to
                Schools or comparable programs to improve pedestrian facilities oriented
                to school children.
Program 7.4     Evaluate safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access in all
                roadway improvement projects, and avoid road improvements that will
                negatively impact the safety and convenience of walking or biking.
Program 7.5     Encourage pedestrian facilities to reflect the semi-rural character of the
                Town, with an emphasis on pathways separated from the roadways rather
                than integrated curbs and sidewalks.
                                    TRAFFIC SAFETY
126.  Neighborhood traffic management includes coordinated enforcement and land use
      planning efforts as well as what is often referred to as "traffic calming." It is noted
      that most of the Town's roadway miles are narrow, hilly and winding, all of which
      tend to keep speeds low. Traffic calming strategies are often implemented in
      residential areas to solve one of two problems: excessive traffic speeds or
      excessive traffic volumes. Residential streets should accommodate local traffic in
      a safe and efficient manner with due regard to surrounding land uses. Excessive
      traffic speed and volume on residential streets leads to local increases in noise
      and air pollution, perceived and real hazards to children and other pedestrians,
      and difficulties in exiting driveways. These issues can frequently be addressed by
      neighborhood traffic management techniques.
127.  Jurisdictions throughout the state are currently using a variety of measures to
      address excessive traffic speeds or excessive traffic volumes on residential
      streets. State law limits the Town’s ability to increase or decrease speed limits
      within its boundaries. Therefore, other means must be used to slow traffic.
128.  Roadway safety may require certain improvements to specific segments of
      roadways and intersections, particularly those that are prone to accidents. These
      locations tend to occur in Los Altos Hills mostly at or near access ramps to and
      from I-280.
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 24

                                           GOAL 8
                      To provide safe roadways for all travelers.
Policy 8.1   The roadway network shall emphasize only minimal through traffic using
             local streets.
Policy 8.2   The Town shall explore the need to upgrade or enhance intersection
             controls at existing controlled intersections, to allow residents improved
             access to through roads.
Policy 8.3   Development of new homes, religious facilities, schools and other land
             uses shall include adequate provision for on-site parking to reduce the
             number of vehicles parked on Town roadways.
Policy 8.4   Town roadway design standards shall emphasize rolled curbs or no curbs
             to provide a safer roadway edge for bicycling, where practical.
Policy 8.5   Pedestrian and equestrian travel shall be separated from roadways by at
             least five feet where practical.
Policy 8.6   Towns site development standards shall emphasize roughening of
             driveways surfaces where crossing pathways.
Policy 8.7   The number of vehicles parked on or along roadways shall be minimal.
Policy 8.8   The Town shall inventory all publicly maintained bridges for the purpose
             of evaluating their safety.
 Program 8.1 The Town should use the following process to address excessive traffic
             speeds or traffic volumes or other safety hazards on the Town's residential
             streets:
                   • Verify whether perceived problems are real (quantify speeds
                       and/or volumes);
                   • Establish design criteria (right-of-way needs, sight distance and
                       signing requirements, etc.) for the subject roadway;
                   • Monitor safety and performance (to determine in field safety of
                       traffic devices); and
                   • Identify funding sources (private versus public).
                             Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 25

Program 8.2        Where a traffic safety problem is identified, the Town should investigate
                   the appropriate use of traffic-calming mechanisms consistent with the
                   Town’s Traffic Calming Guide.
Program 8.3        Assure pathway separation in site development and subdivision review.
Program 8.4        The Town shall discourage excessive numbers of vehicles parked on
                   roadways through design measures that prevent parking such as bollards
                   or natural barriers. Design measures shall reflect the semi-rural character
                   of the Town.
Program 8.5        Maintain a list of all bridges and evaluate their structural integrity.
Program 8.6        When repaving or resurfacing operations occur on collector or arterial
                   streets, consider restriping the roadway to provide a wider shoulder on the
                   uphill portion of the road to provide added room for slower moving
                   bicyclists, provided that motorist and pedestrian safety is not
                   compromised.
Program 8.7        Identify sections of collector and arterial roads that are narrow and could
                   be improved to provide safer pedestrian, bicycling and equestrian
                   passage.
 Equestrian Crossing on Page Mill at Arastradero Road             Page Mill Road near Matadero Creek Crossing
                                    Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page C- 26

                              SCENIC ROADWAY DESIGN
129.   The Town’s roads are an important part of its semi-rural and scenic environment.
       They contribute to the character of the community, providing scenic corridors for
       travel through Town for residents and visitors. With the rugged and often steep
       natural terrain of the Los Altos Hills landscape, all roads within the community have
       scenic qualities. The following objectives and policies apply to every roadway in
       Town.
130.   Signage and markings are important components of effective roadway operations.
       Signage and markings can designate how different users should share limited
       roadway space, designate which facilities are most appropriate for which users,
       and communicate speed and safety information. However, given the semi-rural
       character of the Town, the types of signage and markings found in other
       communities may not always be appropriate for Los Altos Hills. The narrow scale
       of the Town’s roadways and the semi-rural character also suggests a unique set
       of design options for signage and markings.
                                             GOAL 9
          The roadways of Los Altos Hills are scenic and semi-rural. The design
            and maintenance of the roadways should preserve these qualities.
 Policy 9.1     Roadway design shall preserve the Town’s scenic beauty as seen by
                motorists, equestrians, pedestrians, bicyclists and the resident whose
                home is near the road.
 Policy 9.2     The Town shall discourage the widening of any surface roads except
                where critical for safety purposes.
 Policy 9.3     The construction of sound walls is generally prohibited along the Interstate
                280 corridor, but may be considered in conjunction with future noise
                mitigation studies and where located within the state right-of-way.
 Policy 9.4     Particular care should be given to retaining trees and other vegetative
                cover, especially native vegetation and heritage trees. Vegetation should
                not impair roadway safety.
 Policy 9.5     Spacious right-of-ways wide enough so that trees and shrubs can provide
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 27

            a substantial buffer between the roadway and paths and between the
            paths and adjacent properties. The resulting corridor should be pleasing
            and safe for both vehicular and non-vehicular travel. New streetlights shall
            be generally prohibited to avoid light spillover and nuisance to residents.
Policy 9.6  The Town shall request open space easements where necessary to
            ensure the preservation of steep slopes, heritage oak trees, creek areas.
Policy 9.7  All roadway cuts and fills shall be reduced to a minimum for any road
            improvement.
Policy 9.8  Landscape screening may be required for all new development.
Policy 9.9  Off-site directional signs shall be prohibited in the right-of-way, except for
            single, short-term events.
Policy 9.10 The Town should orient and locate roadway signs and markings in a
            manner that does not create a cluttered look. This should not be at the
            expense of safety.
Program 9.1 Institute a program to maintain and enhance native vegetation along
            roadsides, consistent with the need to maintain road edges and pathway
            clearances.
Program 9.2 Impose design standards that restrict the width of the paved portion to a
            minimum consistent with safety for all users in order to maintain the semi-
            rural quality of the roadway.
Program 9.3 Preserve mature street trees, where feasible, when pathways or other
            improvements are added to streets.
Program 9.4 Prepare a program of design standards and implementation measures for
            signage and markings that address the Town’s unique conditions (shall
            comply with MUTCD).
Program 9.5 Signage on designated regional bikeways related to the sharing of the
            roadway should be limited to locations on the edge of Town Limits or at
            major intersections.
                           Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                         Page C- 28

                            EMERGENCY VEHICLE ACCESS
131. The need to provide rapid response to emergencies often competes with the desire
     to maintain narrow semi-rural roadways. Fire and lifesaving vehicles are large and
     must move quickly to be effective. The roads in Los Altos Hills make this
     particularly challenging. The winding nature of the through roads and the
     numerous cul-de-sacs make emergency response difficult. The Town must
     balance its aesthetic qualities with emergency access requirements. The
     objectives and policies set forth below attempt to provide that balance.
132. Emergency roads are designed to provide secondary emergency access to
     residential areas. These roadways, which are usually one lane in width and
     improved only to fire standards, are closed to all except emergency traffic, and
     may allow for foot, equestrian, and bicycle traffic when appropriate easements are
     provided. They are connections between other roads and are used when the
     primary access is cut off during an emergency. The connection between Oak Knoll
     Circle and Dawson Drive is an example of an emergency road. Figure C-4
     illustrates the Town’s existing network of Emergency Roads, as currently
     designated by the Town’s Safety Committee and Fire Department.
                      Fire District Engine on Emergency Vehicle Access Road
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page C- 29

Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
      Los Altos Hills General Plan
              Page C- 30
                                             GOAL 10
      Provide for the most efficient use of roadways for emergency vehicles and for
                              emergency access for residents.
 Policy 10.1    Roadways and driveways shall conform to minimum standards for
                emergency vehicles, generally as recommended by the Fire Department
                and approved by the Town.
 Policy 10.2    All roads shall be easily accessible from intersecting roadways and shall
                have clearly labeled street signs.
 Policy 10.3    All addresses shall be clearly visible at the street. Street addresses should
                be based on the street where the driveway access is located.
 Policy 10.4    In the event of a major disaster, emergency access roads shall be made
                available to neighborhood residents for evacuation purposes or to provide
                for alternative access upon direction of the Incident Commander.
 Policy 10.5    Emergency access roads shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be made
                readily accessible to emergency vehicles during major disasters.
Program 10.1 Emergency roadway connections shall be developed where the distance
                to through streets is excessive, and/or where a second means of
                emergency ingress or egress is critical.
Program 10.2 The Fire Department shall review new development proposals to assure
                adequate emergency access is provided.
Program 10.3 The Town, in conjunction with the Fire District, shall develop a schedule
                for maintaining emergency access roads in functional condition.
                                DRAINAGE AND UTILITIES
133.   The existing drainage system in Los Altos Hills is consistent with the Town’s semi-
       rural character. The Town’s approach to drainage has been to utilize natural
       channels rather than to install pipe drainage systems or to increase creek channel
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 31

       capacities through straightening or widening. Though some drainage channels
       consist of concrete lining and other manmade materials designed to prevent
       downstream or downhill flooding, most drainage features follow topographical
       contours that are either kept in their natural state, or are engineered but
       inconspicuous in nature. This serves to effectively drain water away from adjacent
       properties while preserving the semi-rural residential character of the Town.
                                              GOAL 11
                   Accommodate drainage and utilities in a manner that
                     maintains the semi-rural character of its roadways.
Policy 11.1     Drainage design should be generally compatible with semi-rural
                roadways, developed to complement existing drainage patterns, and
                consistent with “Guidelines and Standards for Land Use Near Streams”
                adopted by the Town in 2007.
Policy 11.2     Concrete channels and other drainage facilities that accelerate runoff shall
                be discouraged.
Policy 11.3     The drainage system shall not burden the natural waterways with road
                pollutants and silt.
Policy 11.4     Drainage shall not create safety hazards for pedestrians, equestrians, or
                bicyclists, or damage to adjacent properties.
Policy 11.5     Drainage shall minimize flooding and erosion impacts on adjacent private
                properties.
Policy 11.6     Open Space easements should be used to preserve natural waterways
                and avoid excessive drainage structures.
Policy 11.7     Utilities shall be placed underground for new development.
Policy 11.8     Utilities, including utility poles, fire hydrants, and utility meters, shall not
                impede the use of pathways.
Program 11.1 Prepare and adopt a set of drainage and pavement design requirements
                                Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page C- 32

                for all roadways. Drainage standards shall generally include roads with
                gravel shoulders, earthen ditches, rocky rivulets, and rolled curbs.
Program 11.2 Identify problem areas and earmark such areas for storm drain
                improvements in the Town’s annual Capital Improvement Project Budget.
                  PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND RIDESHARING
134.  Local Bus Service-the VTA provides local bus service to Foothill College via lines
      along El Monte Road and provides Town residents access to connect to the larger
      system via its stop at the San Antonio Road Transit Center in Los Altos. The
      Foothill College-Mountain View bus route also provides a connection to Caltrain at
      the Mountain View Caltrain station and to the Tasman Light Rail Line. The
      California Avenue Caltrain-Palo Alto Veterans Hospital bus route extends to the
      Hillview/Arastradero intersection, providing service to Town residents located near
      Arastradero Road. The Palo Alto School District provides bus services for
      elementary and junior high school students who reside in Los Altos Hills within the
      district boundaries.
135.  Express Bus Service-the VTA provides express service to Foothill College via
      Interstate 280 and provides access for Town residents to the Stanford Research
      Business Park, Palo Alto and points north. Service is also provided to the main
      transit hubs in Santa Clara Valley to the south.
136.  Paratransit Service-the VTA also provides paratransit service to disabled and
      senior residents on a door-to-door basis. Many Town residents over age 65 may
      be eligible to use this transportation mode.
137.  Park – and - Ride Facilities -a park-and-ride lot is located on the southeast corner
      of the Arastradero Road/I-280 SB Off-Ramp/Page Mill Road intersection. This
      convenient parking lot allows commuters to share rides to and from work.
      Observations found that the lot is well used – on a typical weekday all spaces are
      full, and a number of overflow vehicles are parked on the shoulder of Page Mill
      Road. Improvements to the park and ride facility are being reviewed in conjunction
      with the Santa Clara County Expressway 2040 Plan.
                              Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page C- 33

                                             GOAL 12
      The Town promotes the use of transit and ridesharing to the extent feasible.
Policy 12.1     The Town shall support efforts to provide transit opportunities to residents,
                particularly for seniors and disabled persons.
Policy 12.2     Residents shall be educated regarding availability of alternative
                transportation including transit (both local and express), ridesharing, and
                bicycling.
Program 12.1 Encourage the VTA to improve bus service to Town residents and to
                Foothill College without bringing routes into the interior of Town.
Program 12.2 Promote shuttles for special events (e.g., at Hidden Villa, private parties,
                Fremont Hills Country Club).
Program 12.3 Promote the availability of ParaTransit Services (VTA) in Town for the
                physically handicapped and seniors.
Program 12.4 Evaluate the feasibility of providing a park-and-ride lot at Foothill College.
Program 12.5 Encourage the school districts to reinstate the use of school buses.
Program 12.6 Develop a policy to discourage commuter parking in and around
                residential neighborhoods.
                               REGIONAL COORDINATION
138.   Los Altos Hills is connected to surrounding communities primarily via I-280, Page
       Mill and Foothill Expressways, Arastradero Road, El Monte Road, and Magdalena
       Avenue. Additional connections to Los Altos are provided across Foothill
       Expressway from Edith Avenue and Burke Road. Page Mill Road also connects
       the Town to Route 35 (Skyline Boulevard) on the west.
                               Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 34
       I-280 and Route 101 carry the bulk of north-south peak hour traffic volume in the
       northern Santa Clara-San Mateo County region. I-280 carries the highest level of
       traffic in the Los Altos Hills area. Page Mill Expressway provides access between
       I-280 and the business park uses in Palo Alto just north of Los Altos. Interstate
       280, the I-280/Page Mill Expressway Interchange and Page Mill Expressway
       operate at Level of Service (LOS) E to F during peak commute periods, resulting
                                                     DEFINITION
                                            “Level of Service (LOS)”
                   A standard used to measure the performance of transportation facilities. LOS
                         provides a measure of the operational performance of a roadway or
                     intersection based on a ratio of volume to capacity (V/C) and delay of the
                   facility, and is given a rating from the letter grade A (excellent) to F (failing).
       in some traffic diverting to Arastradero Road. Foothill Expressway operates at
       relatively good service levels, except for some congestion at intersections during
       the peak hour commute periods.
139. City of Palo Alto/Stanford University-the City of Palo Alto and Stanford University are
     served regionally by I-280, Routes 101 and 84, and County G5 and G6 (Foothill
     Expressway and Alma Street). The Palo Alto and Stanford roadway systems remain
     essentially unchanged since the 1960s, yet overall traffic volumes have been
     steadily increasing. Intersections are the most constricted part of the network and
     many are congested during the peak morning and evening travel periods. Some
     intersection improvements have been made over the years, but no major expansions
     of the road network are planned. Many of the plans and policies of the City of Palo
     Alto and Stanford University are directed to alternative travel modes to reduce future
     travel and parking demands. In 2014, the Town began discussions with Caltrans
     and the County of Santa Clara regarding future improvements to the existing I-
     280/Page Mill Road/Arastradero Road Interchange to address traffic delays and
     vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian safety.
140.   City of Los Altos-the City of Los Altos is served regionally by I-280; Routes 101,
       85 and 82; and County G5 (Foothill Expressway). The City is relatively flat with a
       roadway network laid out in a grid system. Much of the travel is north-south
       oriented and carried by arterials within the City, including San Antonio Road, El
       Monte Avenue, Springer Road, Miramonte Avenue and Grant Road. The
       downtown area adjacent to Foothill Expressway/Main Street provides commercial
                                    Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page C- 35

     uses for the residents of both Los Altos and Los Altos Hills. A recently completed
     multi-use trail with ADA accessible ramps connects Town Hall with downtown Los
     Altos and is extensively used by bicyclists, equestrians and pedestrians.
141. County of Santa Clara-the backbone of the County's circulation system is made up
     of freeways, state routes, expressways and arterials, many of which serve the
     surrounding communities as described above. The freeway and state route system
     connect the County to the neighboring counties of San Mateo, Alameda, and Santa
     Cruz. The County's Congestion Management Program (CMP), administered by the
     VTA, provides transportation planning guidance on a countywide basis. The CMP
     has been developed in accordance with California statute. Although the statute is
     imprecise the intent is clear - it is intended to reduce congestion through a
     combination of roadway and transit capital improvements, improved land-use
     planning, and trip reduction and transportation demand management programs.
     The Town is also actively reviewing the Santa Clara County Expressway Plan 2040
     to ensure that future improvements to Page Mill Expressway and Foothill
     Expressway are compatible with the rural character of the community. In addition,
     the Town’s bikeways align with the County’s bikeways map.
142. Regional Transportation Issues-although the Town discourages extraneous
     through traffic, traffic originating from outside of Los Altos Hills has created
     increasing pressure on the local system. Impacts include cut-through traffic,
     isolation of Town residents, and noise issues related to Interstate 280.
143. Cut Though Traffic- the Page Mill Expressway operates at LOS E to F during the
     morning and evening peak commute periods due to the high volume of traffic
     traveling between I-280 and Palo Alto. This traffic also causes congestion at the
     Arastradero Road/Deer Creek Road intersection during the A.M. peak hour period.
     During the evening peak hour period the reverse is true. Although Arastradero
     Road is a through route from I-280 to Palo Alto for commuters, it is classified as a
     collector street within Town (serving abutting residential lots, and carrying traffic
     between neighborhoods and the freeway and Foothill Expressway).
     Some cut through traffic is also apparent on some north-south collector or
     neighborhood connector roads, such as Fremont, Purissima and Elena due to
     congestion on Interstate 280. Fremont Road in particular offers the potential to
     avoid congested sections of Arastradero Road and Foothill Expressway at
     commute hours. No other significant cut-through traffic has been observed. El
     Monte Road and Magdalena Avenue extend through Town as necessary arterials
     between I-280 and Los Altos.
                             Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page C- 36

144.   Isolation of the Town Residents- the Page Mill Expressway carries high volumes
       of traffic, particularly during the morning and evening peak commute periods.
       Access to residential properties using Christopher's Lane and Old Page Mill Road
       is difficult during these periods. Traffic outbound from Old Page Mill Road is limited
       to right turns and, although allowed, it is difficult to turn left into or out of
       Christopher's Lane. Wait times exceed 45 seconds (defined as LOS F). The
       intersection does not meet traffic signal warrants due to the low volumes to/from
       the neighborhood and the installation of a traffic signal would back up traffic onto
       I-280.
145.   I-280 Widening and Noise- although there are no current plans to widen I-280, the
       ever-growing traffic demands in the County and the region may ultimately reach a
       point that widening the freeway is considered. In the meantime, the Town
       occasionally receives complaints regarding noise from I-280, particularly from
       residents of properties abutting the freeway. In response, the Town is encouraging
       Caltrans to prioritize the repaving of Interstate 280 with rubberized asphalt which
       can provide some reduction in road noise.
                                               GOAL 13
                The Town wishes to minimize traffic impacts from present and
                      future activities beyond the control of Los Alto Hills.
Policy 13.1       The Town shall work with regional transportation agencies to coordinate
                  roadway planning, and promote the safe use, improvement and
                  maintenance of regional highways.
Policy 13.2       The Town shall discourage regional and sub-regional traffic from passing
                  through the Town.
Policy 13.3       Los Altos Hills will work with neighboring cities and other agencies to
                  review the environmental impacts of proposed projects, especially in
                  terms of circulation, on the Town. The Town will actively negotiate to
                  reduce those impacts to a level of insignificance.
Program 13.1 Monitor the efforts of the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC)
                  to coordinate transit planning and transit services for the Mid-Peninsula
                  and the Bay Area.
                                 Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page C- 37
Program 13.2 Monitor efforts by Caltrans and the VTA Congestion Management
             Program to reduce congestion and improve traffic flow on freeways. This
             program should also be used to monitor effects on Town roads from
             actions by Palo Alto or Los Altos.
Program 13.3 Establish CEQA thresholds for “significant impacts” of proposed
             development. This will provide neighboring cities and other agencies with
             a measure for impacts of projects to Los Altos Hills. In particular, monitor
             development plans for Stanford lands in Palo Alto and unincorporated
             County areas.
Program 13.4 Emphasize the classification of Arastradero Road and Fremont Road as
             collector streets to provide additional leverage for negotiations as
             neighboring jurisdictions build out.
Program 13.5 Work with State (Caltrans) and County officials on future improvements to
             Page Mill Expressway and the I-280/Page Mill Expressway/Arastradero
             Road interchange to ensure that the improvements are compatible with
             the rural character of the community and improve safety for motorists,
             pedestrians, bicycles, and equestrians.
Program 13.6 Explore additional design solutions for the Christopher’s Lane and Old
             Page Mill Road area.
Program 13.7 Work with the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District to locate
             parking facilities on District lands and to minimize the impact on residents
             of parking for and access to District open space preserves.
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 38

Program 13.8  Work with Foothill
              College to locate
              parking facilities on
              school property and to
              minimize the impact
              on       residents       of
              student parking on
              residential streets.
Program 13.9  Continue to review, on
              an as needed basis,
              the establishment of
              preferential parking districts to alleviate impacts to residents from
              Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District and Foothill College.
Program 13.10 Develop and maintain a traffic calming guide for the implementation of
              traffic calming measures to discourage traffic from using local streets to
              bypass congested intersections.
                            Circulation & Scenic Roadways Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 39
Adopted April 26, 2007
                           Conservation Element
        INTRODUCTION
300.    Residents of Los Altos Hills are committed to protecting the creeks and rolling hills, the
        oak woodlands and chaparral that characterize the community and create one of
        California’s signature landscapes. Maintaining the Town’s character and quality of life
        depends upon the wise management and use of the natural environment and other unique
        resources.
301.    The Conservation Element addresses the protection and management of natural resources
        in the Los Altos Hills planning area. It also addresses the conservation of other unique
        community resources such as historic sites. The element identifies important resources,
        defines conservation policy, and outlines programs for implementation.
302.    This is one of seven elements mandated
        by the state. It satisfies state
        requirements for a Conservation
        Element by including policies pertaining
        to the following subjects:
             • Creeks and riparian areas
             • Trees and plants
             • Wildlife species and habitat
             • Air quality
                                                                                                 Robert Shaw
             • Water resources
             • Soil resources
             • Mineral resources
             • Energy conservation
             • Waste reduction and recycling               Byrne Preserve in the Spring
             • Historic sites and structures
             • Environmental integrity
        For convenience these resources are addressed in separate sections, but their
        interrelationships should be recognized and cherished as part of the area’s ecosystem.
303.    The Conservation Element is closely related to other elements, including the Land Use
        Element, the Open Space and Recreation Element, and the Pathway Element. The
        preservation and use of open space is addressed in the Open Space and Recreation
        Element. Natural hazards are addressed in the Safety Element.
304.    The Conservation Element provides a framework for the conservation and use of natural
        and historic resources. Some aspects of conservation programs can be accomplished
        solely through public efforts, while others can only be realized by appealing to the
        community spirit of the owners of private property within the Town. This element is
        concerned with policies and programs, requiring both public and private action, that will
        conserve and enhance the natural environment and unique qualities of the planning area.
                                      Conservation Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 1

Adopted April 26, 2007
                   CREEKS AND RIPARIAN CORRIDORS
305.    Creeks and their associated riparian corridors are important public assets that provide
        unique ecological, aesthetic, and recreational values to the community. The Los Altos
        Hills stream system contains some of the most intact and valuable riparian habitat in the
        San Francisco Bay region. Many miles of streams and their tributaries flow through the
        Los Altos Hills Planning Area, including unnamed watercourses and the following named
        creeks:
                 •   Adobe Creek
                 •   Barron Creek
                 •   Deer Creek
                 •   Dry Creek
                 •   Hale Creek
                 •   Loyola Creek
                 •   Magdalena Creek
                 •   Matadero Creek
                 •   Purissima Creek
                 •   Permanente Creek
                 •   Robleda Creek
                 •   Summerhill Creek                             Adobe Creek
306.    Creeks and riparian areas are critically important as wildlife habitat and migratory
        corridors. Many of the Town’s riparian areas are contiguous with riparian areas in larger
        adjacent open space preserves such as Rancho San Antonio, Los Trancos, and
        Arastradero, which significantly increases their ecological value. Riparian areas also are
        essential in maintaining creek stability and water quality. Healthy riparian vegetation
        adjacent to watercourses stabilizes steambanks, absorbs water, and filters pollutants.
        Creeks and riparian corridors also provide significant aesthetic and recreational values.
        Many of the stream canyons are essential links in the Town's pathway system.
307.    The presence of invasive, non-native plant species (e.g., Italian thistle, pampas grass, and
        arundo) in riparian corridors has an adverse effect on native vegetation and reduces the
        hydrologic function and wildlife value. Timely removal of invasive species will preserve
        the quality and function of riparian areas and avoid much more expensive restoration
        expenses in the future.
308.    Owners of property intersected by creeks and riparian corridors are faced with a
        confusing array of requirements and restrictions by various agencies. A clear set of
        guidelines and standards for riparian corridors would make the planning process more
        objective and ensure that General Plan goals and policies are carried out.
                                       Conservation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 2

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                         GOAL 1
           Conserve creeks and riparian areas as open space amenities
                              and natural habitat areas.
        Policy 1.1     Avoid fencing, piping, and channelization of creeks when flood
                       control and public safety can be achieved through measures that
                       preserve the natural environment and habitat of the creek.
        Policy 1.2     Work with the Santa Clara Valley Water District and other
                       relevant regional agencies to enhance riparian corridors and
                       provide adequate flood control by use of low impact restoration
                       strategies.
        Policy 1.3     Preserve the integrity of riparian corridors as unique and
                       environmentally sensitive resources.
        Program 1.1    Continue to require that structures be set back at least 25 feet from the
                       top of creek banks. To ensure adequate protection of these valuable
                       resources, review the 25-foot setback and consider expanding it to the
                       driplines of mature oak trees within the setback.
        Program 1.2    Continue to require open space easements along creeks and riparian
                       corridors to ensure that these areas remain in their natural condition.
        Program 1.3    Continue to comply with the requirements of CEQA (California
                       Environmental Quality Act) for proposed development that might
                       impact creeks and riparian corridors. Other relevant local, state and
                       federal agencies including the Santa Clara Valley Water District, the
                       Regional Water Quality Control Board, the California Department of
                       Fish and Game, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers are consulted
                       as appropriate.
        Program 1.4    Develop a comprehensive riparian policy that compiles and clarifies all
                       relevant requirements for affected property owners.
                                    Conservation Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page 3
Adopted April 26, 2007
                                 TREES AND PLANTS
309.    Oak woodlands and chaparral form the predominant vegetative communities on the
        hillsides leading up to Monte Bello Ridge and Kaiser Ridge. They serve to prevent
        erosion and protect the quality of the watershed. These wooded areas also support a wide
        variety of animal life.
310.    Three other significant vegetative types that occur within the planning area are mixed oak
        woodlands, chaparral, and grassland-savanna areas. Generally, the oak woodlands tend
        to support a higher diversity of organisms than do grasslands. The chaparral areas
        represent a particularly high fire hazard during the dry seasons of the year.
311.    Several species of rare, threatened, or endangered plants such as Santa Cruz Manzanita
        and Western Leatherwood have the potential to occur in the Los Altos Hills planning
        area. The potential locations for these species are primarily within the grassland and
        chaparral habitats in the foothills.
                                                                 Heritage Oak Tree at
                                                                O’Keefe Lane Preserve
             Jitze Couperus
                                                          HERITAGE TREES
                                          Trees are a valuable asset to the community
                                          because they beautify landscapes, increase property
                                          value, improve air quality, and reduce energy
                                          consumption. The Town’s Heritage Tree Ordinance
                                          protects large oaks and other trees determined to be
                                          of special significance. The tree ordinance requires
                                          a permit to remove any tree defined as a Heritage
                                          Oak or Heritage Tree.
                                         Conservation Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 4

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                            GOAL 2
                    Protect native and naturalized trees and plants.
        Policy 2.1      Minimize disturbance of the natural terrain and vegetation.
        Policy 2.2      Preserve and protect native and naturalized plants, with special
                        attention to preservation of unique, rare or endangered species and
                        plant communities such as oak woodlands.
        Policy 2.3      Preserve and protect Heritage Trees, including native oaks and other
                        significant trees, on public and private property.
        Policy 2.4      Encourage the planting of native trees and shrubs to provide a
                        substantial buffer between the roadways and adjoining properties in
                        harmony with the general character of the Town.
        Policy 2.5      Encourage the removal and prevention of the spreading of
                        aggressive exotics such as Italian thistle, stinkweed, pampas grass,
                        acacia, yellow star thistle, French broom, Scotch broom and
                        eucalyptus.
        Policy 2.6      Encourage the removal of poison oak where allowed by law.
        Policy 2.7      Avoid the development of environmentally sensitive areas that are
                        rich in wildlife or of a fragile ecological nature, such as areas of rare
                        or endangered species of plants, or riparian areas.
        Program 2.1     Continue to enforce the Heritage Tree Ordinance, which protects large
                        oak trees and other significant trees by requiring a special permit for
                        removal.
        Program 2.2     Continue to require the replacement of any Heritage Oaks or other
                        significant trees that are removed under special permit or as part of
                        approved development projects.
        Program 2.3     Continue to limit development within the dripline of Heritage Oaks.
        Program 2.4     Continue to refer site development applications to the Environmental
                        Design Committee and Open Space Committee for review and comment.
        Program 2.5     Encourage the dedication of conservation/open space easements or the
                        public acquisition of areas that are rich in wildlife or of a fragile
                        ecological nature to ensure their protection.
        Program 2.6     In the landscaping of individual sites and replanting where original
                        vegetation has been destroyed or removed, encourage the use of native
                        rather than exotic plants. In those areas of high fire risk, however, it may
                        be preferable to introduce carefully chosen exotics with high fire
                        resistance characteristics.
        Program 2.7     Develop a program to manage and control invasive species, particularly
                        along creeks and their associated riparian corridors.
                                       Conservation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 5
Adopted April 26, 2007
                        WILDLIFE SPECIES AND HABITAT
312.    The open space areas in and around Los Altos Hills provide habitat for a wide range of
        wildlife, including mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and insects. Some of the most
        common mammals include the cottontail rabbit, hare, black-tail deer, western gray
        squirrel, opossum, red fox, gray fox, raccoon, coyote, and bobcat. Common birds include
        the red-shouldered hawk, barn owl, acorn woodpecker, western scrub-jay, turkey vulture,
        and California quail.
313.    A number of species have been identified by federal and state governments as
        endangered, threatened, or sensitive and may be present in the Los Altos Hills planning
        area. These include the California Red-legged Frog, the Northwestern Pond Turtle, and
        Cooper’s Hawk.
314.    In the past, development occurred with little conscious regard for impacts on wildlife
        habitat, sometimes with the result that natural species were driven out. Today the open
        space areas in and around Los Altos Hills are relatively undisturbed and serve as habitat
        for a diverse wildlife population. Conservation of this habitat is not only important for
        the protection of wildlife, but also for the conservation of the semi-rural atmosphere of
        the community. To protect areas of significant wildlife habitat, such as creeks and
        riparian corridors, the dedication of conservation/open space easements should be
        encouraged.
315.    There is a need for planning to provide for effective protection and conservation of the
        Town’s wildlife heritage, while continuing to allow appropriate development and land
        use. Planning for natural movement of wildlife can help to avoid, minimize and
        compensate for serious negative impacts on wildlife and humans. Areas that link wildlife
        habitat have become vital because native animals such as deer, fox, bobcat and coyote are
        prevented by roads, fences, homes, and other development from moving freely as they
        once did.
316.    Wildlife move through the planning area along natural passageways, particularly along
        creeks and riparian areas that provide sources of food, water and shelter. Many of these
        are already Open Space Conservation Areas that protect wildlife and ecologically
        significant habitat.
                                       Conservation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 6

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                            GOAL 3
                Maintain and enhance the integrity of wildlife habitat.
        Policy 3.1     Maintain and protect creeks and riparian corridors for wildlife that
                       use this resource for food, shelter, migration and breeding.
        Program 3.1    Continue to require open space easements along creeks and riparian
                       corridors.
        Program 3.2    Inventory wildlife habitat areas and the suite of animals in those areas.
        Program 3.3    Assess the potential for development patterns to fragment and isolate
                       significant wildlife habitats.
                                      Conservation Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 7
Adopted April 26, 2007
                                       AIR QUALITY
317.    Air quality is a regional issue that does not respect jurisdictional boundaries. Every city
        and county in the Bay Area must accept a portion of the responsibility for addressing air
        quality problems. Although air quality in the San Francisco Air Basin has improved
        considerably since the 1970s, the area still does not meet California Air Resource Board
        (CARB) standards for carbon monoxide (CO) and particulate matter smaller than 10
        microns in diameter (PM-10s).
318.    Motor vehicles are the primary source of air pollution in Los Altos Hills and the Bay
        Area. Other sources include road dust, construction and grading activities, wood-burning
        stoves and fireplaces.
                                             GOAL 4
                                     Improve air quality.
        Policy 4.1       Support regional, state, and federal programs that improve air
                         quality in the Bay Area.
        Program 4.1      Encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation by maintaining
                         and developing the Town’s pathways system for bicyclists, pedestrians
                         and equestrians.
        Program 4.2      Require all new fireplace inserts to comply with EPA-approved
                         standards.
        Program 4.3      Monitor construction and grading activities to control dust.
                     Pathways encourage alternative
                              modes of transportation.
                                        Conservation Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 8

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                 WATER RESOURCES
319.    Conservation of water resources encompasses a broad range of issues, ranging from
        water supply and water quality to the protection of groundwater and surface water feature
        like San Francisco Bay. Policies and programs and needed to ensure that a healthful,
        reliable supply of water remains available in the future.
        DRINKING WATER
320.    The Town’s drinking water is provided by two water suppliers: Purissima Hills Water
        District and the California Water Service Company (Cal Water). Purissima Hills Water
        District is a public agency that provides water to residents in the northern two-thirds of
        Los Altos Hills; Cal Water is an investor-owned utility that serves the remaining area. A
        few residents supplement their water supply with well water.
321.    The amount of water available is constrained. Purissima Hills presently obtains all of its
        water from San Francisco’s Hetch Hetchy system and is exceeding its supply assurance
        by 25-35 percent. Capacity limitations in the Hetch Hetchy system may be reached in six
        to eight years, or sooner in times of drought. Cal Water obtains the water supplied to Los
        Altos Hills from the Santa Clara Valley Water District via pipelines from the SCVWD’s
        Rincoñada treatment plant and from company-owned wells. During the dry season, the
        plant and pipelines are at capacity.
322.    When system capacity limits are reached, or in times of drought, water use may be
        subject to rationing or other restrictions. Purissima Hills may be limited to its contractual
        allotment, and Cal Water may have to implement some restrictions based on the supply
        available during drought or other occasions of constrained supply. Landscaping that is
        heavily dependent on irrigation may not survive.
323.    Over two-thirds of all water used each year in the Purissima Hills Water District is for
        irrigation of landscaping. During the summer dry season (June through September) water
        used for landscaping on average is five times that of the rainy season.
324.    To encourage the conservation of water resources, Purissima Hills has established a
        progressive, multi-tiered rate structure. In addition, Purissima Hills and Cal Water have
        implemented programs such as the provision of homeowner assistance in water
        management and the distribution of water-efficient appliances. These water conservation
        programs have the added benefit of reducing energy consumption. Statewide, pumping
        water is the leading use of electrical power. For Purissima Hills Water District, the cost
        of power is a significant expenditure, trailing only the costs for water and manpower.
        GROUNDWATER
325.    Groundwater in the Los Altos Hills planning area is contained in both shallow and deep
        aquifers formed in the alluvial deposits of streams running from the foothills to the San
        Francisco Bay. Groundwater recharge occurs mostly naturally, through rainfall. Some
        areas have higher recharge rates than others, depending on factors like soil porosity, clay
        content, and depth to bedrock. In the Santa Clara Valley, the areas with the highest
        recharge rates tend to be along the creeks and on the western edge of the valley floor, just
        below the toe of the foothills. In the past, wells have supplied water to Town residents
        during times of drought.
                                         Conservation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 9

Adopted April 26, 2007
        SURFACE WATER
326.    Surface water bodies in and around Los Altos Hills include lakes, creeks and San
        Francisco Bay. Lakes include Quarry Lake, as well as Boronda Lake in Foothills Park
        and Arastradero Lake in the Arastradero Preserve (both located in Palo Alto). Four major
        creeks—Matadero, Hale, Barron, and Adobe—run from the foothills to the San Francisco
        Bay estuary system. In addition to the natural drainage system, a network of storm drains
        collects runoff from streets and roads in Los Altos Hills and carries it to the creeks and
        San Francisco Bay.
327.    The primary source of water pollution in Los Altos Hills is urban runoff. Runoff from
        streets, parking lots and private yards may contain oil, grease, pesticides and herbicides,
        heavy metals, paints and household chemicals, construction materials, sediment and
        eroded soil. Automobiles are a major source of many of these pollutants. Ultimately,
        these pollutants end up in creeks and in San Francisco Bay, where they have caused
        substantial water quality degradation. To improve the quality of stormwater runoff, the
        Town actively participates in the Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention
        Program.
                           Best Management Practices for Water Quality
             The following Best Management Practices (BMPs) can help control the use of pollutants
                                   and prevent their discharge into the environment.
            For Residents:                                   For Contractors:
            • Proper storage, use and disposal of            • Proper methods of paving, construction
                hazardous household cleaners, fertilizers,        and painting
                pesticide, and garden supplies               • Use of environmentally safe materials
            • Participation in household hazardous waste     • Proper methods of delivery and storage of
                collection programs                               materials
            • Recycling of motor oil and anti-freeze         • Responsible management and disposal of
            • Refraining from illegal dumping                     solid waste, contaminated soil, and
            • Reducing vehicle use                                concrete waste
            • Reducing discharges from car washing and       • Erosion control measures
                maintenance                                  • Proper sanitary sewer and septic waste
                                                                  management
                                             Conservation Element
                                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                     Page 10

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                           GOAL 5
                        Protect and conserve water resources.
        Policy 5.1     Keep or restore major drainage courses in their natural condition
                       insofar as possible because of their importance in supplying major
                       vegetation, land forms and wildlife habitat, and storm drainage.
        Policy 5.2     Protect the Town’s groundwater from the adverse impacts of urban
                       uses.
        Policy 5.3     Encourage the conservation and efficient use of water in new and
                       existing residences.
        Policy 5.4     Work with Purissima Hills Water District and Cal Water Service
                       Company in their efforts to encourage water conservation.
        Policy 5.5     Reduce non-point source pollution in urban runoff.
        Program 5.1    Encourage the maintenance of adequate groundwater supplies by
                       providing information on retention ponds, vegetative swales, and
                       unpaved drainage ditches.
        Program 5.2    In the planning, environmental impact review, and completion of all land
                       development or land alteration projects, direct particular attention toward
                       the protection of the natural water system.
        Program 5.3    Work with water purveyors to inform homeowners of their potential
                       water usage in new landscape projects and to recognize the benefits of
                       water efficient landscapes without significant burden to the homeowners.
        Program 5.4    Consider incentives for property owners meeting certain water
                       conservation criteria and incentives to encourage water retention ponds,
                       water reuse and recycling, vegetated swales and other approved methods
                       of runoff control.
        Program 5.5    Continue to promote water conservation through public education.
        Program 5.6    Actively participate in programs such as the Santa Clara Valley Urban
                       Runoff Pollution Prevention Program to improve the quality of
                       stormwater runoff.
        Program 5.7    Continue to implement the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Ordinance.
        Program 5.8    Develop and implement public education programs on water quality
                       issues, including Best Management Practices (BMPs) for residents,
                       contractors and Town employees.
        Program 5.9    Continue to limit the amount of impervious surface in new development
                       to reduce urban runoff into storm drains, creeks and the San Francisco
                       Bay.
                                      Conservation Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 11

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                    SOIL RESOURCES
328.    Soil, a mixture of mineral and organic matter, is produced very slowly as native rock
        surfaces are eroded by wind, water and gravity. Soil sustains plant life, is an important
        natural resource, and is a crucial part of the ecosystem. High-quality topsoil can easily be
        harmed by human activities and can lose its life-sustaining capabilities or be lost to
        erosion and sedimentation if it is not cared for properly.
329.    Soil erosion occurs when soils are removed from their original location and transported
        by wind, water and gravity. Erosion causes the loss of fertile topsoil, carves deep ruts
        and gullies, and fills in creeks and marsh lands. Soils settle and accumulate in a
        particular location during sedimentation. Erosion and sedimentation are natural
        processes that can speed up when grading and other construction work are done,
        especially when the work is done near creeks or during the rainy season. Plants shield
        the soil and bind it together, helping to prevent erosion. It is also important to use proper
        grading and construction techniques to prevent erosion.
330.    Soils can be contaminated when chemicals or other pollutants are improperly released
        and the soil becomes toxic or harmful to plants, animals and people. The improper use of
        chemical pesticides and herbicides, as well as spills and leaks can contaminate soils.
                                              GOAL 6
                           Protect and conserve soil resources.
        Policy 6.1       Encourage soil stabilization measures that mitigate soil erosion and
                         sedimentation.
        Policy 6.2       Ensure the proper use, storage and disposal of toxic chemicals to
                         prevent soil contamination.
        Policy 6.3       Minimize the removal of vegetation and require replanting to
                         maintain soil stability, prevent erosion, and retain the aesthetic
                         quality of the community.
        Program 6.1      Protect and preserve native plant communities next to creeks to help
                         prevent erosion.
        Program 6.2      Continue to require erosion control measures on construction sites.
        Program 6.3      Reduce the use of pesticides and herbicides on Town-owned properties
                         to the extent possible.
        Program 6.4      Prohibit the dumping of any waste material that may harm or destroy soil
                         quality and character.
        Program 6.5      Ensure that proposed septic systems meet the health and safety standards
                         of Santa Clara County so that soil and groundwater pollution does not
                         occur.
                                         Conservation Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 12
Adopted April 26, 2007
                                MINERAL RESOURCES
331.    Mineral resources that have been found and extracted in the planning area are primarily
        construction aggregate deposits. Neary Quarry, which supplied base rock for the
        construction of Moffett Field and crushed rock for Highways 101 and 280, is no longer in
        operation. In 1996 the Town approved the subdivision of Neary Quarry, which has since
        been developed with single-family homes. Permanente Quarry owned by Hanson
        Cement and Gypsum Company is still in operation. The Permanente Quarry is located on
        unincorporated lands in Santa Clara County, within the Sphere of Influence of the City of
        Cupertino. The operation is of concern to residents of Los Altos Hills because of its
        proximity and potential impacts on the surrounding area, particularly Kaiser Ridge.
332.    The preservation of Kaiser Ridge, located within the Cupertino Sphere of Influence, will
        depend on efforts by the City of Cupertino and Santa Clara County to regulate the
        operation of Hanson Cement and Gypsum Company. The Town should support
        Cupertino and the County in these efforts and should keep abreast of the quarrying
        aspects of the Hanson Gypsum operation to ensure that the skyline that has been quarried
        is rehabilitated.
                                              GOAL 7
                  Minimize environmental impacts of the extraction
                            and transport of mineral resources.
        Policy 7.1        In the context of the local physical situation, the extraction of rock,
                          sand, gravel and mineral resources shall be permitted only when
                          compatible with goals for maintaining a quality environment.
        Policy 7.2        Minimize all potentially adverse environmental impacts from
                          extraction and transport of mineral resources, including, but not
                          limited to:
                              •   Nuisances such as dust, odor, debris and noise.
                              •   Disruption and damage to natural features, such as
                                  ground cover, topography, drainage, habitat,
                                  groundwater, and related issues.
                              •   Increased traffic volumes and damage to road surfaces.
        Policy 7.3        Ensure the reclamation of mineral resource extraction sites for safe,
                          attractive and beneficial future use.
                                         Conservation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 13

Adopted April 26, 2007
                              ENERGY CONSERVATION
333.    Californians have become more energy conscious since the energy crisis of the 1970s.
        The escalating cost of energy and the ever-decreasing availability of fuel sources have
        impelled government agencies to conserve energy and look for alternatives to the use of
        non-renewable resources.
334.    The Town of Los Altos Hills demonstrated its commitment to energy efficiency and the
        use of solar power when the new $4.5 million Town Hall was constructed in 2005.
        Reduced energy and water consumption were major objectives in the building’s design.
        The new Town Hall features a 30 kW photovoltaic system, which supplies approximately
        half of the electrical energy used by the municipal center annually. The solar system was
        made possible in part by a grant from the Packard Foundation of Los Altos. Another
        feature of the building is the use of natural day-lighting, including strategically placed
        solar light tubes to reduce electrical lighting load.
                                                                     New energy-efficient Town Hall
                                                                     includes drought-tolerant
                                                                     landscaping.
                                   Solar panels supply about
                                   half of the electrical needs
                                                  at Town Hall.
335.    To encourage the use of solar power, Los Altos Hills has developed the following
        incentives:
                 •    Building permit fees are waived for the construction or
                      installation of solar energy generation equipment.
                 •    For ground-mounted photovoltaic systems, up to 500 square
                      feet may be exempt from development area calculations.
                 •    For roof-mounted photovoltaic systems, a bonus of up to 500
                      square feet of development area may be granted.
        Other measures may be proposed by the Environmental Initiatives Committee, a standing
        committee charged with the development of incentives for energy conservation and other
        environmental objectives.
                                           Conservation Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page 14

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                          GOAL 8
                Promote energy-efficient construction and the use of
                              alternative energy sources.
        Policy 8.1     Promote the incorporation of energy conservation measures in new
                       construction.
        Policy 8.2     Encourage active and passive solar energy design in building and site
                       development.
        Policy 8.3     Expand the use of alternative fuels for Town vehicles by purchasing
                       hybrids and other fuel-efficient vehicles.
        Program 8.1    Incorporate energy efficiency measures in new Town facilities.
        Program 8.2    Continue to develop and offer incentives for energy conservation.
                                The Town’s hybrid vehicles
                                      are fuel efficient.
                                     Conservation Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page 15

Adopted April 26, 2007
                    WASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING
336.    Reducing waste provides direct and indirect environmental benefits including cleaner air
        and water, reduced resource and energy use, and a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
        California’s Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 set an ambitious goal for cities to
        divert 50 percent of all solid waste from landfills
        by 2000 through source reduction, recycling,
        and composting. The law also requires cities to
        adopt Source Reduction and Recycling Plans
        that specify how they will achieve the waste
        reduction goals. Los Altos Hills adopted such a
        source reduction plan in 1994.
337.    Los Altos Garbage Company (LAGCo) provides
        residential and commercial garbage and
        curbside recycling services to the residents of
        Los Altos Hills. In cooperation with the Town,
        LAGCo has recently started single-stream
        recycling, making it possible to use a single
        container for all recyclables rather than sorting
        them into different containers.
                                              GOAL 9
                            Reduce the amount of solid waste
                                generated in Los Altos Hills.
        Policy 9.1       Promote source reduction and recycling throughout the community.
        Program 9.1      Continue to implement the Town’s 1994 Source Reduction and
                         Recycling Element.
        Program 9.2      In Town purchasing, encourage the purchase of products that minimize
                         packaging, contain recycled materials, and can be reused or recycled.
        Program 9.3      Consider supporting new ideas and innovative proposals that will
                         promote recycling and other environmentally sound practices.
        Program 9.4      Continue to work with Los Altos Garbage Company to implement
                         single-stream recycling and other ways to encourage waste reduction and
                         recycling.
                                         Conservation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 16

Adopted April 26, 2007
                     HISTORIC SITES AND STRUCTURES
338.    The preservation of historic sites and structures helps maintain and enhance the unique
        character of Los Altos Hills. Some of the sites listed below have already been recognized
        for their historic importance and are registered state historic landmarks. However, the
        historic importance of all sites listed below should be preserved in a manner most
        appropriate to the individual site.
339.    The Town should explore the possibility of having existing historic structures designated
        as state historical landmarks. Historic sites without structures may have to be purchased
        if the Town determines that historic significance warrants preservation in a natural state.
        In any case, the historic significance of all sites should be evaluated prior to development.
        At minimum, if the site is found to be of some historic significance, provision for historic
        commemoration should be required as part of development. In addition, the Town should
        establish a program for the evaluation and preservation of historical sites.
340.    While it is the intent to preserve identified resources for the benefit of the Town, it is
        recognized that there will be circumstances where it will not always be possible to
        achieve preservation. Such determinations cannot always be made in advance and
        therefore prudent decisions must be made when individual resources are before the Town
        for action.
341.    An inventory of historic sites and structures in the Los Altos Hills planning area is listed
        in Appendix A. The inventory is intended to be reviewed on a regular basis and updated
        as needed.
                                          Heritage House
     Formerly the Eschenbruecher House in Los Altos, the building was donated to the
     Town and moved to its present site adjacent to Town Hall in 1984. To acquaint
     today's residents and visitors with the early 1900s character of the Town, apricot
     and prune trees were planted behind the building, where a collection of vintage
     farm equipment is on public display.
                                         Conservation Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 17
Adopted April 26, 2007
                                            GOAL 10
               Encourage both public and private efforts to preserve
                             and enhance historic resources.
        Policy 10.1    Preserve, protect and enhance the historic resources of the planning
                       area because they are unique and valuable assets for the community
                       and region.
        Policy 10.2    Promote community awareness of local history and historic
                       resources for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the
                       Town.
        Program 10.1   Continue to develop a comprehensive inventory and map of historically
                       significant sites and structures. Review Appendix A at least every five
                       years and update the inventory as appropriate. Consider adding the
                       following sites and structures: Heritage House, Finn House, Westwind
                       Community Barn, Packard House, Hidden Villa, Ginzton House, Lois
                       Crozier Hogle House, Fremont Hills Country Club Water Tower, Jensen
                       House and Barn, Eshner House, and Stegner House on South Fork.
                       The Mills Act is a state law that provides an
                       economic incentive for the restoration and
                       preservation of qualified historic buildings by
                       private property owners. Enacted in 1972, the
                       Mills Act enables participating cities and
                       counties to enter into contracts with owners of
                       qualified historic properties. The contracts grant
                       property tax relief to owners who agree to
                       restore and maintain their historic properties.
                                       Conservation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 18
Adopted April 26, 2007
                            ENVIRONMENTAL INTEGRITY
341.    The impacts of human development on the natural environment are complex and
        constantly changing. This section protects the overall integrity of the environment with
        policies and programs that reduce or mitigate the negative impacts of development in
        order to make today’s health, economic and aesthetic benefits available to future
        generations.
                                            GOAL 11
         Promote and enhance the integrity of the natural environment.
        Policy 11.1     Develop and implement programs by which the natural
                        environmental features of the planning area can be conserved to the
                        maximum extent feasible and by which areas already unduly
                        disturbed by man can be returned to a more natural condition.
        Policy 11.2     Ensure that in the planning, development and use of land,
                        environmental impact is not overlooked, conservation actions are
                        considered, and such evaluations and actions are sufficiently
                        comprehensive and consistent with established guidelines.
        Policy 11.3     Conserve the natural character of the planning area in any land
                        development project.
        Policy 11.4     Ensure that the scale of building, the siting of development, the
                        design and the materials of construction are harmonious with the
                        natural setting.
        Policy 11.5     Ensure that development projects are designed to conserve the
                        natural slope, preserve existing native vegetation, limit invasive
                        species, and conserve natural drainage channels and swales.
        Policy 11.6     Participate in and support the conservation efforts of other
                        jurisdictions, agencies or organizations that are of mutual benefit to
                        the Town.
        Policy 11.7     Support conservation education programs in the local schools and,
                        when necessary to respond to local problems, initiate and implement
                        specific educational programs or campaigns.
        Program 11.1    Environmental Monitoring – Develop a procedure for monitoring known
                        or potential environmental problems to ensure that irreversible damage
                        will not occur. Examples of problems that should be monitored include
                        stream siltation, pollution of subsurface and surface waters, soil erosion,
                        the potential or imminent danger associated with fire hazard areas (in
                        conjunction with the Santa Clara County Fire Department), soil
                        contamination, and the potential or imminent danger from landslides and
                                       Conservation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 19

Adopted April 26, 2007
                       other effects of land instability. The extent of monitoring activity that
                       can be conducted is constrained by financial limitations. To the extent
                       possible, Town staff should work with informed and concerned citizens
                       to establish a basic procedure for identifying and tracking the existing or
                       potential problems of greatest concern.
        Program 11.2   Specific Remedial Activities – In some cases, remedial activities may
                       require the participation of all segments of the community in order to be
                       effective. In most cases, however, individual initiative by local residents
                       and property owners will be sufficient to carry out specific efforts for
                       protection of the environment, such as:
                                •    Replanting to prevent erosion
                                •    Control or elimination of exotic weed species or
                                     undesirable trees and plants
                                •    Minimal use of herbicides and pesticides to avoid
                                      contamination of soil and water
                                •    Removal of dead vegetation to reduce fire hazard
                                •    Replacement of highly flammable vegetation with less
                                     flammable materials
                                •    Use of native plants in preference to exotics in replanting
                                •    Treatment or removal of diseased or hazardous trees
                                •    Protection of streamside vegetation
                       These activities may require Town review and approval if they are
                       proposed as part of specific development projects. In cases where the
                       extent of the problem includes an area larger than an individual
                       ownership, cooperative or coordinated effort will be needed. For
                       example, activities such as the removal of any long-standing obstruction
                       to natural drainage or the restoration of stream banks require review and
                       coordination by the Town.
        Program 11.3   Public Education – Town Hall should serve as a basic source of
                       information on local environmental issues and conservation programs.
                       Town staff, elected officials and committees such as the Open Space
                       Committee and the Environmental Design Committee should encourage
                       efforts to educate the public with regard to the conservation of natural
                       resources in Los Altos Hills.            When other public agencies or
                       conservation groups are sponsoring information sessions on subjects of
                       mutual concern, the Town should assist in publicizing events. This can
                       be done through publications that are made available at Town Hall or
                       through notices posted on the website or bulletin boards at Town Hall.
                                      Conservation Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 20

TOWN OF LOS ALTOS HILLS
  GENERAL PLAN
 HOUSING ELEMENT
        UPDATE
        2015-2023
    ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON
             APRIL 20, 2015
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................... HE-1
     Role of Housing Element .............................................................................................................. 2
     Housing Element Planning Period ................................................................................................ 2
     Local Housing Issues .................................................................................................................... 2
     Relationship to the General Plan................................................................................................... 3
     Public Participation ....................................................................................................................... 3
     Organization of the Housing Element ........................................................................................... 5
     Data Sources ................................................................................................................................. 5
EVALUATION OF THE 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT.................................................. HE-7
POPULATION, HOUSING, AND EMPLOYMENT TRENDS................................... HE-10
     Demographics ............................................................................................................................ 11
             Population Growth ......................................................................................................... 11
             Age Characteristics ........................................................................................................ 12
             Ethnic Diversity ............................................................................................................. 12
     Households and Residential Units ........................................................................................... 13
             Number of Households .................................................................................................. 13
             Household Size ............................................................................................................. .14
             Families.......................................................................................................................... 14
     Residential Unit Types and Occupancy .................................................................................. 14
             Vacancies ....................................................................................................................... 15
             Tenure ............................................................................................................................ 15
             Overcrowding ................................................................................................................ 15
     Household Income..................................................................................................................... 16
             Income Groups ............................................................................................................... 16
             Poverty Level ................................................................................................................. 16
             Households Overpaying for Housing............................................................................. 17
     Housing Stock ............................................................................................................................ 17
             Age of Housing Stock .................................................................................................... 17
             Incomplete Plumbing ..................................................................................................... 18
             Housing Unit Value ....................................................................................................... 18
     Labor Force ............................................................................................................................... 19
             Employment Composition ............................................................................................. 19
             Employment Location.................................................................................................... 19
             Employment Projections ................................................................................................ 19
HOUSING NEEDS ........................................................................................................... HE-20
     Satisfaction of Regional Fair Share ......................................................................................... 21
                                               2015-2023 Housing Element
                                               Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                            Page TC-1
    Population Groups with Special Needs ................................................................................... 25
            Elderly Persons .............................................................................................................. 25
            Large Households .......................................................................................................... 26
            Farmworkers .................................................................................................................. 27
            Female Headed Households........................................................................................... 27
            Persons with Disabilities ................................................................................................ 27
            Students.......................................................................................................................... 28
            Emergency Shelter ......................................................................................................... 28
CONSTRAINTS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ......................................................................................... HE-29
    Constraints to Housing ............................................................................................................. 29
    Environmental Constraints ...................................................................................................... 29
            Slope and Soil ................................................................................................................ 30
            Seismic Motion .............................................................................................................. 30
            Flood Zones ................................................................................................................... 31
            Wildland Fire ................................................................................................................. 31
    Economic Constraints ............................................................................................................... 31
            Land Costs ..................................................................................................................... 32
            Construction Costs ......................................................................................................... 32
            Financing Costs.............................................................................................................. 32
    Governmental Constraints ....................................................................................................... 33
            Land Use Controls ......................................................................................................... 33
            Residential Design Standards ........................................................................................ 34
            Development Review and Processing Time Frames...................................................... 37
            Development and Permit Fees ....................................................................................... 38
    Infrastructure Constraints ....................................................................................................... 39
            Circulation System ......................................................................................................... 39
            Storm Drainage .............................................................................................................. 40
            Wastewater Treatment ................................................................................................... 40
            Fire Protection................................................................................................................ 41
            Police Protection ............................................................................................................ 41
            Water Supply ................................................................................................................. 41
            School Districts .............................................................................................................. 42
            Public Transportation ..................................................................................................... 43
            Commercial Services ..................................................................................................... 43
    Opportunities for Housing ....................................................................................................... 43
            Vacant and Underutilized Parcels .................................................................................. 43
            Sites Suitable For Low and Moderate Priced Housing .................................................. 43
            Sites Suitable for Residential Second Units................................................................... 44
            Annexation of Sites Suitable for Development.............................................................. 44
            Sites Suitable For Manufactured Housing and Mobile Homes ...................................... 45
                                            2015-2023 Housing Element
                                            Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                         Page TC-2
             Sites Suitable For Employee Housing ........................................................................... 45
             Sites Suitable For Affordable Student and Faculty Housing ......................................... 45
             Sites Suitable For Emergency Shelters/ Transitional and Supportive Housing ............. 45
             Housing for Persons with Disabilities............................................................................ 48
             Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME Funds ............................ 49
             Housing Trust Fund of Santa Clara County (HTSCC) .................................................. 49
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSERVATION ............. HE-50
HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND OBJECTIVES ....................... HE-54
     General Strategy ......................................................................................................................... 54
     Goals, Policies, and Programs .................................................................................................... 55
     Summary of Objectives............................................................................................................... 70
APPENDIX A ......................................................................................................................... A-1
     Secondary Unit Survey
APPENDIX B ..........................................................................................................................B-1
     Secondary Unit Survey Results
APPENDIX C ......................................................................................................................... C-1
     Housing Element Community Comment Survey
APPENDIX D ......................................................................................................................... D-1
     Housing Element Community Comment Survey Results
APPENDIX E ..........................................................................................................................E-1
     2009 Housing Element Implementation
APPENDIX F-1 ..................................................................................................................... F1-1
     Vacant and Underutilized Parcels Site Inventory
APPENDIX F-2 ..................................................................................................................... F2-1
     Vacant and Underutilized Parcels Map
APPENDIX G ......................................................................................................................... G-1
     New Residential Construction by Year, 2007-2014
APPENDIX H ......................................................................................................................... H-1
     Estimated Fees for Housing Construction 2014
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                          Page TC-3
                                     Housing Element
INTRODUCTION
501. The Town of Los Altos Hills offers a residential environment rare in the San Francisco Bay Area.
     Its semirural density, rolling terrain, dense vegetation, strong community stand on environmental
     protection and compatibility, and its adjacency to lands of the Midpeninsula Regional Open
     Space District have resulted in a highly desirable location for residential development. This
     desirability, even with severe constraints to development such as extreme slopes, unstable soils,
     hydrologic hazards, and a minimal vehicular circulation system, has driven the cost of housing in
     the Town upward. Nonetheless, residential development, the only type of development allowed
     within the Town, is low in density and carefully sited into the land to ensure compatibility and
     harmony between residents and the environment. It is a setting, both natural and man-made,
     which makes Los Altos Hills distinct among its suburban-density neighbors to the north, east, and
     south.
502. In the mid-1950’s Santa Clara County’s trend of permitting development to over-burden the
     natural environment through higher densities and smaller lots served as a catalyst for the Town’s
     1956 incorporation. The County’s pattern of development approvals was considered counter to
     sound stewardship of the land and its delicate resources. The existing development pattern at the
     time of incorporation was very low density, rural residential with one acre and larger minimum
     lot sizes. To preserve the scenic character and beauty of the natural environment, the Town
     founders chose to retain the existing residential densities, limit the development area on each
     property and restrict excessive grading and removal of native vegetation. Then, today, and most
     likely into the future, it is the community’s desire to preserve and maintain this rural atmosphere
     associated with its established residential areas.
503. In addition to the rural residential development allowed by the then newly incorporated
     community, the Town also allows uses accessory to rural residential style development such as
     small-scale crop and tree farming, keeping of horses and other domestic animals, and other
     agricultural pursuits compatible with the primary rural residential uses. The Town also
     encourages private and public recreational uses necessary to conveniently serve the residents,
     public and private schools, churches, fire stations, and community centers needed locally to serve
     Town residents. The goal in incorporation was to provide, amidst open spaces, residential uses
     and the minimum public and private facilities and services necessary to serve Town residents on a
     continuing basis. There are numerous constraints to development associated with the semirural
     community design.
504. Uses other than semirural residential, such as retail and medical services and employment centers,
     are readily available in adjoining, suburban communities, and their duplication in the Town,
     especially to serve a relatively small population, is unnecessary.
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE-1

ROLE OF HOUSING ELEMENT
505.  California is one of the most expensive states in the nation in terms of housing costs. The State
      Legislature took notice of this situation and made the following findings:
               “The lack of affordable housing is a critical problem which threatens the economic,
                environmental, and social quality of life in California”;
               “California housing stock has become the most expensive in the nation”;
               “Among the consequences of those actions are discrimination against low-income and
                minority households, lack of housing to support employment growth, imbalance in jobs
                and housing, reduced mobility, urban sprawl, excessive commuting, and air quality
                deterioration”; and
               “Many local governments do not give adequate attention to the economic, environmental,
                and social costs of decisions which result in disapproval of affordable housing projects,
                reduction in density of affordable housing projects, and excessive standards for
                                                    1
                affordable housing projects.”
506.  From these findings evolved a requirement that a housing element be a part of every general
           2
      plan . As the general plan is a comprehensive, long-term plan for the physical development of the
      county or city, the housing element is “a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, and
                                                                                                          3
      scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and development of housing.”
HOUSING ELEMENT PLANNING PERIOD
507.  This Housing Element Update supersedes Los Altos Hills’ 2009 Housing Element. The Update is
      intended to guide the Town’s policies and programs on housing for the 2015-2023 planning
      period.
LOCAL HOUSING ISSUES
508.  The Town’s desire to preserve a semirural environment does not preclude commitment to housing
      issues. Two such key issues identified in the Housing Element are opportunities for more
      affordable housing and the provision of housing for the Town’s aging population.
    1 Excerpts from Article 10, Section 65589.5(a) of the California Government Code.
    2 Article 5, Section 65302 of the California Government Code identifies seven mandated general plan elements, which
      include land use, circulation, housing, conservation, open-space, noise, and safety.
    3 Excerpted from Article 10.6, Section 65580 of the California Government Code.
                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                        Page HE-2

509.  After the adoption of the 1988 Housing Element, the renting of residential secondary dwelling
      units in Los Altos Hills was allowed. Being that secondary dwelling units were previously not
      permitted in the community, it is important to provide the residents of Los Altos Hills with
      information stating that second units are legal and encouraged. Since legalization, second units
      have added significantly to the Town’s existing and available housing stock. Residential second
      units continue to provide the Town with an excellent source of more affordably priced housing,
      and the Town plans to continue promoting second units.
510.  According to the 2010 Census, 41% of the Town’s population consists of people over the age of
      55, many of whom live in underutilized homes as younger household members have relocated. In
      addition, long-time elderly residents tend to stay in their homes. Therefore, the housing needs of
      the elderly will continue to be an important part of the Town’s housing policy for years to come.
RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
511.  The 2015-2023 Housing Element is one of the eight elements of Los Altos Hills’ comprehensive
      General Plan. The Plan consists of the following elements: Land Use; Conservation; Open Space
      & Recreation; Pathways; Noise; Safety; Circulation; and Housing.
512.  The Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan Elements and is consistent with the
      policies set forth in those elements. For example, the Land Use Element emphasizes low density
      residential, hillside protection, and green building strategies. Whenever any element of the
      General Plan is amended, the Housing Element will be reviewed and modified, if necessary, to
      ensure continued consistency between the elements.
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
513.  Government Code 65583(c) (B) requires that the Town “make a diligent effort to achieve public
      participation of all economic segments of the community in the development of the housing
      element”. The public outreach strategy in Los Altos Hills has been formulated in consideration of
      the fact that the Town is small and is overwhelmingly comprised of private residents. Public
      outreach in support of the Housing Element Update included the following:
              A Second Unit survey mailed to every household in the Town
              A presentation by staff on the Housing Element and Survey at the Los Altos Hills Senior
               Commission
              A public hearing at the Planning Commission to introduce the Housing Element Update
              The formation of a subcommittee of the Planning Commission to review survey results,
               develop new policies and programs and review the Administrative Draft;
              A Community Comment Survey/Questionnaire sent to every household in the Town
              A Community Workshop to gather input from residents and interested parties
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE-3

             The creation of a webpage for the Housing Element Update with status updates, news and
              information, and links to other housing related websites
             Public Notices on the Housing Element Update placed in the quarterly Town newsletter,
              the local paper and on the Town’s website;
             Development of a mailing list of all interested parties
514. The 2014 Second Unit Survey (Appendix A) was mailed to all property owners within the Town
     limits in June 2014. This mailing served to obtain updated information on second units such as
     number of new permitted units, rental rates, etc., as well as to elicit comments on other programs
     under consideration in the 2015-2023 Housing Element such as the potential to allow for a floor
     area/development area increase for secondary units, an amnesty program to legalize existing
     second units and the level of interest in secondary units on lots that are less than one acre in area.
     The Survey followed up a very successful 2009 Second Unit Survey that helped the Town
     identify progress on the development of new secondary units and the rental rates being charged.
     The Survey also served the double purpose of informing residents that Second Units are both
     legal and encouraged in Los Altos Hills. Results from the Second Unit Survey are included in
     Appendix B.
515. The Planning Commission held a public hearing on September 18, 2014 to introduce the initial
     draft of the Housing Element and provided staff with comments on the proposed changes along
     with potential questions for the Public Comment Card.
516. The Planning Commission created a subcommittee comprised of two Commissioners and staff
     whose purpose was to discuss and update goals, policies and programs that focus on meeting the
     Town’s future housing needs. The subcommittee reviewed surveys and other public input and
     prepared recommendations to the Planning Commission. In addition, the subcommittee
     addressed comments received from the State Department of Housing and Community
     Development (HCD) on the draft Housing Element update and forwarded their recommendations
     to the Planning Commission and Town Council for incorporation in the document.
517. A Community Survey/Questionnaire (Appendix C) was mailed to all property owners to capture
     input from residents who may not appear at a public workshop. The survey/questionnaire
     provided a brief background on the Housing Element Process and asked qualitative questions
     such as:
             If you are retired or retiring soon, what housing options are you considering?
             How can opportunities for secondary units be expanded in Town?
             How do you think the Town should address senior housing issues in the Housing
              Element?
     Results from the Public Comment Questionnaire are included in Appendix D.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE-4

518.  Town staff hosted a Public Workshop on November 20, 2014 to gather further input from
      residents. The workshop described the Housing Element update process including applicable state
      laws, regional housing need allocation numbers, current statistical data and a brief summary of
      potential new programs for secondary units. Following an informative presentation, members of
      the public asked numerous questions on the update process and suggested changes to existing
      secondary dwelling unit regulations along with other housing options designed to benefit elderly
      residents and allow them to remain in the community as they age. There was discussion about the
      importance of preserving Los Altos Hill’s unique semirural character. Attendees and staff
      espoused the important role of second units in providing more housing options while maintaining
      the residential, semirural character of the Town, and discussed ways to further encourage their
      development. A mailing list was created from the names of those who attended.
519.  The Draft was revised in response to comments received on the 2015-2023 Housing Element
      from the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The Draft 2015-
      2023 Housing Element was also posted on the Town’s Web Page to allow all residents and
      interested parties the opportunity to view the document online and direct comments to City staff
      accordingly.
520.  Prior to adopting the Housing Element, the Town posted the revised Draft Housing Element on
      the website and held public hearings at the Planning Commission and City Council. The public
      hearing schedule is incorporated in the Housing Element and hearings were advertised in the
      newspaper, mailed to all interested parties on the mailing list, posted throughout Town and placed
      on the Town Web Page.
ORGANIZATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
521.  The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
           A summary of the Town’s existing and projected housing needs;
           An assessment of the land, financial and administrative resources available to address
               Los Altos Hills’ housing needs;
           A Background Report consisting of a detailed housing needs assessment, an analysis of
               constraints to housing production and affordability;
           A Housing Plan to address the Town’s identified housing needs including housing goals,
               policies, and programs; and
           An evaluation of the Town’s progress in implementing the housing programs established
               in the 2009 Housing Element update.
DATA SOURCES
522.   Various sources of information are used to prepare the Housing Element, including:
           2010 Census data as well as the 2008-2012 American Community Survey (ACS). These
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE-5

  sources remain the most comprehensive and widely accepted source of demographic
  information.
 Population and housing counts from the State Department of Finance (January 2014)
 Housing market information from newspapers, internet rent surveys and DataQuick sales
  transactions
 Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Projection 2013 and ABAG’s Regional
  Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA - July 18, 2013);
 Comparative data for income levels for various groups is provided by the 2008-2012
  American Community Survey;
 The Town’s 2014 Second Unit survey
 The Community Comment Survey/Questionnaire mailed out in November 2014
 The 2013 Senior Community Questionnaire/Survey
 Various Town documents, including the Zoning Ordinance and the General Plan.
                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                 Page HE-6

EVALUATION OF THE 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
523. As noted, this Housing Element represents an update to the Town’s 2009 Housing Element. The
     2009 Element’s goals centered on efforts to provide for additional housing opportunities while at
     the same time preserving the Town’s semirural residential environment and natural setting. Two
     such key issues were identified as opportunities in the 2009 Housing Element: opportunities for
     more affordable housing and the provision of housing for the Town’s aging population. The 2009
     Housing Element reflects an eagerness to promote second units, an affordable housing type that
     maintains the character of Los Altos Hills, and attention to the housing needs of the elderly, a
     major housing challenge for Los Altos Hills. In developing this Housing Element Update, an
     assessment of the 2009 Element was conducted, the purpose of which was to identify those
     aspects of that Element which were successful or continued to demonstrate promise and to
     eliminate or revise those components which did not yield the desired results.
524. The Town has successfully implemented a number of the programs outlined in the 2009 Element
     (The 2009 Housing Element Annual Progress Report is included as Appendix E). The success of
     these programs has resulted in:
            The development of 40 new residential second units between 2007 and 2014 with over
             87% of the units renting at levels affordable to low and very low income households;
            Waiving the housing fee (currently $1,222) for all residential secondary units;
            Allowing for new second units to connect to existing sewer laterals and septic systems of
             the primary dwelling, which substantially reduces costs;
            Maintaining an inventory of secondary units and providing monthly and yearly updates
             on the construction of secondary units;
            Amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow board and care facilities and transitional
             housing;
            Amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow for Emergency Shelter housing on institutional
             land uses;
            Amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow for tandem parking for secondary dwellings;
            Amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow detached secondary dwellings to have
             basements which do not count towards floor area allowing for larger units;
            The completion of a Senior Community Questionnaire in 2013 to determine the needs of
             the Town’s senior residents;
            Providing information to the Town residents about Community Development Block
             Grant funds for housing rehabilitation loans for lower income households on the Town
             website;
            Completion of an inventory of vacant and underdeveloped lands suitable for residential
             development;
            Updating the 2009 Secondary Unit Survey in July 2014 as a method of monitoring the
             success of the secondary unit program in meeting regional fair share requirements.
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE-7

525. The following programs are still in the process of implementation or are ongoing:
             Making available additional information on topics such as the benefits of undergrounding
              utility lines, secondary unit information, updates on the construction of new units and
              rehabilitation of existing residential units, the benefits of brush and weed abatement, and
              hydrant upgrade requirements.
             Participate through Santa Clara County in the Community Development Block Grant
              Program to provide housing rehabilitation loans for low and moderate income
              households;
             Continued annexation of lots within the Town’s sphere of influence;
             Facilitate and expedite the development of new housing units for all income levels in the
              community;
             Continue to review and process secondary units at staff level;
             Develop a secondary unit brochure to hand-out at the counter and post on-line;
526. The following are programs outlined in the 2009 Element that have not yet been implemented or
     adopted and will be carried forward to the 2015-2023 update:
             Amend the General Plan land use map for the Foothill College property from P (Public
              School) to PC (Public College) and identify multi-family residential as a permitted use;
             Amend the Zoning Code to allow a density of up to 20 units per acre on PC designated
              lands;
             Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow housing for employees on parcels with existing
              non-residential uses.
527. Appendix E to this Element provides an in-depth, program-by-program discussion of the 2009
     Element’s implementation.
528. Those goals, policies, and programs found successful, potentially successful, and effective which
     were developed as part of the 2009 Housing Element have been carried forward either wholly or
     partially into this Element to continue those efforts. Likewise, those goals, policies, and programs
     of the 2009 Element found to be unproductive in terms of the Town’s overall housing goals were
     not carried forward.
529. Los Altos Hills exceeded its ABAG Regional Housing Need Allocation for total number of units
     constructed in the 2007-2014 planning cycle through the construction of 47 new single family
     estate homes and 40 attached and detached secondary dwelling units. The Town’s single family
     residential production surpassed the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) targets in the
     above moderate income category, while the number of affordable constructed ranged from 23 to
     100 percent of the targeted RHNA totals. The Town was very successful in meeting the extremely
     low and very low income categories in that the number of units produced (25) very closely
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE-8

       matched the fair share requirement (27). The results show that Town’s efforts to promote
       affordable second units are working reasonably well, producing units at the low and very low
       income levels (see table below).
                                                                                                      4
                  Residential Unit Type         2007-2014 ABAG             Actual Residential Units
                     Income Category          Regional Fair Share                  Constructed
                 Extremely Low                           13                            13
                 Very Low                                14                            12
                 Low                                     19                            10
                 Moderate                                22                             5
                 Above Moderate                          13                            47
                 Total                                   81                            87
4
  The breakdown of units constructed among affordability categories was based on overall home prices in Los Altos Hills as
  well as the 2014 Second Unit Survey. Accordingly, second units were split between the extremely low, very low, low, and
  moderate income categories based on the monthly rental rate of the unit and the amount of income that would be required to
  afford that unit based on a maximum rental allowance of 30% of the gross monthly salary. The Second Unit Survey reported
  that about one third of occupied units do not currently charge rent which would place those units under the extremely low
  income category. It is assumed that all new single-family dwellings fall into the above moderate category, given the high
  average home prices in the community.
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                        Page HE-9

POPULATION, HOUSING AND EMPLOYMENT TRENDS
530. A snapshot of population, housing and employment trends reveals:
             The Town has a vacancy rate of 3.8 percent, reflecting a very stable housing stock and
              indicative of low residential mobility.
             The Town continues to grow at a relatively slow pace, due in part to a limited supply of
              easily and inexpensively developable land;
             The Town’s population, like that of the region and nation, is aging, and the Town’s
              median age is higher than the County and State;
             The Town’s household income is among the highest in the County and State;
             There were two homeless individuals counted in Los Altos Hills in the most recent
              County Homelessness Survey (January 2013);
             There is minimal occurrence of poverty, overcrowding, or unemployment within the
              Town;
             Most of the Town’s households are made up of families;
             The Town’s housing stock is in good to excellent condition;
             The value of the Town’s housing stock is extremely high.
531. Many of the Town’s residents specifically selected Los Altos Hills as their place of residence
     despite higher housing costs and fewer housing options than surrounding communities. This is
     because the environment in which the Town is set has been carefully preserved and cultivated
     over the years, the quality of schools is excellent, and preserving the natural landscape is a high
     priority for many residents. In addition, land prices and home prices are very high, which places
     economic constraints on alternative housing options, including density bonus provisions.
     Working within these factors is the unique challenge for the planning staff and the Housing
     Element document itself.
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE-10

DEMOGRAPHICS
532. The data in the table below provides a demographic profile of the Town’s community. Further
     analysis is found in subsequent sections.
        Table 1
        Selected Population and Household Characteristics
                                                              Los Altos
                                                                 Hills         County                State
        Total Population 2014                                         8,354     1,868,558              38,340,074
        Total Population 2010                                         7,922     1,781,642              37,253,956
        Total Population 2000                                         7,902     1,682,585              33,871,648
        Total Population 1990                                         7,514     1,497,577              29,760,021
        Percent Change 2010-2014                                     5.45%          4.88%                    2.92%
        Percent Change 2000-2010                                     0.25%          5.89%                    9.99%
        Percent Change 1990-2000                                       5.1%         12.3%                    13.8%
        Age Composition - 2010
             Under 18 years                                        22.90%          24.10%                  25.00%
             18-64 years                                           53.93%          64.80%                  63.70%
             65+ years                                             23.20%          11.10%                  11.40%
        Median Age – 2010                                             50.20          36.20                    35.20
        Racial Composition – 2010
             White                                                 68.40%          47.00%                  57.60%
             Hispanic or Latino                                      2.70%         26.90%                  37.60%
             African American                                        0.50%          2.60%                    6.20%
             Native American                                         0.10%          0.70%                    1.00%
             Asian/Pacific Islander                                26.70%          32.40%                  13.40%
             Other/Two or more races                                 3.70%          4.90%                    4.90%
        Median Household Income 2008-2012                        $196,484         $90,747                  $61,400
        Median Household Income - 2000                           $173,570         $74,335                  $47,493
        Median Household Income - 1990                           $115,851         $48,115                  $35,798
        Average Household Size - 2010                                   2.85          2.92                      2.96
        Source: U.S. Census Bureau 1990 & 2000 Census & 2010 Census; 2008-2012 ACS; 2013 ABAG Projections; California
        Department of Finance 2014 Population Estimates
     Population Growth
533. The Bureau of the Census found the Town’s population grew from 7,902 in 2000 to 7,922 in
     2010 reflecting a very small increase of 20 residents or 0.25 percent. This time period
     encompassed a substantial economic downturn that significantly affected the local economy
     including the Town of Los Altos Hills. The economic downturn ended in 2009 and by 2011, the
                                            2015-2023 Housing Element
                                            Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                      Page HE-11

     regional economy started to expand. By 2014, the State Department of Finance estimated that the
     population of the Town was 8,354, for a total growth of 432 persons or 5.45 percent between
     2010 and 2014. However, it should be noted that a significant portion of that population increase
     can be attributed to the annexation by the Town of 52 properties in the West Loyola and Olive
     Tree areas, which added approximately 150 residents (35% of the total increase).
     Age Characteristics
534. The median age of the Town’s residents in 2010 was 50.2, an increase of 3.5 years from 2000
     when the median age was 46.7 years. This continues a pattern which showed an increase of 2.4
     years between 1990 and 2000 and a large increase of 6.7 years between 1980 and 1990. This
     increase in age is likely attributable to the greater cost of housing in the Town than other areas of
     the County, which precludes younger, less affluent households from moving into the community.
     In addition, existing residents tend to have lived in the community for a longer period of time due
     to the desirability of the area. This trend has continued with 23.2 percent of the Town’s
     population consisting of residents over the age of 65 years, compared to around 11 percent for the
     County and State. Persons under the age of 18 currently comprise just under 23 percent of the
     Town’s population. These population trends are expected to continue due to the high cost of
     living in the community and it is anticipated that the percentage of residents over the age of 65
     will continue to increase.
535. While the Town’s population continues to age, increased demands will be placed on senior social
     and health services provided by the Town, County, State, and Federal governments. The overall
     aging of the population will also place demands on the type of housing developed or rehabilitated
     within the Town, especially to meet the needs of older, potentially less mobile individuals.
     Ethnic Diversity
536. The Bureau of the Census found the Town’s population in 2010 to be predominantly White
     (68.4%) with Asian and Pacific Islanders comprising another (26.7%) of the Town’s population.
     Other categories tabulated included Hispanic or Latino (2.7%), Black (0.5%), Native American
     (0.1%), and other (3.7%). The Town is less diverse than Santa Clara County as a whole, though
     the Asian population has grown significantly over the last couple decades.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE-12

HOUSEHOLDS AND RESIDENTIAL UNITS
537. The data in the table below provides a housing profile of the community. An analysis of the data
     presented in the table is provided in the sections that follow.
             Table 2
             Selected Housing Characteristics
                                                                          Town             County                State
             Total Households – 2010                                     2,829           604,204          12,577,498
             Total Households – 2000                                     2,740           585,863          11,502,870
             Total Housing Units – 2010                                  3,001           631,920          13,680,081
             Total Housing Units – 2000                                  2,816           579,329          12,214,549
             Median Year Homes Constructed                               1967            1969             1970
             Percentage of Units Owner Occupied – 2012                  87.4%            58.1%            56.0%
             Vacancy Rate – 2012                                         3.8%            4.4%             8.8%
             Housing Values and Costs – 2012
                       Median Housing Value
                                                                       $1,000,000+         $656,600         $383,900
                       Median Rent
                                                                       $1,850              $1,508           $1,209
                       (for secondary dwellings)
             Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2000, 2010 Census, 2008-2012 American Community Survey, 2014 Second Unit Survey
     Number of Households
538. The Census Bureau found there were 2,829 households in the Town in 2010, an increase of 89
     from the 2,740 households reported in the 2000 Census. Of the 2,829 occupied housing units in
     Los Altos Hills, 2,582 are owner occupied and 247 are renter occupied.
539. Beyond 2014, households in the Town and its Sphere of Influence are expected to increase, but at
     an even slower rate. The California Department of Finance estimates the number of households in
     the Town and its Sphere will increase from the 2010 figure to a projected 3,130 households by the
     year 2020, representing an annualized increase of 0.7 percent during this period. The slowing
     increase in the number of new households is directly linked to the diminishing supply of land
     with which new housing can be constructed along with sewer capacity constraints and substantial
     physical and environmental constraints to development (the Town is bordered by incorporated
     communities and open space lands).
                                           2015-2023 Housing Element
                                           Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                     Page HE- 13

      Household Size
540.  The Census Bureau found there to be 2.85 persons per household in 2010, a very slight decrease
      from 2000 when there were 2.86 persons per household. The decrease in household size during
      that ten year period is contrary to ABAG’s Projections which expected an increase in the Town’s
      household size from 2000 to 2010 and beyond.
      Families
541.  According to the Census Bureau in 2010, 2,371 of the Town’s 2,829 occupied households were
      defined as family households while 458 were classified as non-family households. Approximately
      78 percent of the families are married couple families, and nearly 39 percent of all families have
      children under 18. The latter statistic represents a slight decrease from 2000 Census data, when it
      was reported that nearly 40 percent of all families in the Town had children under 18.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES AND OCCUPANCY
542.  In 2010 the Town had a total of 3,001 residential units, an increase of 186 units from 2000 when
      2,815 residential units were recorded by the Census Bureau. Of those 3001 units, the 2008-2012
      American Community Survey reported that 2,838 are detached housing (including 6 mobile
      homes) and 56 are attached units. The remainder are group quarters. The additional 186 units
      results in a yearly average increase of 19 units added to the Town’s housing stock during the ten
      year census period, which is substantially greater than the approximately 11 unit/year average for
      new dwelling unit construction that the Town experienced during the 2007-2014 Housing
      Element planning cycle. This difference can largely be attributed to annexations by the Town
      which add to the overall housing stock but are not counted as new housing units in the Housing
      Element. Based on the value of existing properties, the lack of nonconforming uses (residential
      hotels, mobile home parks), and the fact that the Town is almost entirely residential in land use,
      the Town has no designated at-risk affordable housing units.
543.  Nearly all of the Town’s residential units are detached single family residences and secondary
      dwelling units. The Town’s legalization and encouragement of second units has increased the
      number of such units approved and constructed and the 2014 Second Unit Survey also indicated
      significant interest in constructing second units on individual properties.
544.  The only other type of housing facilities in Town consist of two group living facilities located
      within the Town’s boundaries – Daughters of Charity Campus and Poor Clares Monastery. The
      Census identifies these facilities as group quarters rather than as housing units, and they provide
      housing for up to 100 persons (60 individuals at the Daughters of Charity and 40 individuals at
      Poor Clares Monastery). The Daughters of Charity campus consists of three individual dwelling
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 14

     units, group living facilities for up to 20 individuals with a common kitchen, and an assisted
     elderly care facility for up to 40 individuals with 24 hour nursing care. The assisted care facility
     generally caters to retired nuns who worked for the organization and provides supervised medical
     care for these individuals. Poor Clares is a monastery wherein individuals live in group quarters
     with a shared kitchen. The individuals living at these facilities are generally categorized as very-
     low or extremely low income. The Town recognizes this unique contribution of housing to the
     region and encourages these uses to remain.
     Vacancies
545. According to the Census Bureau, only 172 of the 3,001 residential units were vacant in 2010,
     resulting in an overall vacancy rate of 3.8 percent. Of the 172 vacant units, 50 were vacant due to
     their use as seasonal or vacation residences, resulting in an even lower vacancy rate for those
     units intended for year-round habitation (2.2%). None of these figures include the two group
     quarters. The 2010 vacancy rate was lower than desirable vacancy levels to accommodate
     residential mobility due to the extraordinary growth in the housing market in Santa Clara County.
     Tenure
546. According to the Census Bureau, the Town of Los Altos Hills had 2,829 occupied residential
     units in 2010, of which 247 (8.7%) were occupied by renters and 2,582 (91.3%) were owner
     occupied. The Town’s housing stock currently provides housing for approximately 8,350
     residents. Approximately 625 of these residents reside in a renter occupied units while 7,725
     inhabit owner occupied units. The average household size for renter occupied units was 2.53
     persons per household, which is below the average household size of 2.88 persons for owner
     occupied units. Both these averages are below the County’s average household sizes of 3.00 and
     2.80 for owner occupied and renter occupied units, respectively.
547. 2010 Census data indicates that 38 percent of all owner occupied units in Los Altos Hills are
     owned by elderly householders (over 65 years of age). In contrast, only 26.3 percent of owner
     occupied units in the County are owned by the elderly.
     Overcrowding
548. The 2006-2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) report indicates that of
     the occupied units in Los Altos Hills, no residential units were classified as being overcrowded.
     By definition, an overcrowded unit is defined as a unit occupied by more than one person per
     room (excluding the kitchen and the bathrooms). By comparison, the incidence of overcrowding
     in Santa Clara County as a whole was estimated at 12.4 percent.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 15

HOUSEHOLD INCOME
549. According to the 2008-2012 American Community Survey (ACS), Los Altos Hills had a median
     household income of $196,484, almost twice the 2014 County median of $105,500. Mean and
     median household incomes for Los Altos Hills have historically been significantly higher than the
     County as a whole and this disparity increased between 2000 and 2012. ABAG predicts the Town
     and its Sphere’s mean income will continue to be the highest in the County until 2020, when they
     project a mean household income (in constant 1995 dollars) of $302,400.
     Income Groups
550. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development defines five income groups,
     as follows:
          Extremely Low Income- Households earning up to 30 percent of the regional median
              household income.
          Very Low Income – Households earning up to 50 percent of the regional median
              household income
          Low Income – Households earning up to 80 percent of the regional median household
              income
          Moderate Income – Households earning between 80 percent and 120 percent of the
              regional median household income
          Above Moderate Income – Households earning above 120 percent of the regional median
              household income
551. According to estimates based on information from Census Bureau, the Town of Los Altos Hills
     was made up of approximately 12.6 percent very low income households, 5.9 percent low-income
     households, 8.3 percent moderate income households, and 63.8 percent above moderate income
     households.
     Poverty Level
552. Poverty level, as defined by the Federal government, is adjusted annually and encompasses not
     only income levels, but also family size, number of children, and the age of the family
     householder or unrelated individual. According to the latest estimates, 3.1 percent of the Town’s
     total population was below the poverty level, totaling 237 individuals. There are 76 families
     below the poverty level, representing 3.1 percent of families. Data from the CHAS reports that of
     the 130 households considered extremely low income, 25 are renters and 105 are owners.
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page HE- 16

      Households Overpaying for Housing
553.  Housing is generally the greatest single expense for California families. Due to differing family
      income levels and sizes, it is difficult to set a specific maximum percentage of income a
      household should devote to housing. Generally, a household should not contribute more than 30
      percent of its income to housing in order to prevent sacrificing other necessary expenditures.
      Devoting a sum greater than 30 percent (depending on family size and income) of a household’s
      income can result in hardship and difficulty in providing other necessary goods and services.
      Severe overpaying occurs when households pay 50 percent or more of their gross income for
      housing. Statewide, the impacts of high housing costs tend to fall disproportionately on extremely
      low, very low, and low-income households, especially renters. Higher-income households may
      choose to spend greater portions of their income for housing whereas the cost burden for lower-
      income households reflects choices limited by a lack of a sufficient supply of housing affordable
      to these households. Data from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
      shows that among lower income households, 289 households are considered to be overpaying for
      housing. Sixty-nine lower income households that are overpaying are renters and 220 are owner-
      occupied.
554.  There are 2,829 occupied residential units in Los Altos Hills, of which 2,582 (91.3%) were owner
      occupied. Among renter occupied households, 60.4 percent spent less than 25 percent of their
      income on rent, up from 30.5 percent in 2000, while 15.1 percent use between 25-34 percent of
      their income.
555.  Of the 2,582 owner occupied housing units, 63.4 percent spend less than 25 percent of their
      income on housing payments, 6.1 percent pay between 25-35 percent, and 21.3 percent pay more
      than 35 percent of their income on housing. For those with a mortgage, only 41.3 percent are
      spending less than 25 percent of their income on mortgage payments, and 34.7 percent are paying
      over 35 percent.
556.  On the topic of overpaying for housing, it is important to note that the Town of Los Altos Hills
      has become a very desirable place to live. With limited supply of housing, and strong demand,
      basic economics dictate high prices. Many households choose to pay more than the standard
      allocation of household income for housing for the opportunity to live in the Town, even with the
      availability of less costly housing in nearby communities.
HOUSING STOCK
      Age of Housing Stock
557.  The Town has very few if any homes that need replacement or rehabilitation. The 2008-2012
      American Community Survey indicates that most of Los Altos Hills’ housing stock was
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 17

         constructed between 1950 and 1990, similar to Santa Clara County’s housing. Twenty percent of
         the Town housing stock was constructed between 1940 and 1960 and 71 percent was built
         between 1960 and 1980.
                            Housing Stock Construction Time Periods
 2010 - Present
   2000 - 2009
   1990 - 1999
   1980 - 1989
   1970 - 1979
   1960 - 1969
   1940 - 1959
  1939 - Earlier
                 0        100       200        300         400        500      600        700        800
                                                Number of Units
         Incomplete Plumbing
558.     Incomplete plumbing usually refers to a lack of running water or flushing toilet and is sometimes
         associated with substandard rural housing. Based on previous census data and the value of land
         and structures in the community, there are almost no units with incomplete plumbing in Town.
         Furthermore, all units constructed after 2000 include complete plumbing systems and were
         inspected by the Town’s Building Official.
         Housing Unit Value
559.     The Bureau of the Census defines the value of a housing unit as the respondent’s estimate of the
         current dollar worth of the property if the unit is owner-occupied, or the asking price if the
         property is vacant (excluding rental units). Within the community of Los Altos Hills, 99 percent
         of all housing units were valued at $1,000,000 or more in 2014. The 2000 Census listed a median
         home value for single family homes in Los Altos Hills at $1,000,000 and today the range is
         estimated to be from $3 million - $5 million. A brief survey of listed vacant single family homes
         on the market in June 2014 turned up a median asking price of $4,575,000 with a median size of
         4,345 square feet. The Town’s median home prices have historically been much higher than the
         County median. There is only a very small rental market in Los Altos Hills; about nine percent of
         homes are renter occupied, the majority being second units and rooms for rent.
                                         2015-2023 Housing Element
                                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE- 18

560. The housing and land values in the Town owe much to the Town’s semirural, quiet setting not
     readily available elsewhere on the San Francisco Peninsula as well as its access to area
     destinations and its proximity to Silicon Valley.
LABOR FORCE
     Employment Composition
561. According to the 2010 Census, the Town of Los Altos Hills had a labor force of 4,085 people,
     97.8 percent of whom were employed and 2.2 percent of who were not. ABAG’s Projections
     2013 has estimated that there are 4,570 employed residents in the Town and in the Sphere of
     Influence, and that this amount will increase to 5,440 by the year 2030.
562. The industries that employ a majority of Los Altos Hills’ residents are manufacturing (23%),
     education, health and social service (22%), and professional scientific, management,
     administrative, and waste management services (21%). The Town is in proximity to Silicon
     Valley’s electronics industries, as well as to six different institutions of higher education,
     including Stanford University, San Jose State University, and Santa Clara University.
     Employment Location
563. Because the Town is nearly completely residential in makeup, nearly all of Los Altos Hills’
     employed labor force commutes outside the Town’s corporate boundaries to the work place,
     except the 10 percent who reported working at home. Of those who commute, 97 percent drive,
     87 percent in single occupancy vehicles. About 64 percent of commuting workers traveled 20
     minutes or more in each direction. For those employed within the Town’s corporate limits most
     operate at-home businesses, or are employed by at-home businesses, or are employed by the
     community college and several schools within the Town’s corporate boundaries. There are no
     retail, business, or industrial employment centers located within the Town’s corporate limits.
     Employment Projections
564. In Projections 2013, ABAG projects the number of employed residents of Los Altos Hills and its
     Sphere will increase from 4,475 in 2010, to 5,440 in the year 2030. The Town itself does not
     allow any traditional retail, business, or service uses which would normally be the source of new
     employment growth. One potential generator of employment growth, and a generator for which
     there are no known reliable statistics or reporting mechanisms, is household domestic workers.
     Some of the individuals employed as domestic workers are provided housing by their employers
     either within main residences or within detached guest quarters or residential second units.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 19

HOUSING NEEDS
565.  It is evident from the preceding section of this Element that the Town has little localized unmet
      housing need. The Town does not allow any retail, service, or industrial uses which would
      generate employment, and in turn, demands for new housing. Therefore the Town does not by
      itself generate a demand for housing. Rather, demand for housing is generated beyond the Town’s
      limits, along the San Francisco peninsula, Silicon Valley and in the East Bay.
566.  Although there is an absence of localized housing need, the Town is required to participate along
      with the balance of the region in addressing regional housing needs.
567.  The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is charged by the Legislature to determine
      the region’s5 overall housing needs, particularly for households of moderate income and below,
      and to allocate to each county, city, and town a “fair share” of that regional need. For the Town of
      Los Altos Hills, ABAG determined there to be a need for 121 additional residential units in the
                                                                                 6
      Town and Sphere to meet the Town’s share of the regional need for the period of 2014-2022.
568.  In making its projections, ABAG refined the estimated need into the four household income
      categories discussed earlier in this Element, as follows:
        Table 3
        Housing Fair Share Allocation by Income
        2014-2022 (ABAG DATES)
                                                                                            % Regional Fair
             Income Category                2014 Income             Regional Fair Share
                                                                                                 Share
        Very Low Income                         $53,050                        46                 38%
        Low Income                              $84,900                        28                 23%
        Moderate Income                        $126,600                        32                 27%
        Above Moderate Income                 >$126,600                        15                 12%
        Total                                                                 121                 100%
569.  The California Government Code requires the Town to develop a Housing Element which
      establishes goals, policies, programs, and quantifiable objectives designed to ensure that the
      regional fair share is met. It can be presumed that 50 percent of very low-income households
      qualify as extremely low income households, which would be about 23 households with an
      income less than 30 percent of area mean income.
    5 The Association of Bay Area Governments includes the Counties of Sonoma, Marin, Napa, Solano, Contra Costa,
      Alameda, San Mateo, and Santa Clara, and the City and County of San Francisco
    6 Source: Housing Needs Plan, July 2013, Association of Bay Area Governments.
                                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                   Page HE- 20

SATISFACTION OF REGIONAL FAIR SHARE
570.  Review of Town records indicates that from 2007 through November 2014, 87 new (not
      including replacement single-family dwellings) residential units were completed and granted
      occupancy. This compares with 92 new residential units constructed between 2002 and 2006 and
      137 homes between 1998 and 2002. It is reasonable to assume that all of the new single-family
      units constructed were within a price range affordable only to households classified as being
      above moderate income based on the value of the dwellings.
571.  In 1989, the Town removed restrictions on the construction and occupancy of secondary dwelling
                                                                                                   7
      units thereby making them part of the Town’s available rental housing stock . Prior to that action,
      residential second units could not be rented and could only be occupied by relatives of the
      property owner or by individuals employed by property owners for on-site custodial and
      housekeeping activities. That action alone has increased the number of residential units available
      for rent by more than 575 based on an extrapolation of data derived from the Town’s 2014
      Residential Second Unit Survey.
572.  The Town conducted a Second Unit Survey in 2014 to confirm the number of existing residential
      second units and monitor the success of the secondary unit program in the production of
      affordable rental housing, as well as to gauge community interest in the development of
      additional residential second units. The complete results of this survey are included in Appendix
      B.
573.  The 2014 Survey was delivered to each of the Town’s 2,854 households, 978 of which returned
      it, representing a 34 percent return rate. One of the questions posed in the survey addressed the
      amount of rent charged for residential second units. Table 4 shows the maximum affordable rent
      for a one-person, two-person and four-person household based on the 2014 state income limits
      and monthly rent equal to 30% of their monthly income maximum.
                                                           Table 4
                         RENT RANGES FOR RESIDENTIAL SECOND UNITS
         Income      Income Range        Maximum        Income Range         Maximu       Income Range Maximum
        Category      One- person           Rent         Two-person           m Rent       Four-person   Rent
        Extremel
                         $22,300             $557          $25,500             $637            $31,850   $796
          y Low
       Very Low          $37,150             $929          $42,450            $1,061           $53,050  $1,326
           Low           $59,400           $1,485          $67,900            $1,697           $84,900  $2,122
        Moderate         $73,850           $1,846          $84,400            $2,532          $105,500  $3,165
  7
     Residential second units cannot be sold and owned separately from the primary residential unit.
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                     Page HE- 21

     The Second Unit survey done in 2009 revealed that 86% of the households in secondary units
     consisted of one and two-person households. Therefore, staff provided four rental ranges in the
     2014 survey that more adequately reflected the typical second unit household of one or two
     persons instead of the standardized four-person in the extremely low, very low, low, and
     moderate income ranges. The survey results on second unit rents are presented in Table 5.
                                                    Table 5
                      RENT RANGES FOR RESIDENTIAL SECOND UNITS
           Income                                Rent Distribution for  Rent Distribution for post 1999
                            Rental Range
          Category                                 all units surveyed           units surveyed
       Extremely Low    No rent or Rent <$800             30%                         25%
          Very Low      Rent = $800 - $1,200              31%                         44%
            Low         Rent = $1,200 - $1,600            26%                         20%
          Moderate      Rent = > $2,300                   13%                         11%
574. It should be noted that approximately 30 percent of the respondents stated that at the time of the
     survey, no rent was charged for the occupied secondary dwelling unit. It should also be noted
     that, based on income limits set by the State Department of Housing and Community
     Development, the response on rental ranges indicates that approximately 61 percent of the
     Town’s second units would be affordable to extremely low and very low income households (up
     to $1,200 per month), and that 87% of the total would be affordable to low income households
     (up to $1,600 per month). Therefore, the second units constructed in the community are
     overwhelmingly being occupied by households in the lower income categories.
575. The second unit survey also collected information on the general age of the unit, allowing staff to
     assess any differences in the rent structure on newer units. Of the 191 survey respondents with a
     second unit, 60 had units built after 1999 (built within the last fifteen years). As indicated in
     Table 4, the rent distribution on these newer units is actually more affordable, with 69 percent
     renting at ranges affordable to extremely low to very low income households.
576. The 2014 survey further indicates that 100 residential second units were constructed before 1990,
     and perhaps as many as 332 units (as the 978 responses represented a 34 percent response rate),
     were legalized by the Town’s second unit ordinance adopted in 1988. The survey also indicated at
     least 193 secondary dwelling units exist in the community.
577. Town records of building permits issued from 2007–2014 show that 40 secondary dwelling units
     were constructed and that new second units account for 46 percent of all new residential units
     constructed during this time period, up from 27 percent of all residential units constructed during
     the previous planning period. Based on percentages derived from the second unit survey, Table 6
     distributes the new second units approved between 2007 and 2014 by income category.
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 22

                                                   Table 6
           Distribution of Secondary Dwelling Units by Income Category 2007 - 2014
      Income Category                                           Number of Units
      Extremely Low/Very Low Income                                  25
      Low Income                                                     10
      Moderate Income                                                 5
      Total                                                          40
578. Table 7 encompasses the total of all new units constructed in the community with all 47 new
     primary single family detached residential units completed between 2007 and 2014 designated as
     above moderate units. This results in the following:
                                                   Table 7
                     Distribution of All Residential Units by Income Category
                                                2007 - 2014
            Income Category               2007-2014 ABAG            2007-2014 Actual Residential
                                        Regional Fair Share                   Permitted
      Very Low Income                              27                            25
      Low Income                                   19                            10
      Moderate Income                              22                            5
      Above Moderate Income                        13                            47
      Total                                        81                            87
     Conclusion
579. Los Altos Hills met its overall 2007-2014 regional housing needs allocation for total number of
     new dwellings units constructed and basically succeeding in producing its share of very low
     income housing. However, the community fell short of meeting its goals for producing enough
     low and moderate income units. In the previous planning cycle, the Town exceeded its goals for
     very low and low income categories by a total of 10 units. The Town was more successful in
     meeting its goals in the 1999-2006 period partly because ABAG adjusted the Town’s regional
     share of housing needs to more accurately reflect that Los Altos Hills is a non-employment
     generator in the region (the Town has no commercial zoning districts).
580. During the 2007-2014 planning cycle, the Town produced an average of 10-11 new dwelling
     units a year, 5 of which were affordable secondary dwelling units. Given this rate of
     construction, it is reasonable to assume that the Town may not be able to meet its regional
     housing need allocation numbers during the 2015-2023 cycle as the RHNA numbers have been
     increased 50% above the previous planning period (from 81 to 121 units). In addition, the
     allocated number of affordable units has increased by 56% (from 68 to 106 units). Being that the
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page HE- 23

Town relies primarily on secondary dwelling units to fulfill its affordable housing allocation
numbers, several programs that seek to increase production of second units have been retained
and carried over to this new planning period and additional programs have been added to further
encourage their construction. The Town has also adopted zoning amendments to allow for
increased floor area on second units through the use of basements and to allow for tandem
parking. In addition to expanding opportunities for secondary dwelling units, the Town has also
retained a program to assist in the development of affordable housing at Foothill College by
proposing to change the land use designation of the college to allow for affordable student,
faculty and employee housing and retained a program that provides for housing opportunities at
other institutional designated land uses.
                                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                        Page HE- 24
POPULATION GROUPS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
581.    State Housing Element Law8 requires “an analysis of any special housing needs, such as those of
        the elderly, persons with disabilities, large families, farm workers, families with female heads of
        households, and families and persons in need of emergency shelter.”
                                                               Table 8
                                                     Special Needs Groups
         Special Needs Groups                   Persons              Households                       Percent*
         Large Households**                                               319                           11.3%
              Renter                                                       19                          (5.96%)
              Owner                                                       298                          (93.4%)
         Seniors (65+)                            1838                                                  23.2%
              With a disability                    286                                                 (15.6%)
         Senior Households**                                              862                           30.4%
              Renter                                                       24                          (2.8%)
              Owner                                                       838                          (97.2%)
         Seniors living alone                                             135                          (15.7%)
         Persons with Disability                   743                                                   9.4%
         Female-headed
         Households                                                       125                           4.44%
              With related children                                        51                          (40.8%)
         Farm workers***                           14                                                   0.18%
         Total               Persons/
         Household                                7922                   2829
         Source: 2010 Census (unless otherwise noted).
         * Numbers in ( ) reflect the % of the special needs group, and not the % of the Town Population / Households
         ** Source: socds.huduser.org/chas/reports
         *** Persons employed in Farming, Forestry or Fishing Occupations
         Large Household: 5 persons or more
        Elderly Persons
582.    Statistics cited earlier in this Element indicate that the average age of Los Altos Hills’ residents
        was greater than the County average, and that it will likely continue to increase over the next
        several years. The trend in Los Altos Hills is not unlike the national trend in that the average age
        of the population is increasing.
8 Government Code Section 65583(a)(7)
                                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                         Page HE- 25

583. There were 1,838 elderly residents (65 years of age and older) in the Town of Los Altos Hills,
     representing 23.2 percent of the total population. In addition, there were 688 residents between
     the ages of 60 and 64, and 689 residents between the ages of 55 and 59. The 2010 Census reports
     that the Town had 862 households with one or more elderly residents. Of these households 727
     consisted of households with 2 or more persons, while 135 consisted of 1 person elderly
     households. This suggests that a majority of the Town’s elderly are likely being cared for by
     family members or assisted by others in the same household. For elderly residents living alone,
     obtaining needs such as the provision of meals (due to mobility issues), transportation, and other
     typical senior services becomes a considerable challenge. These needs are now satisfied through a
     variety of programs operated and funded by the Town, Santa Clara County, and various social
     service agencies. With the Town’s older population there is a probability that there are a
     considerable number of single family detached residential units which are under-utilized due to
     the fact that they were constructed to accommodate large families and now provide living space
     for one or two people.
584. The California Health and Safety Code Section 1568.031 provides that a residential care facility
     (defined as a facility serving six or fewer persons) is a residential use and must be permitted
     wherever residential uses are allowed. Similarly, California Government Code Section 65583(c)
     (1) also requires provisions for transitional housing. The proportion of elderly is expected to
     grow, and housing for the elderly will be a continuing concern in Santa Clara County. Although
     many elderly can continue to live in their own homes, particularly if structural modifications are
     made to help them cope with the disabilities that accompany aging, there will nevertheless be an
     increasing demand for specialized care facilities. The Housing Element includes programs that
     will allow some long-term Los Altos Hills residents who can no longer remain in their homes to
     continue living in Los Altos Hills. It is anticipated that the increasing number of second units will
     allow elderly residents to remain in their homes if desired, with the assistance of caretakers.
585. Between 2007 and 2014, the Town contributed $7,350 to the Los Altos Senior Center and
     $65,230 to the Community Services Agency for the provision of such services as emergency
     assistance, nutrition and hot meal programs, information and referral, and senior care
     management.
     Large Households
586. In 2010, 11.6 percent (319) of all families residing in Los Altos Hills contained five or more
     family members. A large portion of the housing stock in Los Altos Hills is large and spacious,
     providing ample living space for the larger than average family. In fact, 2000 Census Data
     reported that homes in Los Altos Hills had a median of 8.2 rooms for all housing units, higher
     than the County median of 5 rooms per housing unit. Town records indicate that the construction
     of new residences have maintained this trend, resulting in the addition of large homes to the
     Town’s housing stock. There is no information available to suggest that large families have a
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 26

     special housing need in the Town.
     Farmworkers
587. Agricultural operations in Town are very limited and there are no year round commercial
     agricultural operations that require farmworkers on a seasonal basis. The few, small farms,
     orchards, vineyards and equestrian operations that do exist require only occasional maintenance
     and are usually contracted out to companies that provide those services. In addition, many of the
     properties that require extensive maintenance have caretakers who live on the property rent free
     or pay reduced rent.
     Female Headed Households
588. There are 125 female headed households in Los Altos Hills, constituting 4.4% of the total
     households in the community. Of these, only 51 have related children, or 1.8% of the total. The
     typical female headed household is a property owner and resides in a single-family dwelling.
     There is no information available to suggest that female headed households have additional
     special housing needs in the community.
     Persons with Disabilities
589. According to the 2010 Census information there were 743 persons with a disability in the town.
     Of these, 413 persons are between the ages of 18 and 64 years, making up approximately ten
     percent of the population of that age range. In addition, according to the most recent data from
     the State of California Department of Developmental Services, there are 45 individuals with
     developmental disabilities in the community, 30 of which are children under the age of 18, and
     almost all currently live within the home of a parent or guardian. Nearly 75 percent of those
     individuals are employed. A public transportation disability is defined as a health condition which
     makes it difficult or impossible to use buses, trains, subways, or other forms of public
     transportation. Due to limited mobility, housing that does not create barriers to living is needed
     for the physically handicapped. Because there are no multi-family housing developments within
     the Town, issues associated with providing access for the physically challenged is not addressed
     on a daily basis. The Town has noticed over the past several years an increase in requests by
     individual households to include design features, both interior and exterior, to allow for access for
     the physically challenged. As a means of facilitating requests for accessibility modifications, the
     Housing Element includes a program to develop written procedures for reasonable
     accommodation requests with respect to zoning, permit processing, and building laws. Group
     homes and other community care type facilities for disabled persons are permitted uses in the
     zoning ordinance and can be developed to the same scale as single-family dwellings. As for
     larger scale facilities, the Daughters of Charity group living facility can accommodate persons
     with disabilities under their existing conditional use permit.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 27
     Students
590. The Town of Los Altos Hills encompasses Foothill Community College and is near a number of
     other colleges and universities, including Stanford University, Santa Clara University, De Anza
     Community College, and Menlo College. In 2010, there were 530 persons residing in Los Altos
     Hills enrolled in college. About 110 are enrolled in a 4-year college and are therefore likely to be
     full-time students. Full-time students are often categorized as temporary low-income persons.
     Thus, adequate low-cost rental housing is a major need demanded by this special needs
     population, a demand which is often satisfied through the renting of rooms in many of the Town’s
     private residences. This also serves a secondary benefit in that many of the opportunities
     available to college students are with older members of the community, and the addition of a
     college aged student to a household provides opportunities for providing services to the older
     residents.
     Emergency Shelter
591. Temporary emergency shelter has become a significant housing issue across the nation. Typically
     it includes shelter for individuals and households in need due to financial hardship, family
     difficulties, a natural disaster, or temporary unemployment. The number of homeless persons is
     increasing statewide, and this problem not only affects those individuals without shelter, but also,
     the welfare of the entire community. There are many such agencies attempting to address this
     concern, several of which are outlined in a later section of this Element.
592. While there are significant numbers of homeless individuals and families throughout Santa Clara
     County (7,631 homeless individuals were counted in the most recent county survey), there are
     only two known homeless individuals residing in the Town, as documented in the 2013 Santa
     Clara County Homeless Census and Survey. Over the years the Town has allocated $240,000 of
     funding received through participation with Santa Clara County in the Housing and Community
     Development Block Grant Program to the Community Services Agency of Mountain View’s
     Project Match, to provide transitional housing in proximity to Los Altos Hills. Project Match
     program has recently been discontinued, replaced by Senior Housing Solutions. The Town also
     contributed $65,230 to the Community Services Agency of Mountain View between 2007 and
     2014.
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 28

CONSTRAINTS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
593. Development within the Town of Los Altos Hills faces a number of constraints, some naturally
     occurring, others man-made. This section of the Element addresses each of these types of
     constraint areas. This section of the Element also addresses opportunities to promote and
     encourage the development of housing.
CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
594. Development constraints can be divided among four main categories: 1) environmental, 2)
     economic, 3) governmental, and 4) infrastructure.
595. As outlined in the following pages, the primary constraint to development in the Town of Los
     Altos Hills is the natural physical environment, accommodation of which is costly due to
     additional construction requirements, and is frequently undesirable due to overriding need for
     environmental protection. Economics of land value, which is high within the Town, cannot be
     mitigated by governmental intervention short of providing significant subsidies, the funding for
     which is not available. Land costs in the Town are high because of the highly desirable features
     afforded by the Town’s environment. The Town’s development processes are similar and in some
     ways less encumbering than the development processes of adjoining communities, and do not
     represent a significant constraint to development. Finally, infrastructure requirements, again
     consistent with adjoining communities, do represent a constraint to development, a constraint
     which can sometimes be satisfied and mitigated with additional improvements.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
596. The importance of environmental constraints in housing production is especially evident in a
     community with prominent topographical features such as those found in the Town of Los Altos
     Hills. Topographic characteristics in Los Altos Hills inhibit housing construction in some areas
     due to unsafe or difficult development conditions, including flooding, seismic motion, steep
     slopes, and soil instability. The Town’s topography also affects the affordability of homes due to
     added costs created by more costly construction techniques required, such as additional
     engineering, grading, soil stabilization, non-traditional foundation systems, and site access.
     Several of the naturally occurring environmental constraints can suitably be mitigated, the cost of
     which is significant and contributes to higher housing prices. As the Town has developed over the
     years, the lands left undeveloped have typically been those which present the greatest constraints
     and costs to development due largely to naturally occurring environmental factors.
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page HE- 29

     Slope and Soil
597. The Town of Los Altos Hills is characterized as having generally sloping terrain with frequently
     unstable and/or expansive soils beneath surface deposits. These two characteristics require that
     either the conditions be avoided, leaving tracts of land undevelopable, or alternatively, that
     engineering design be carefully reviewed to ensure that landslides and other slope/soil stability
     hazards are suitably mitigated. The necessity for additional engineering and construction
     provisions, as well as for greater scrutiny in design and construction oversight, adds to the cost of
     development, a cost which is ultimately passed on to the home buyer. As noted, much of the
     remaining undeveloped lands within the Town are those with the steepest slopes and the least
     desirable soils, making their development among the costliest in the Town.
     Seismic Motion
598. The Town of Los Altos Hills is traversed by three major fault lines, including the Berrocal Fault,
     which runs from the western Town border to the southeastern tip of the Town boundaries; the
     Altamont Fault, which runs parallel to the Berrocal Fault to the north; and the Monta Vista Fault,
     which meanders from the northwest quadrant to the southeast quadrant of the Town. Although all
     of these fault lines are categorized by the State as potentially active, the history of seismic activity
     in the area does not include any significant movement along these faults.
599. In recent times, the closest area where earthquakes have originated is approximately one mile
     south of Los Altos Hills in Santa Clara County. This area experienced a series of 1.0 – 2.9
     magnitude earthquakes (Richter Scale) during the time period from 1969 to 1973.
600. Additionally, there are two large fault lines within Santa Clara County, the San Andreas and
     Calaveras faults which are known to be currently active and could endanger the stability of Los
     Altos Hills’ hillsides. The San Andreas Fault is located three to five miles southwest of the Town
     limits and the Calaveras Fault is located in the mountains east of San Jose. Although these faults
     do not traverse the Town of Los Altos Hills, it is likely that more earth movement would result
     within Town limits due to the Town’s steep topography and unstable soils.
601. In October 1989, the Loma Prieta earthquake, originating in the Santa Cruz Mountains, caused
     significant damage in Los Altos Hills, resulting in the demolition of 7 homes and necessitating
     substantial repairs to more than 25 residential units. The damage seen from the Loma Prieta
     earthquake bears out the continued necessity for stringent earthquake safety ordinances in Los
     Altos Hills, which include restricting the siting of development and high standards of engineering
     design to ensure adequate safety levels in the event of strong earth movement.
602. While the effects of a significant seismic event would be widespread, the effects would be most
     intense on lands with steeper slopes and weak soils, which represents much of the remaining
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 30

     undeveloped land within the Town and its Sphere of Influence.
     Flood Zones
599. Although no major rivers traverse the Town of Los Altos Hills, a number of creeks, especially
     Adobe Creek, and the hilly terrain create flooding possibilities in numerous areas. The General
     Plan Geotechnical Hazards Map delineates all valley bottom terrain as being prone to 100–year
     storm flood inundation. Residential construction along creeks and within delineated flood zone
     areas is restricted by federal and local regulations to minimize erosion, maintain the natural creek
     characteristics, and to ensure safe housing conditions. The valley bottoms present some of the
     more level areas of land, and would otherwise be some of the least expensive lands to develop
     due to the absence of extreme slope conditions. However, because of the flood hazard conditions
     on many of the valley floors, the cost of construction is higher due to the need to account for
     drainage and flood control, a cost which is passed on to the home buyer, as well as the
     requirement that the home buyer acquire Federal flood insurance, at a substantial additional cost.
     Areas most subject to flooding have often been left undeveloped due in part to the costs
     associated with mitigating the potential hazards. In order to keep all flood management analysis
     consistent, an existing program will be carried forward in the Housing Element update to ensure
     that the Town will amend the Safety and Conservation Elements of the General Plan to include
     analyses and policies regarding flood hazard and management, as per AB 162. Per this program,
     the Town shall also annually review the Land Use Element of the General Plan for those areas
     subject to flooding as identified by the flood plan prepared by the Federal Management Agency
     or the Department of Water Resources (DWR).
     Wildland Fire
604. The issue of wildland fire is a continuing issue in the development of Los Altos Hills’ lands.
     Fueled by dense vegetation and extreme slopes, a wildland fire in 1985 destroyed thirteen single
     family residential units. The issue of wildland fire was emphasized in the 1991 Oakland Hills
     Fire, where more than 3,000 residential units were damaged or destroyed in a setting similar to
     that of the Town’s. Steep terrain and extensive vegetation combine to create a setting which must
     be carefully evaluated and mitigated in the approval of new residential development. The Town
     often requires mitigation of the potential exposure of residential units to areas of relatively high
     fire danger, which tends to further increase the cost of residential development. Also, narrow
     roads, necessitated by the extensive steep terrain as a means of avoiding severe grading and
     leveling of the natural terrain, make access to the hillsides difficult.
ECONOMIC CONSTRAINTS
605. Economic factors, in addition to governmental and environmental factors, can significantly affect
     the availability and cost of housing. A major difference between economic and governmental
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 31

     influences is that a jurisdiction has little or no control over the economic factors which affect the
     housing market, and these market factors can often offset a jurisdiction’s attempts to make
     housing construction desirable and feasible. The three economic factors which contribute most to
     the constraint of housing development are:
             Land costs;
             Construction costs; and
             Financing costs.
     Land Costs
606. The typically quoted cost for an acre of undeveloped land which has a reasonable potential for
     development within the Town of Los Altos Hills ranges from $1.5 million to $2.5 million dollars
     depending on its proximity to the freeway. While a minor portion of land cost can be attributed to
     the Town’s minimum lot size requirements, a majority is attributable to the physical environment
     afforded within the Town, including such features as the hillside terrain, dense vegetation, other
     natural and man-made amenities, and the unique semirural residential community. Other cities
     and towns along the San Francisco peninsula which have high appeal in terms of places to live
     have similar high land values due to limited supply and high demand.
     Construction Costs
607. Due to the need to accommodate steeply sloping properties, geotechnical constraints, and the
     provision of utilities and sewage systems, the cost of construction in Los Altos Hills is
     considerably higher than elsewhere in the Bay Area. Developers and contractors must
     compensate for these constraints, and additional costs for such items as grading, retaining walls
     and ensuring soil stability translate into construction costs that substantially exceed those of other
     Bay Area communities.
     Financing Costs
608. Interest rates significantly affect the cost of a home, yet constantly fluctuate so that it is difficult
     to determine exactly how much of a burden they pose to home buyers. There is no evidence to
     suggest that the availability of loans for potential Los Altos Hills home buyers is less than in
     other regions of the Bay Area. Nor is there evidence to suggest that financing costs are any higher
     for Los Altos Hills than elsewhere in the regional area. Thus, although financing costs add a
     significant cost to home purchase; this additional cost is no different in the Town of Los Altos
     Hills than in surrounding communities.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE- 32

GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
609. Although governmental housing regulations are created for the purpose of ensuring an acceptable
     quality of housing development, these regulations can sometimes negatively affect housing
     availability. For example, development fees associated with securing the necessary approvals and
     permits are usually passed on to the home buyer, meaning that housing costs are increased. The
     challenge is to achieve a balance between the goal of maintaining safe, quality housing and the
     goal of providing affordable housing. This section examines governmental regulations which can
     act as constraints to development and provides a discussion of possible mitigation or removal of
     these constraints, and concludes that the Town’s institutional regulations and processes are not a
     significant constraint to the development of housing in light of the Town’s physical environment
     and community objectives to establish and maintain a semirural-oriented residential community.
610. Governmental factors which most affect the development of housing in the Town of Los Altos
     Hills are:
          Land use controls;
          Development review and processing time frames; and
          Development and permit fees.
611. Within the Town of Los Altos Hills the costs associated with the governmental process, both
     dollar and time costs are similar to those imposed by similar communities in the area and in some
     instances, are less. As a whole, the Town’s processes and costs for development approval are
     considered reasonable, and are not considered an impediment or constraint to development.
     Land Use Controls
612. Land use controls have been established to guide growth of the Town in an orderly manner and to
     preserve the health and safety of Town residents and improvements, as well as to protect the open
     and semirural residential character of the community. Land uses are regulated through the
     creation of two land use zones. These zones establish Los Altos Hills as a transition area between
     the urbanized mid-peninsula and the open coastal mountain range.
613. The two designated land use zones are as follows:
             Residential-Agricultural District (R-A) – The primary uses allowed are primary dwellings
              and agriculture, with a minimum lot size of one acre. Dwellings may be custom built or
              factory built and no design review is required for secondary dwelling units. Larger lot
              minimums may be imposed if it is determined that the slope of the land or other
              environmental constraints to development dictate a larger lot to ensure environmental
              protection, avoidance of naturally occurring or man-made hazards, and implementation of
              the Town’s General Plan. Accessory uses, including home occupations and child daycare
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 33

                 homes, private stables, pools, tennis courts, greenhouses, workshops, antennas and dish
                 antennas, secondary dwelling units, transitional housing, emergency shelters, and
                 temporary trailer coaches are also permitted in the R-A zone. Additionally, conditional
                 uses are acceptable provided the project meets the Town’s regulations and the Council’s
                 approval. Conditional uses include: public libraries, churches, recreation facilities,
                 temporary house trailers, day nurseries and kindergartens, public and private schools,
                 public utility and services uses, fire and police stations, Town facilities, and commercial
                 stables.
                Open Space Reserve District (OSR) – The primary uses allowed in the OSR zone are
                 agricultural uses (including horticulture and grazing), forest preserves, and other open
                 space uses. Accessory uses and structures other than buildings necessary to conduct a
                 primary use are not permitted.
      Residential Design Standards
614.  To maintain its semirural character, the Town of Los Altos Hills has created a set of site design
      standards to be followed by all developers. As stated in the Town’s Municipal Code, “All lots or
      parcels shall be designed so as to take maximum advantage of, while still preserving, the basic
      natural characteristics of the land.”
                Driveways – A minimum 14-foot driveway width is required, with excessive widths
                 prohibited as a means of minimizing impacts associated with land form modification.
                 Where driveways are exceptionally long, the width, grade, and construction are also
                 regulated by the Los Altos Fire Protection District to ensure adequate access for fire
                 protection services.
                Off-Street Parking – Off-street parking for four vehicles is required for all single family
                 detached residential units. Residential second units are required to provide one space
                 reserved for the second unit only, although the parking space may be in located in tandem
                 with existing parking. Off-street parking within the Town of Los Altos Hills is necessary
                 due to the narrow, winding roadway system and the need to maintain the roadway system
                 free of obstructions for normal and emergency vehicular traffic. The requirement for four
                 off-street parking spaces stems in part from the lack of any public transportation serving
                                                          9
                 the residential areas of the Town.
                Road Design Standards – The minimum right-of-way width for most new public and
                 private roads serving 3 or more lots or single family detached residential units, except fire
    9
      The requirement for the provision of four off-street parking spaces for all single family detached residential units and
      one additional off-street parking space for residential second units does not appear to be a deterrent to the development
      of either type of residential unit.
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                       Page HE- 34

  or emergency roads, is 60 feet. Fire or emergency roads widths are variable. Grades in
  excess of 15 percent are generally not permitted.
 Sanitary Sewer Improvements – Every lot must be provided with adequate sanitary sewer
  disposal either through connection to a public sanitary sewer system or an individual
  septic system. A considerable portion of undeveloped lands within the Town’s corporate
  limits as well as those undeveloped lands in the Town’s Sphere of Influence are more
  than 200 feet from an existing public sanitary sewer line (connection to public sanitary
  sewer systems is required for new development within 200 feet of a sewer line). New
  development beyond this distance may utilize an individual septic system which may
  reduce costs associated with new housing development, although it should also be noted
  that the use of individual septic systems does represent a limitation on the development of
  lands not served by public sewer systems. In addition, recent code changes enacted by
  the county and the Town allow for secondary units to connect to existing septic systems
  if they have adequate capacity. This further reduces constraints to providing secondary
  units on existing properties.
 Storm Drainage Improvements – Drainage systems must be designed to minimize the
  effects of erosion, siltation, and flooding on immediate or distant downstream neighbors
  and public facilities.
 Underground Utility Improvements – All new and existing public utility systems and
  service facilities must be installed underground when properties are proposed for
  subdivision. Besides the obvious aesthetic benefit of underground utilities, the added
  benefit is protection of vital services delivered via these utilities such as electricity,
  telephone, and cable television. In the Oakland Hills Firestorm of 1991, overhead lines
  were severed during the fire making communication difficult if not impossible, and
  cutting electrical power to pumps and other services vital to fire protection efforts.
 Water Improvements – The developer must provide a complete water system and furnish
  evidence showing the availability of the public water system to serve the project, as well
  as adequate water supply for fire protection.
 Path and Trail Easements – As depicted on the General Plan circulation map, the Master
  Path Plan Map and in the Pathways Element, easements or in lieu fees must be provided
  for adequate trails when designated parcels are developed. Improvements are also usually
  required. The paths serve as the pedestrian circulation system which links most areas of
  the Town.
 Height of Structures – The vertical height limit of buildings is limited to 27 feet in order
  to maintain a consistent, low profile that is compatible with the Town’s semirural
                            2015-2023 Housing Element
                            Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                   Page HE- 35

             character. Building height may be increased to a maximum of 32 feet if setbacks are
             increased as specified in the Town’s Zoning ordinance.
            Maximum Development Area– The maximum development area (MDA) of a lot is that
             portion of a lot which may be developed with buildings and impervious surfaces, and
             which requires that the balance of the lot area be retained in an undeveloped or
             landscaped state. The MDA is based upon a relationship between the average slope of the
             lot and the lot’s net area. Within the context of MDA, development includes the primary
             and secondary residential units and other buildings (floor area), parking areas, patios,
             decks, walkways, swimming pools, tennis courts, etc. MDA is typically 15,000 square
             feet on a relatively flat, one-acre lot.
            Maximum Floor Area - The maximum floor area (MFA) is the maximum amount of floor
             area (building area, including each floor of a structure, plus garages and other accessory
             structures) which may be developed on a lot. The MFA is based upon a relationship
             between the average slope of the lot and the lot’s net area. MFA is typically 6,000 square
             feet on a relatively flat, one-acre lot.
            Setback Lines – All structures must be set back at least 40 feet from the nearest public or
             private street property line for front yard setbacks, and 30 feet from property lines for the
             side and rear yard setbacks.
            Landscaping – A landscape plan providing at least the minimal amount of landscaping
             necessary to mitigate off-site visual impacts is required for almost all projects.
            Residential Secondary Dwelling Units – Secondary units are permitted on all lots with at
             least one gross acre of land, subject to compliance with all of the other site standards
             discussed above. Such units are limited to a maximum of 1,000 square feet in size, must
             be compatible with the main residence and site, and require an additional parking space.
615. Development standards established in the R-A Zoning District for such aspects as building
     setbacks, parking, building height, and floor area ratio are generally no more restrictive than in
     other communities, particularly those with similar environmental settings. Where there may be
     some variance with other communities along the San Francisco peninsula is the Town’s minimum
     lot size of one acre. As has been noted earlier in this Element, the necessity of a one acre
     minimum lot size evolves from several factors, including the community’s commitment to
     preserving a semirural residential setting and the need to allow siting flexibility to avoid to the
     extent possible naturally occurring environmental hazards.
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 36

     Development Review and Processing Time Frames
616. The typical sequence of development in the Town of Los Altos Hills is to first subdivide acreage
     through the Subdivision process, to then obtain Site Development Permits for each lot, and then
     to obtain a building permit for each residential unit to be constructed.
617. If subdivision of large acreage is proposed, the typical processing time for a subdivision map
     ranges between 6 months and one year, with the variation stemming from requirements of the
     California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and whether or not a Mitigated Negative
     Declaration or Environmental Impact Report is prepared to satisfy the requirements of CEQA.
     These time frames for the processing of subdivision maps are typical for communities along the
     San Francisco peninsula and throughout much of the State, and therefore, are not considered an
     additional constraint in the Town.
618. Site Development Permits are required for the development of new single family detached
     residential units, whether a lot has been newly created via a recent subdivision process or if the
     lot has been in existence for some time. The basic purpose of the Site Development Permit
     process is to ensure that a proposed new single family detached residential unit satisfies all of the
     Town’s established development standards (height, setbacks, Floor Area, Development Area,
     etc.) and that its siting mitigates any potentially adverse impacts including such considerations as
     visual prominence, removal of vegetation, and excessive grading. It should be noted that there is
     no architectural design review conducted or required in the Town, either in conjunction with the
     Site Development Permit process or as a separate review process. The typical processing time for
     a Site Development Permit is two to six months, a time frame not considered to be an impediment
     to residential development, and a time frame certainly at parity with other communities. Site
     Development Permits for new residences are acted upon by the Planning Commission after
     recommendations by Town staff.
619. Site Development Permit approval is also required for the development of residential secondary
     dwelling units. However, since 2003, the Town has been processing second unit applications
     ministerially, with no public notification or hearing required. The Town’s ordinance was
     amended to comply with Government Code Section 65852 which requires local governments
     with a second unit ordinance to ministerially consider second unit applications. The net effect of
     the Ordinance change is to reduce processing times and costs for a residential second unit
     compared with other permits. The approximate processing time frame for a second unit permit is
     less than 30 days. A public hearing may be required before the Planning Commission when a
     second unit project does not meet all applicable Town requirements.
620. Building permits, and associated mechanical, electrical, and plumbing permits, are issued prior to
     the start of construction. The basic purpose of the permits is to ensure that construction activities
     satisfy all requirements of the Uniform Building Code and its associated specialty codes. The
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 37

     Town’s typical time frame for the processing of a building permit for an accessory structure such
     as a second unit is one and one-half to two weeks, and again, is not considered excessive or
     constraining.
621. The Town has adopted the 2013 California Building Standards Code, as required of all
     jurisdictions in California along with amendments that are specific to the unique characteristics of
     the Town. The Building Standards Code establishes construction standards necessary to protect
     public health, safety and welfare, and does not unduly constrain development of housing. Los
     Altos Hills has adopted several local amendments to the Building Code to protect the public from
     hazards that are unique to the Town such as wildfires, steep hillsides and proximity to earthquake
     faults.
     Development and Permit Fees
622. Development fees in the Town of Los Altos Hills are charged for both planning activities and for
     building permits. Planning fees are charged for the purpose of recovering all costs associated with
     administration of the Town’s regulations pertaining to land use. Planning fees are currently
     comprised of a non-refundable fee and a deposit, against which professional planning and
     engineering staff charge to provide review services. This fee structure reflects the Town’s actual
     cost for staff time. The Town reviews its fee structure and levels on a regular basis to ensure they
     reflect the true cost of delivering services.
623. Building permit fees are charged to cover costs associated with the review of building plans for
     conformance with the California Building Standards Code as well as costs associated with
     conducting building construction inspections. The fees charged for building permits are based on
     the valuation of the construction. The City Council directed a review of the rates charged for the
     issuance of Building Permits with the possibility of reducing the current fees required. The net
     effect of the reduction is a lessening of the costs associated with obtaining entitlement and
     development permits, which may have a measurable effect on the overall cost of housing. The
     most recent fee schedule was adopted in June 2014. The Housing Element includes a program
     that provides for regular review of fees to ensure that the cost of development review is not
     excessive while covering the cost of delivery of services.
624. The Town and special districts also impose new development fees for the construction and/or
     connection of new infrastructure systems to existing systems. This includes water, sewer, and
     drainage fees and connection charges to address issues associated with increased system capacity
     demands and impacts. The Town also collects a $1,222 housing fee imposed on the issuance of
     each building permit for a new residence. The fee was initiated in 1978 and was reviewed a few
     years ago as part of an analysis of building permit fees. Starting in 2004, the housing fee is
     waived for secondary dwelling units.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 38

625.  While not imposed by the Town, local school districts charge a fee which is linked to the size of
      new construction and must be paid prior to issuance of building permits. The purpose of the fee is
      to compensate serving school districts for the costs associated with the demand for additional
      services and classroom space generated by new residential development. The three districts which
      collect fees in the Town are the Los Altos Elementary School District, which levies a fee of $2.24
      per square foot for residential construction, the Mountain View-Los Altos High School District,
      which levies a fee of $1.12 per square foot for residential construction within the Town, and the
      Palo Alto Unified School District, levies a fee of $3.25 per square foot for residential construction
      within the Town.
626.  As noted, the Town completed the evaluation of the fee schedules associated with the entitlement
      and development process and where possible, lowered fees while not compromising service
      levels or public health, safety, and welfare. Appendix H identifies the cumulative fees required
      for a typical single family residential home, as well as for a second unit. In total, development
      fees for a single-family home average $44,255, representing two to three percent of the value of
      newly constructed homes in the community. While fees on secondary units are one-third of the
      cost of a single-family home, they could potentially serve as a disincentive for a homeowner to
      add a second unit. As the sewer connection and building permit fees represent the highest fees
      charged on second units, a program has been added to the Housing Element to develop criteria for
      reducing or waiving these two fees as a means of better facilitating second units.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS
627.  When analyzing infrastructure constraints which may affect future housing development in Los
      Altos Hills, it is important to note that many remaining vacant properties are vacant because they
      are constrained by one or more factors. Circulation and roadways, storm drainage, wastewater
      treatment and Fire protection are the most prevalent constraints. Many vacant properties are
      located on substandard roadways in high fire hazard areas, have inadequate access, lack sewer
      facilities and/or cannot accommodate septic systems, or have storm drainage problems which
      must be corrected prior to development.
628.  Mitigation to overcome these constraints will become more necessary as the Town moves closer
      to build out. The following analysis is provided to outline the effect of continued housing
      development on these public facilities serving the Town. In addition, Police protection, water
      supply, school facilities, public transportation, and commercial services are discussed below.
      Circulation System
629.  The existing circulation system is designed primarily for low volume rural residential use. Roads
      are rural in design with narrow widths averaging 20 to 24 feet without curbs and gutters. Some
      roads are gravel, or dirt, with limited paved surface. The overall road system conforms to the
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE- 39
     natural topography, which would be significantly altered if a more traditional, suburban style
     roadway system were constructed.
630. Aside from occasional cases where a parcel planned for development abuts a roadway requiring
     improvements, minimal routine maintenance is provided by the Town. Typically, when
     development abuts a roadway requiring improvements, the developer is required to improve the
     roadway to Town standards.
631. Available data on traffic volume and patterns indicates that traffic volumes are the heaviest along
     Arastradero Road, Page Mill Road, Fremont Road, and El Monte Road, which are the roadways
     carrying traffic through the Town from origins and to destinations outside the Town’s corporate
     limits. No roadways exceed their maximum capacity, and, assuming residential densities and
     development continue at the current rate, it appears existing roadways can accommodate
     remaining build out, if necessary mitigation is implemented on an individual basis. If higher
     densities of development are allowed, the circulation system would be significantly affected and
     constraints on further housing development would be increased.
     Storm Drainage
632. The storm drainage system of Los Altos Hills is designed to the greatest extent possible to
     maintain natural water drainage patterns. Public roads usually have no curbs or gutters and there
     are no major public storm water detention facilities. Improvements consist primarily of street
     culverts which pass under driveways. Drainage and erosion problems have sometimes occurred
     from past development which was not subject to the level of engineering review and standards
     required today. The Town has made continuous effort to address storm drainage problems and
     make improvements necessary to control these problems. The Town created a Development Area
     policy to encourage limiting impervious paving in private development. Town government
     buildings are models in green design, including pervious surfaces and solar energy, in order to
     serve as an example of environmentally sustainable design. As mentioned previously, storm
     drainage is a constraint to development in that many remaining vacant properties have storm
     drainage problems which will require correction prior to development. These necessary storm
     drainage improvements may also create an increase in housing costs since they may dictate the
     design of the development on the site and limit it to some degree. The current infrastructure of the
     Town has limited resources to maintain and improve existing drainage facilities in Town, even
     with the fees charged in association with the issuance of building permits for new residential
     units. Allowance of higher density in the Town would intensify the problems already experienced
     in the Town with drainage facilities.
     Wastewater Treatment
633. The Town’s wastewater treatment needs are served by individual septic systems and by sanitary
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page HE- 40

     sewer service. Approximately one-half of the Town utilizes septic systems; The other half are
     connected to public sewer with services provided through contract with the City of Palo Alto or
     the Town of Los Altos sanitary sewer systems. The Palo Alto sanitary sewer basin has adequate
     capacity to accommodate new connections in the Town. However, sanitary sewer lines do not
     presently extend to all areas of the community. Parcels more than 200 feet from existing sanitary
     sewer lines have the option of installing individual septic systems, which is often less expensive
     than the cost of extending sanitary sewer lines. However, some parcels located more than 200 feet
     from existing sanitary sewer lines are precluded or severely constrained in terms of the use of
     individual septic systems due to other site constraints, including extreme slopes and soils not
     suited for septic system leach fields. The Los Altos sanitary sewer is almost at contractual
     capacity. This is considered a significant constraint to development in the southern one third of
     the Town. A joint sewer study by Los Altos and Los Altos Hills was completed in 2004 to
     determine under what conditions additional capacity may be granted. The Town is currently
     working with the City of Los Altos to measure actual capacity by installing flow meters
     throughout the system. Currently, there is sufficient sewer capacity to accommodate the
     community’s regional housing needs through development on the sites identified in the Housing
     Element sites inventory in Appendix F-1 and F-2.
634. The Housing Element identifies the Foothill College site as suitable for multi-family faculty and
     student housing. Foothill College has the necessary sewer and water infrastructure in place to
     serve future multi-family development.
     Fire Protection
635. Fire protection service in Los Altos Hills is provided by the Santa Clara County Fire Department.
     The City of Palo Alto provides backup services when needed. Most of the Town represents a high
     fire risk and there are many concerns associated with providing adequate fire protection. Most
     areas of the community are designated as high fire hazard areas due to the amount of natural
     vegetation, limited access, and steep terrain. These factors combine to impact the costs of housing
     development through the necessity to incorporate design features and construction techniques and
     materials which help mitigate the high fire hazard.
     Police Protection
636. The Town of Los Altos Hills is not categorized as a high crime area. The Town’s police services
     are provided under contract by the Santa Clara County Sheriff’s Department.
     Water Supply
637. The Town’s drinking water is provided by two water suppliers: Purissima Hills Water District
     and the California Water Service Company (CalWater). Purissima Hills Water District is a public
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page HE- 41

     agency that provides water to residents in the northern two-thirds of Los Altos Hills; CalWater is
     an investor-owned utility that serves the remaining area. A few residents supplement their water
     supply with well water.
634. The amount of water available is constrained. Purissima Hills presently obtains all of its water
     from San Francisco’s Hetch Hetchy system and is exceeding its supply assurance by 25-35
     percent. Capacity limitations in the Hetch Hetchy system may be reached in six to eight years, or
     sooner in times of drought. Cal Water obtains the water supplied to Los Altos Hills from the
     Santa Clara Valley Water District via pipelines from the SCVWD’s Rinconada treatment plant
     and from company-owned wells. During the dry season, the plant and pipelines are at capacity.
     Nonetheless, at the current time, water service and supply is sufficient to accommodate the
     community’s regional housing needs through development on the sites identified in the Housing
     Element sites inventory.
635. When system capacity limits are reached, or in times of drought, water use may be subject to
     rationing or other restrictions. Purissima Hills may be limited to its contractual allotment and Cal
     Water may have to implement some restrictions based on the supply available during drought or
     other occasions of constrained supply. Landscaping that is heavily dependent on irrigation may
     not survive. Over 80% of all water used each year in the Purissima Hills Water District is for
     irrigation of landscaping. During the summer dry season (June through September) water used for
     landscaping is on average, five times that of the rainy season. The 2007 Conservation Element
     includes policies encouraging native, water-efficient vegetation. In addition, the Town adopted a
     water efficient landscape ordinance in 2010 to further reduce water use for landscaping.
636. SB 1087 now requires water and sewer providers to grant priority for service allocations to
     proposed developments that include units affordable to lower income households. As second
     units serve to provide affordable housing in Los Altos Hills, the Town will request priority
     granting of services to second units from water and sewer providers.
     School Districts
637. Los Altos Hills is located within portions of three school districts, the Los Altos Elementary
     School District, the Palo Alto Unified School District, and the Mountain View-Los Altos Union
     High School District. Enrollment in these districts, particularly at the elementary school level, has
     been increasing slowly over the past few years and is projected to continue to do so. Reports from
     the district indicate that there is concern about potential over-crowding in the future if
     development continues to occur in the areas served by the districts. Gardner-Bullis School,
     renovated and reopened in 2008, is the only public elementary school within Town limits.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 42

     Public Transportation
638. Public transportation service to Foothill College and downtown Los Altos is provided by the
     Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority. The District’s service to the Town is limited, and it
     is estimated that fewer than 125 of the more than 2,850 properties in Town are within 1/2 mile of
     public transportation. Transportation for seniors and disabled persons unable to utilize
     conventional public transportation is provided by the District’s paratransit service.
     Commercial Services
639. There is a lack of any commercial services typically associated with suburban communities, such
     as retail shopping and financial, business, and medical services. As has been outlined earlier in
     this Element, the Town does not allow the development of these services. They are available in
     adjoining suburban communities, and within close proximity by automobile.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR HOUSING
640. There are opportunities for the Town to add additional residential units to its current stock, even
     though there are significant constraints to the additional development of housing. Most of the
     land within the Town’s existing corporate limits has been previously subdivided and developed.
     Remaining properties within the Town tend to be those which are less easily developed due to
     environmental and infrastructure constraints. However, Los Altos Hills finds itself with greater
     potential because of its large lots which can accommodate a form of ‘infill’ housing through the
     encouragement of secondary dwelling units.
     Vacant and Underutilized Parcels
641. The Town’s zoning requires that residential lots have a minimum lot size of 1 acre. Given that
     additional development constraints such as topography, creeks, easements, and dedications may
     further reduce the net parcel area of a proposed subdivision, it is likely that most future
     subdivisions will occur on parcels with a minimum area of 3 acres. A vacant and underutilized
     parcel study identified a total of 134 vacant or underutilized parcels with potential to be
     subdivided or developed. The results of the study are provided in Appendix F-1. An evaluation of
     known development constraints for each site was provided by the Town’s planning staff.
     Factoring in the site constraints for these parcels, it was estimated that a range of 185-356
     additional single-family dwelling units and secondary dwelling units may be added through
     subdivision or development of these parcels.
     Sites Suitable For Low and Moderate Priced Housing
642. Housing element law requires jurisdictions to demonstrate the availability of zoning to encourage
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page HE- 43

     and facilitate a variety of housing types, including multi-family residential uses. Los Altos Hills’
     land use controls currently provide only for the development of single-family residential uses,
     reflecting both the Town’s desire to maintain its semirural character, as well as density limitations
     made necessary due to significant geological, infrastructure, and environmental constraints, as
     documented in the Town’s General Plan. For example, infrastructure limitations include a lack of
     storm drainage facilities, the continued use of septic rather than sewer systems in much of the
     Town, and narrow road widths. In addition, the Town does not have any public services or
     facilities other than the Town government offices and a few schools and a junior college, and
     public transportation opportunities are limited.
     In order to comply with housing element requirements, while respecting the Town’s unique
     characteristics and constraints, the Town has identified the Foothill Community College site as
     suitable for affordable multi-family housing for college faculty, employees and students. The
     Foothill College site encompasses 122 acres, including over 20 acres of undeveloped space. Also,
     while most sites are not served by a sewer, the Foothill College site is connected to the Los Altos
     Sewer Basin, and has water service provided by the Purissima Hills Water District. In addition,
     there is also adequate transit accessibility to the Site, via VTA's routes 40 and 52, and it is located
     less than a quarter mile from I-280. These facilities make the Foothill College site a very optimal
     site for multi-family housing.
     To enable development of multi-family housing on Foothill College, the Town shall complete a
     General Plan Text Amendment where it shall change the land use designation of the Foothill
     College Site from P (Public School) to PC (Public College), and identify multi-family residential
     as a permissible use. In addition, the Zoning Code will also be amended to permit sites
     designated as Public College by the General Plan to allow multi-family residential uses at
     densities of 20 du/acre.
     Sites Suitable for Residential Second Units
643. All vacant and underutilized parcels identified in Appendix F can be developed with a second
     unit. Therefore, each newly developed parcel has the potential for a second unit which would in
     effect double the number of potential units on the vacant and underutilized parcels in the Town
     limits. Given some of the benefits of second units which were discussed in this Element, it is very
     likely the Town will continue to receive more applications for the development of second units.
     Community members expressed interest in pursuing second units and the Town has promoted this
     type of unit as a source of housing. Additionally, the Town’s sphere of influence offer
     opportunities for development of second units.
     Annexation of Sites Suitable for Development
644. In 2002, the Town prezoned a total of 286 acres of land known as San Antonio Hills that includes
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 44

     primarily one-acre lots. Some of lands have been annexed to the Town of Los Altos Hills and it is
     anticipated most will be annexed, over time. In late 2002, 58 acres in the Ravensbury area within
     San Antonio Hills was annexed by the Town. In September 2007, the Town annexed 82.83 acres
     (65 parcels) known as the West Loyola neighborhood and in 2010, an additional 24 acres (with
     24 homes) in the Olive Tree neighborhood were annexed. This added to the supply of available
     housing units in the Town of Los Altos Hills. Additionally, all lots of one or more acres in size
     can potentially accommodate a secondary unit thus increasing the supply of affordable rental
     units.
     Sites Suitable For Manufactured Housing and Mobile Homes
645. All vacant parcels identified on Appendix F are available for rental, factory-built, manufactured,
     or pre-fabricated housing. It is probable that non-governmental constraints, such as property
     costs, will continue to preclude this type of housing development in Los Altos Hills in the future,
     even on lots that currently exist below the required 1-acre minimum.
     Sites Suitable for Employee Housing
646. Certain non-residential uses (subject to Conditional Use Permits) offer opportunities for the
     development of housing for employees. These properties are designated as institutional uses on
     the General Plan land use map and consist of three schools, a community college, four religious
     facilities, and Town Hall. These properties have the potential to provide housing opportunities
     for a small number of employees to live on-site. This will help in the creation of affordable
     housing opportunities in Los Altos Hills while helping in the reduction of commute traffic and
     contributing to the Town’s jobs/housing balance efforts.
     Sites Suitable for Affordable Student and Faculty Housing
647. Foothill College is a unique site and offers the potential for both faculty, staff and student
     housing. The Town has recently communicated to Foothill College representatives that the Town
     would be supportive of exploring options for on-campus faculty housing and/or student housing if
     the College should pursue such housing opportunities. The possibility for higher density housing
     exists due to the size of the site and number of potential users. As indicated in Program #19 of the
     Housing Element, the Town will support future development of affordable housing on the
     Foothill College site through various incentives, including an expedited review process, enabling
     General Plan and Zoning designations, and potential funding applications.
     Sites for Emergency Shelters/Transitional and Supportive Housing
648. Emergency Shelters - Pursuant to SB 2, jurisdictions with an unmet need for emergency shelters
     are now required to identify a zone(s) where emergency shelters will be allowed as a permitted
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 45

     use without a conditional use permit or other discretionary permit. The identified zone must have
     sufficient capacity to accommodate the shelter need, and at a minimum provide capacity for at
     least one year-round shelter. Permit processing, development and management standards for
     emergency shelters must be objective and facilitate the development of, or conversion to,
     emergency shelters.
     As discussed in the homeless section of the Housing Needs Assessment, there are 2 known
     homeless individuals or families residing in the Town, as documented in the 2013 Santa Clara
     County Homeless Census and Survey. In order to comply with SB 2, the Town adopted a zoning
     text amendment that permits emergency shelters on properties that are designated institutional on
     the Town’s land use map. There is sufficient capacity available on these institutional sites to
     accommodate emergency shelters for homeless individuals in the community.
649. Transitional and Supportive Housing - Transitional housing is temporary housing (generally 6
     months to 2 years) for homeless individuals or families transitioning from homelessness to
     permanent housing, whereas supportive housing is permanent housing with social services that
     support households in maintaining stable, productive lives. SB 2 requires jurisdictions to regulate
     transitional and supportive housing as a type of residential use subject only to those restrictions
     that apply to that type of residential use in the same zone. In June 2013, the Town adopted a
     zoning amendment that allows transitional and supportive housing as a permitted use throughout
     the community in compliance with SB 2.
650. Organizations which provide emergency shelter are also located in nearby communities. These
     organizations, the cities in which they are located, and a brief description of the services they
     offer are listed below.
             Community Services Agency of Mountain View/Los Altos (Mountain View)
                       Refers needy persons to emergency shelters in the area or uses a voucher system
                       to provide temporary lodging (maximum of 3 days) at a motel, and provides one-
                       time emergency financial assistance for rent or bills, to help avoid emergency
                       homelessness. Families with children are given first priority. All cases are
                       reviewed individually. A portion of the Town’s Housing and Community
                       Development Block Grant Program funds have been allocated to the Community
                       Services Agency.
             Salvation Army (Sunnyvale/Mountain View)
                       Refers all persons, if possible, to emergency shelters or provides one day shelter
                       at a motel using a voucher system on a very limited, case by case basis. Single
                       men are generally referred to the San Jose Hospitality House where they may
                       stay free of charge for three nights per year. Fees are charged for additional
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 46

          nights lodging.
 Haven Family House (Menlo Park)
          Provides transitional housing and on-site support services for up to 15 homeless
          families at a time in one and two bedroom apartments. The center reports that a
          majority of program graduates are rapidly and permanently re-housed.
 InnVision
          Operates Hotel DeZinc, providing lodging for 15 to 20 single persons, hosted by
          Palo Alto area faith communities. InnVision also operates Claro-Mateo Alliance
          Shelter and Claro-Mateo Alliance Shelter, with 48 beds for single adults and
          couples and 6 units for families. On the peninsula, InnVision also operates
          transitional housing, permanent supportive housing, and self sufficiency services
          at a variety of locations, primarily in Menlo Park and Palo Alto.
 Fair Oaks Community Center (Redwood City)
          Whenever possible, refers both families and singles to transitional housing
          facilities. In limited cases, provides vouchers for a maximum of two to three
          nights stay at a motel.
 Emergency Housing Consortium of Santa Clara County
          This consortium has shelters and programs located throughout the County, the
          closest one in Sunnyvale. The Transitional Housing Program (THP) offers
          transitional work and housing support.
 Family Supportive Housing, Inc.
          Family Supportive Housing offers shelter and supportive services to homeless
          families in Santa Clara County, offering three services: the San Jose Family
          Shelter, the Bridges AfterCare transitional support program, and GlennArts Arms
          transitional housing program. The emergency shelter facility houses families with
          children for up to three months and 70 percent of those served are children. The
          GlennArts Arms program offers rental subsidy and case management for families
          for up to two years and can serve about 16 to 20 families at a time.
                           2015-2023 Housing Element
                           Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                  Page HE- 47

     Housing for Persons with Disabilities:
651. Housing Element law requires that the Element analyze constraints to the development,
     improvement and maintenance of housing for persons with disabilities including those with
     developmental disabilities. As stated previously, there are an estimated 425 individuals in the
     community classified as disabled, the majority being elderly. According to the most recent data
     from the State of California Department of Developmental Services, there are 45 individuals with
     developmental disabilities in the community, 30 of which are children under the age of 18. In
     addition, 44 of the 45 persons currently live within the home of a parent or guardian.
     In order to address housing for persons with disabilities, the following categories of housing types
     and an analysis of policies, practices, processing, procedures and programs related to these
     housing types is as follows:
        Group Homes: State law requires that residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons
         shall not require a conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance. The
         Town’s zoning ordinance Section 10-1.702.h currently permits residential care facilities
         serving six or fewer person by right as an accessory use in the R-A zone. The entire
         community has only one single family residential district. Therefore, allowances for group
         homes over six specifically for the disabled in other zoning districts are not necessary. In
         addition, the Town does not have siting, separation, or separate parking requirements for
         licensed residential care facilities and special needs housing developments. Furthermore, the
         Daughters of Charity property has an existing conditional use permit that includes a 24-hour,
         supervised care facility for up to 40 elderly residents.
        Definition of Family: The Town’s zoning ordinance was amended to include a definition of
         family which is inclusive and non-discriminatory.
        Reasonable Accommodations: The Town has conducted a review of zoning and building code
         requirements, and has not identified any barriers to the development, maintenance or
         improvement of accessible housing. Due to the large lots and ample setbacks of single family
         homes in town, most if not all accessibility modifications can be accommodated through a
         simple remodel permit. Handicapped ramps and guardrails are permitted to intrude into the
         standard setbacks required under zoning to allow first floor access for physically disabled
         residents. While the Town has not identified any constraints to the provision of accessible
         housing, the Town has not developed specific procedures for requesting a reasonable
         accommodation. As a means of facilitating such requests, the town has included a program in
         the Housing Element to develop procedures for reasonable accommodation requests with
         respect to zoning, permit processing, and building laws.
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 48

     Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME funds
652. The Town participates with Santa Clara County as part of the Urban County Consortium for
     Federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME funds. These funding
     sources are available to support in affordable housing programs benefiting low income (80%
     MFI) households. Income eligible homeowners in Los Altos Hills can access the Housing
     Rehabilitation Loan Program offered by the County Office of Affordable Housing. The Town can
     also apply directly to the County for CDBG and HOME funds for specific projects, which it has
     done in recent years to provide financial support for Senior Housing Solutions (formerly Project
     Match) and Mid-Peninsula Housing Coalition projects. As indicated in Program #19 of the
     Housing Element, the Town will support development of affordable housing on the Foothill
     College site through application to the County for CDBG/HOME funds.
     Housing Trust Fund of Santa Clara County (HTSCC)
653. The HTSCC is a non-profit 501(c)(3) community based organization created in 2001 through a
     cooperative effort of the private and public sectors, including the Housing Collaborative on
     Homelessness and Affordable Housing, the Silicon Valley Manufacturing Group, Santa Clara
     County, Community Foundation Silicon Valley, and all 15 Santa Clara towns and cities. The
     purpose of the Trust is to increase the supply of affordable housing in Santa Clara County within
     three program areas: first-time homebuyer assistance, multi-family rental housing, and homeless
     with special needs. Funds are available for acquisition, rehabilitation, new construction,
     predevelopment costs and supportive housing services. The Town also made contributions to the
     Housing Trust of Santa Clara County between 2007 and 2014, totaling $18,000. Since HTSCC’s
     inception in 2001, it reports raising approximately $30 million in investment dollars, which it has
     leveraged to create over 7,200 affordable housing opportunities. Los Altos Hills has contributed
     to the HTSCC, and is eligible to apply for Trust Funds in support of affordable housing activities.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page HE- 49

OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY AND RESOURCE CONSERVATION
654. Energy conservation is standard practice in the housing development industry today. Through
     basic energy conservation construction techniques, households are able to lower energy bills and
     conserve natural resources.
655. In the Los Altos Hills area, energy costs and consumption result mainly from space and water
     heating. In 2000, a majority of the residents (84%) relied on natural gas for space and water
     heating. For space and water heating, the remainder of the population which does not use utility
     gas relied on electricity (11.6%), bottled or tank gas (3.4%), or fuel oil (1.4%).
656. Initially, most energy conservation measures were applied only by homeowners or developers
     who individually deemed it to be a worthwhile endeavor. Presently, however, statewide energy
     conservation standards, adopted in July 1983 (single-family homes) and January 1984 (multi-
     family units) are enforced throughout the state so that a minimum level of energy efficiency is
     established. Every newly constructed residential unit is required to abide by specified
     conservation regulations. These regulations are enforced by the Town of Los Altos Hills’
     Building Department through careful review of each proposed project for adequate energy
     efficiency as defined by the California Energy Commission. The Energy Commission has divided
     the state into a series of climate zones. Los Altos Hills is situated in Climate Zone 4. State energy
     efficiency standards are associated with this climate zone’s special characteristics so as to
     maximize energy conservation. Mandatory features and devices required of all housing units in
     order to comply with State regulations include:
             Insulation of ceilings, walls, ducts, water tanks, and pipes;
             Caulking of all joints and penetrations;
             Approved and certified doors, windows, fireplaces, shower heads, faucets, and heating
              equipment;
             Setback thermostats; and
             Efficient gas cooking appliances.
657. For further information on detailed requirements, refer to the Climate Zone 4 Manual issued by
     the California Energy Commission.
658. On October 9, 2008, the City Council adopted mandatory green building requirements for new
     residential construction. All new residence applications submitted for Site Development review
     must incorporate green building measures using either Build It Green’s GreenPoint Rated or US
     Green Building Council’s LEED for Homes checklists. The Green Building program is designed
     to be accessible, flexible and attainable, and encourages voluntary participation for remodels and
     additions. The program requires the equivalent of a GreenPoint Rated score of 50 points or a
     LEED for Homes score of 45. Expedited permit processing, guaranteed building inspections, and
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 50

     special recognition incentives are built in for projects exceeding minimum points.
659. The Town encourages the use of both passive and active solar energy conservation techniques in
     building design and siting. To encourage the use of solar power, Los Altos Hills has developed
     the following incentives:
             Building permit fees are waived for the construction or installation of solar energy
              generation equipment.
             For ground-mounted photovoltaic systems, up to 500 square feet may be exempt from
              development area calculations.
             For roof-mounted photovoltaic systems, a bonus of up to 500 square feet of development
              area may be granted.
660. Other measures may be proposed by the Environmental Initiatives Committee, a standing
     committee charged with the development of incentives for energy conservation and other
     environmental objectives.
661. To encourage the conservation of water resources, Purissima Hills Water District has established
     a progressive, multi-tiered rate structure. In addition, Purissima Hills and Cal Water have
     implemented programs such as the provision of homeowner assistance in water management and
     the distribution of water-efficient appliances. These water conservation programs have the added
     benefit of reducing energy consumption. Statewide, pumping water is the leading use of electrical
     power. For Purissima Hills Water District, the cost of power is a significant expenditure, trailing
     only the costs for water and manpower.
662. In addition to green building, solar, and water conservation efforts, Los Altos Hills can promote
     energy conservation by advertising utility rebate programs and energy audits available through
     Pacific Gas and Electric, particularly connected to housing rehabilitation programs. Lower-
     income households, while few in Los Altos Hills, are also eligible for State sponsored energy and
     weatherization programs.
663. Pacific Gas & Electric (www.pge.com) provides both natural gas and electricity to residential
     consumers in Santa Clara County, including Los Altos Hills. The company provides a variety of
     energy conservation services for residents and PG&E also participates in several other energy
     assistance programs for lower-income households, which help qualified homeowners and renters,
     conserve energy and control electricity costs. These include the following:
             The California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program - Provides a 20 percent
              monthly discount on gas and electric rates to income qualified households, certain non-
              profits, facilities housing agricultural employees, homeless shelters, hospices and other
              qualified non-profit group living facilities.
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page HE- 51

 The Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) Program -
  Provides one-time emergency energy assistance to low income customers who have no
  other way to pay their energy bill. REACH aims to assist who are in jeopardy of losing
  their electricity services, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the
  unemployed, who experience severe hardships and are unable to pay for their necessary
  energy needs. Customers who have experienced an uncontrollable or unforeseen hardship
  may receive an energy credit up to $200.
 The Balanced Payment Plan (BPP) - Designed to eliminate big swings in a customer’s
  monthly payments by averaging energy costs over the year. On enrollment, PG&E
  averages the amount of energy used by the household in the past year to derive the
  monthly BPP amount. PG&E checks the household’s account every four months to make
  sure that its estimated average is on target. If the household’s energy use has increased or
  decreased dramatically, PG&E will change the amount of monthly payment so that the
  household does not overpay or underpay too much over the course of a year.
 The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) Block Grant - Funded by
  the federal Department of Health and Human Services, it provides two basic types of
  services. Eligible low-income persons, via local governmental and nonprofit
  organizations, can receive financial assistance to offset the costs of heating and/or
  cooling dwellings, and/or have their dwellings weatherized to make them more energy
  efficient. This is accomplished through these three program components:
  o    The Weatherization Program provides free weatherization services to improve the
       energy efficiency of homes, including attic insulation, weather-stripping, minor home
       repairs, and related energy conservation measures.
  o    The Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) provides financial assistance to
       eligible households to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling dwellings.
  o    The Energy Crisis Intervention Program (ECIP) provides payments for weather-
       related or energy-related emergencies.
 The Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) Program - PG&E’s rate reduction program
  for large households of three or more people with low- to middle-income. It enables low
  income large households to receive a Tier 3 (131 percent to 200 percent of baseline)
  electric rate reduction on their PG&E bill every month.
 Medical Baseline Allowance Program - PG&E offers additional quantities of energy at
  the lowest (baseline) price for residential customers that have special medical or
  heating/cooling needs.
                            2015-2023 Housing Element
                            Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                   Page HE- 52

664. In addition, PG&E is also educating its customers on how to work directly with manufacturers
     and retailers to discount the bulbs at the point of sale and are working with state and local
     governments to promote fluorescent lamp recycling through the California Take-It-Back
     Partnership.
665. Los Altos Hills has a Conservation Element, adopted April 26, 2007 as part of its 2007-2008
     General Plan Update in order to comprehensively conserve resources and habitat in Los Altos
     Hills. The Conservation Element provides guidance to residential development to meet the
     Town’s conservation goals.
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page HE- 53

HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND OBJECTIVES
GENERAL STRATEGY
666.     The Regional Housing Needs Allocation is based on regional housing needs. The Town remains
         committed to ensuring that residential development and housing opportunities within the Town
         continue along the course established by the 2002, 2009 and 2015-2023 Housing Elements.
667.     In particular, the Town’s approach to providing additional low and moderate income housing
         opportunities will continue to emphasize the construction of new residential secondary dwelling
         units on existing lots and in future subdivisions, and the conversion of portions of existing
         primary residential units to secondary units. Secondary dwelling units are a practical solution for
         affordable housing in affluent and semirural communities such as Los Altos Hills. The Town has
         had success with this affordability strategy in the last Housing Element Update cycle and
         continues to build on that success with minor modifications based on public feedback. The
                                                                                       10
         advantages and benefits that secondary dwelling units offer include :
                 Increasing residential units with minimal impacts to the Town’s semirural environment;
                 Affordable rents due to the lower costs of building secondary units compared to single
                  family homes;
                 Rental income for elderly or young homeowners who might not otherwise be able to
                  afford payment or maintenance of a home on a single income;
                 Non-monetary benefits provided by renters including services, companionship and added
                  home security.
668.     In addition to encouraging second unit construction, the 1988 second unit ordinance also
         legalized hundreds of previously existing second units. The Town’s primary affordable housing
         strategy will be to further encourage second unit construction through incentives, reduced fees
         and review time for processing second unit requests, and enhanced public awareness of the
         opportunity to construct second units. The Town has conducted in-depth Second Unit Surveys to
         garner feedback on hurdles to second unit production and continues to be proactive in removing
         barriers to second unit production.
669.     In addition to second units, the Town will also address its housing needs by permitting the
         introduction of affordable housing for faculty, employees and students on the Foothill College
         site. Furthermore, housing for employees will be permitted at non-residential uses in Town (i.e.
         Fremont Hills Country Club, Packard Foundation, Westwind Barn). These actions will help in the
         creation of affordable housing opportunities in Los Altos Hills while helping to reduce commute
         traffic.
10 From Rural by Design: Maintaining Small Town Character, Randall Arendt, et. al., American Planning Association (1994).
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                    Page HE- 54

670.  On the following pages are a series of goals, policies, programs, and quantified objectives
      designed to guide the Town along a path of ensuring housing opportunities for all existing and
      future residents of the community, while at the same time remaining true to the principles upon
      which the Town was incorporated - mainly preservation of a unique semirural residential
      environment set amidst a natural setting. None of the individual goals, policies, or programs is
      intended to be an entire solution to the issue of housing in the Town, but instead comprise a
      complete, integrated solution.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS – 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
I.   Goal Preserve the existing character of the Town and provide housing opportunities for
            persons who desire to reside in a semirural and environmentally sensitive
            environment.
      A.    Policy     Ensure that all new residential development and reconstruction and rehabilitation
                       of existing residences preserves the natural environmental qualities which
                       significantly contribute to the semirural atmosphere of the Town, including the
                       hills, ridgelines, views, natural water courses, and the native trees.
      B.    Policy     Continue to guide residential development in a manner that is sensitive,
                       particularly in areas with significant environmental constraints.
      C.    Policy     Protect areas with exceptional natural value.
      D.    Policy     Ensure that reasonable opportunities are available for new residential
                       development and reconstruction, and rehabilitation of existing residences while
                       preserving, as much as possible, existing views, hills, ridgelines, water courses,
                       riparian vegetation, significant open spaces, and native trees.
      E.    Policy     Require landscaping to soften the visual impact of new development on the
                       surrounding community.
      F.    Policy     Require storm water drainage and erosion control systems to be designed to
                       maintain, to the greatest extent possible, existing water drainage patterns,
                       containment of storm water run-off and protection of existing downstream lands
                       from flooding and flooding related hazards.
              1.      Program          Review all new residential development and reconstruction and
                                       rehabilitation of existing residences through the Site Development
                                       Permit review process, which focuses on development siting as
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page HE- 55

                                well as issues of grading, drainage, access, and landscape
                                screening as visual mitigation.
                                  Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                  Responsible Agency:              Planning/Public Works
                                  Quantified Objective:            N/A
          2.     Program        Work with County of Santa Clara, mid-peninsula cities, the Mid-
                                peninsula Regional Open Space District and other public agencies
                                to promote open space programs that are compatible with the
                                Town’s goals and policies, especially within the Town and its
                                Sphere of Influence. (Policies A - D)
                                  Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                  Responsible Agency:              Planning/Public Works
                                  Quantified Objective:            N/A
II. Goal Maintain and preserve the quality of the Town’s housing stock.
     G.  Policy   Rely on individual property owners to maintain the quality of the Town’s
                  housing stock on an individual basis.
          3.     Program        Participate through Santa Clara County in the Federal Housing and
                                Community Development Block Grant Program to provide
                                housing rehabilitation loans for low and moderate income housing
                                units/households. Make available to the Town residents
                                information about CDBG funds on the Town Website.
                                  Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                  Responsible Agency               Planning/City Manager
                                  Quantified Objective:            N/A
          4.     Program        Enforce the California Building Standards Code through an on-
                                going program of enforcement and abatement based on complaints
                                from Town residents.
                                  Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                  Responsible Agency               Building Department
                                  Quantified Objective:            N/A
                                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                         Page HE- 56

III. Goal Ensure that all local housing needs and the Town’s fair share of the regional
          housing needs are met.
      H.  Policy   Facilitate the private development of new residential units and the reconstruction
                   and rehabilitation of existing residential units to meet the identified housing
                   needs for all income levels of the community and provide for variety of housing
                   opportunities.
            5.    Program         Continue to facilitate and expedite the development of new
                                  dwelling units and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing
                                  units.
                                     Time Frame:                      Ongoing (Yearly Update)
                                     Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                     Quantified Objective:            50 above-moderate units
            6.    Program         Continue the annexation of lands within the Town’s Sphere of
                                  Influence to increase the Town’s supply of lands suitable for
                                  residential secondary dwelling unit development.
                                     Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                     Responsible Agency:              Planning/City Council
                                     Quantified Objective:            3 very low, 3 low and
                                                                      3 moderate income units
            7.    Program         Analyze the potential annexation of the prezoned 95 lots within
                                  the Spalding/Magdalena neighborhood, potentially including an
                                  evaluation of the desire of residents to be annexed.
                                     Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                     Responsible Agency:              City Council
                                     Quantified Objective:            10 moderate income units
                                                                      3 low income units
            8.    Program         Modify the Zoning Ordinance to comply with the California
                                  Employee Housing Act.
                                  Allow non-residential uses with approved use permits to
                                  provide on-site affordable housing for up to six employees. In
                                  accordance with the Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety
                                  Code Section 17000 et seq.), the employee housing shall be
                                  regulated in the same manner as single-family dwellings in the
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page HE- 57

                        same zoning district. Through this revision, non-residential
                        uses will be able to create opportunities for a number of
                        employees of these non-residential uses to live on-site in Los
                        Altos Hills. This will help in the creation of affordable housing
                        opportunities, including housing for extremely low income
                        households, while helping in the reduction of commute traffic.
                          Time Frame:                     Ordinance change
                                                          December 2016
                          Responsible Agency:             City Council
                          Quantified Objective:           5 extremely low, very low and
                                                          low income units
    9.    Program       Continue to encourage room rentals as means of providing
                        affordable housing options within existing housing stock.
                          Time Frame:                     Ongoing
                          Responsible Agency:             Planning
                          Quantified Objective:           N/A
    10.    Program      Maintain and make available on the City’s website information on
                        the construction of new, and rehabilitation of existing, residential
                        units.
                          Time Frame:                     Ongoing
                          Responsible Agency:             Planning/Building
                          Quantified Objective:           N/A
I. Policy Provide opportunities for lower cost housing through the development of
          residential secondary dwelling units, including new second units and those
          developed through the conversion of portions of existing primary units. The
          Town’s goal is that 20 percent of all newly constructed residential units are new
          or converted secondary units.
    11.    Program      Continue to provide a review process to allow staff level approval
                        of all residential second units.
                        Since the adoption of the 1998 Housing Element, the Town has
                        successfully adopted an administrative review process for
                        residential second units whereby any second unit that conforms to
                        development standards may be approved at staff level. This has
                        resulted in an expedited process and the production of 40
                         2015-2023 Housing Element
                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                  Page HE- 58

            secondary dwelling units during the last planning period from 2007
            through 2014. The Town will continue to encourage and facilitate
            the production of second units through the expedited
            administrative review process.
              Time Frame:                      Ongoing
              Responsible Agency:              Planning
              Quantified Objective:            N/A
12. Program Develop a residential secondary dwelling unit brochure for
            placement on the Town’s website, to be made available at the
            Town’s public information counter and provided to each applicant
            for development of a residential parcel within the Town, to
            existing residents interested in developing new second units or
            converting portions of existing primary units, and to seniors
            seeking opportunities to remain in Los Altos Hills. The second unit
            brochures shall also be provided to all owners of property pre-
            zoned and annexed to the Town of Los Altos Hills. Brochures shall
            include information regarding incentives for construction of
            secondary units, such as an expedient administrative review
            process; waiver of the housing fee, and under specified criteria, the
            building permit and sewer hook-up fees; and modified parking
            requirements. The Town will annually review these incentives to
            evaluate their effectiveness in encouraging second units affordable
            to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households
            and report to State HCD as part of the Town’s annual Housing
            Element review. To the extent these incentives appear ineffective;
            the Town will adopt additional incentives and revise its Housing
            Element accordingly.
              Time Frame:                      Ongoing. Review effectiveness
                                               of incentives on an annual
                                               basis.
              Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
              Quantified Objective:            Produce an average of 7 new
                                               second units per year.
13. Program Develop and adopt reasonable criteria for reducing or waiving
            building permit and sewer hook-up fees for second units.
             2015-2023 Housing Element
             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                    Page HE- 59

              Time Frame:                      December 2015
              Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
              Quantified Objective:            N/A
14. Program Evaluate the use of existing legal nonconforming parking areas to
            meet the parking requirement for a secondary dwelling unit
              Time Frame:                      December 2016 2012
              Responsible Agency:              Planning
              Quantified Objective:            5-10 very low and low income
                                               units
15. Program Consider development of an amnesty program to legalize existing
            unpermitted secondary dwelling units and ensure that the second
            unit meets current health and safety codes and current setback and
            parking requirements.
              Time Frame:                      December 2016
              Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
              Quantified Objective:            15-20 very low       and    low
                                               income units
16. Program Evaluate an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance allowing attached
            secondary dwelling units on properties that are less than one acre
            in area.
              Time Frame:                      December 2016
              Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
              Quantified Objective:            10-15 very low       and    low
                                               income units
17. Program Evaluate an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance that would allow
            for secondary dwelling units up to a maximum floor area of 1,200
            square feet.
              Time Frame:                      December 2016
              Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
              Quantified Objective:            5-10 very low and low income
                                               units
18. Program Evaluate the factors that could facilitate the qualification of
            existing structures to allow them to be recognized as secondary
             2015-2023 Housing Element
             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                     Page HE- 60
                         dwelling units.
                           Time Frame:                      December 2016
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                           Quantified Objective:            5-10 very low and low income
                                                            units
J. Policy Work and cooperate with the Foothill-DeAnza Community College District in
          the development of affordable student, faculty and employee housing apartments
          at Foothill College.
    19.    Program       Support Foothill College in potential future development of
                         affordable student, faculty, and employee housing on the College
                         properties, and provide incentives for development through an
                         expedited review process, establishment of enabling provisions in
                         the General Plan and Zoning, and provision of funding support.
                         The Town will meet annually within the planning period in an
                         effort to explore the possibility of student and employee housing
                         including affordable housing for extremely low income
                         households. The Town will amend the General Plan to change the
                         Foothill College designation from P (Public School) to PC (Public
                         College), and identify multi-family residential as a permitted use.
                         In addition, the Zoning Code will be amended to permit sites
                         designated PC in the General Plan to allow multi-family residential
                         at densities of 20 units/acre. When there is an appropriate
                         opportunity, the Town will meet with multi-family housing
                         developers and the college to discuss the proposal and work to find
                         ways to expedite the processing of permits. Apply to the Santa
                         Clara County Office of Affordable Housing for CDBG and HOME
                         funds, and to the Housing Trust Fund of Santa Clara County in
                         support of development of housing affordable to extremely low,
                         very low and low income households at the college.
                           Time Frames:                     Identify     incentives     and
                                                            provide expedited review
                                                            process – December 2017 and
                                                            Ongoing.
                                                            Communicate        to    college
                                                            officials annually during the
                                                            planning period.
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                  Page HE- 61

                                                            General Plan and Zoning
                                                            Code Text Amendments –
                                                            December 2017
                                                            Identify    funding     sources
                                                            annually and apply for
                                                            funding – Ongoing (at pre-
                                                            application phase of projects)
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning/ City Manager/ City
                                                            Council
                           Quantified Objective:            Very low, low and moderate
                                                            income units
K. Policy Participate with Santa Clara County, the Association of Bay Area Governments,
          and the State Department of Housing and Community Development in the
          routine assessment of local and regional housing needs as they relate to the
          Town.
    20.    Program      At least once every eight years participate in the determination of
                        the Town’s local housing needs.
                           Time Frame:                      2022
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning/City Council
                           Quantified Objective:            N/A
    21.    Program      Maintain an inventory of sites, either manually or by computerized
                        data base, suitable for residential development, based on available
                        environmental and infrastructure information.
                           Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning/Public Works
                           Quantified Objective:            N/A
    22.    Program      At least once at the beginning and once at the end of the eight-year
                        timeframe of the Housing Element, conduct Town-wide surveys to
                        ascertain information on rental rates of rooms and second units,
                        occupancy status, structural condition of unit or room.
                           Time Frame:                      2014, 2022
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning
                           Quantified Objective:            N/A
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                 Page HE- 62

    23.    Program       Maintain an inventory of second units and provide monthly and
                         yearly updates on the construction of second units.
                         At mid-point in the timeframe of the Housing Element, the
                         Town will compare the results of the tracking system with its
                         regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) for extremely low,
                         very low, low and moderate-income families. If RHNA is not
                         being met, the City will develop alternative strategies for
                         addressing the housing needs of very low, low and moderate-
                         income families.
                           Time Frame:                      Annually-Ongoing
                           Responsible Agency:              Building/Planning
                           Quantified Objective:            N/A
L. Policy Review Town policies and regulations on a regular basis to ensure that the
          regulations, the process, and the fees do not lead to unnecessary impediments to
          housing development nor unnecessary increases in housing development costs.
    24.    Program       Review and revise as appropriate all building and planning fees on
                         a regular basis to assure that the fees charged provide for but do
                         not exceed the Town’s costs of delivering services and adjust
                         accordingly. The Town completed a review of development fee
                         charges in 2014 that resulted in the recommendation to modify
                         building permit fees for new single-family residences and
                         residential second units. Town Council approved the recommended
                         changes and adopted the Ordinance in June 2014.
                           Time Frame:                      Annually
                           Responsible Agency:              City Council
                           Quantified Objective:            N/A
M. Policy Maintain and provide information pertaining to environmental constraints
          affecting residential development.
    25.    Program       Develop, maintain, and make available pamphlets, brochures, and
                         other written information on the Town’s development and
                         environmental constraints and permitting process.
                           Time Frame:                      Ongoing (Yearly Update)
                           Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                           Quantified Objective:             N/A
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                  Page HE- 63

           26.     Program    The Town shall annually review the Land Use Element of the
                              General Plan for those areas subject to flooding as identified by the
                              Flood Plan prepared by the Federal Management Agency or the
                              Department of Water Resources (DWR). Upon any amendment to
                              the General Plan, the Housing Element will be reviewed for
                              internal consistency and amended as appropriate.
                                Time Frame:                      Ongoing (Annual Review)
                                Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                Quantified Objective:            N/A
IV. Goal To encourage energy conservation to lower housing operation costs, reduce
         demands on existing energy systems, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and
         preserve non-renewable resources.
     N.  Policy   Recommend and promote energy conservation in existing and new housing.
           27.     Program    Enforce the use of energy conserving features required by the latest
                              edition of the California Building Standards Code and applicable
                              provisions of the California Government Code.
                                Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                Responsible Agency:              Building
                                Quantified Objective:            N/A
           28.     Program    Refer interested residents to PG&E for information on energy
                              conservation.
                                Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                Responsible Agency:              Building
                                Quantified Objective:            N/A
           29.     Program    Monitor the results of the Town’s Development Area bonus
                              program for solar panels to quantify the number of new solar
                              panels constructed annually.
                                Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                Quantified Objective:            N/A
                               2015-2023 Housing Element
                               Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                       Page HE- 64

         30.     Program       Monitor the results of the pervious surface Development Area
                               credit program.
                                 Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                 Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                 Quantified Objective:            N/A
         31.     Program       Monitor the results of the Town’s Green Building Ordinance and
                               consider updating the code to include residential additions.
                                 Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                 Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                 Quantified Objective:            N/A
    O.  Policy  Recommend and promote water conservation in existing and new housing.
         32.     Program       Publicize the County Water-Wise Audit and Lawn removal
                               incentive program. Under the program, residents can receive up to
                               a $1,000 rebate and commercial, industrial, and institutional
                               properties can receive up to a $10,000 rebate by replacing high
                               water using plants such as turf grass, with low water using plants
                               from our Approved Plant List or by installing permeable
                               hardscape.
                                 Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                 Responsible Agency:              Planning/Building
                                 Quantified Objective:            N/A
V. Goal Encourage older residents/senior citizens to remain members of the community.
    P.  Policy  Support and encourage participation in programs for seniors in cooperation with
                local and regional non-profit agencies.
         33.     Program       Continue to provide financial support to the Community Services
                               Agency and the Los Altos Senior Center for the provision of such
                               services as emergency assistance, nutrition and hot meal programs,
                               information and referral, and senior care management.
                                 Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                 Responsible Agency:              City Council/City Manager
                                 Quantified Objective:            Annual contributions
                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                        Page HE- 65

           34.     Program         Support Senior Housing Solutions (formerly Project Match), a
                                   home sharing service that matches seniors interested in sharing
                                   their homes with other seniors, including publicizing Senior
                                   Housing Solutions its services via articles in local newspapers and
                                   newsletters, and including financial support to assist Senior
                                   Housing Solutions. Senior Housing Solutions is headquartered in
                                   Milpitas and operates throughout the Peninsula.
                                     Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                                     Responsible Agency:              City Council/City Manager
                                     Quantified Objective:            Annual contributions
VI. Goal Eliminate discrimination in housing access based on race, religion, national origin,
         age, sex, marital status or physical handicap, and other arbitrary barriers that
         prevent choice of housing.
     Q.  Policy   Refer complaints of discrimination to groups such as the Mid-peninsula Citizens
                  for Fair Housing to provide fair housing services.
           35.     Program The County of Santa Clara contracts with Mid-Peninsula Citizens for
                                Fair Housing for provision of fair housing education, outreach and
                                counseling services. While not providing direct funding to Mid-
                                Peninsula Citizens for Fair Housing, the Town of Los Altos Hills is
                                one of several jurisdictions that participate with the County of Santa
                                Clara in providing fair housing services to its residents and make use
                                of the programs available through Mid-Peninsula Citizens for Fair
                                Housing. The Town will prepare a handout with information on this
                                service and will make it available at the public counter, and provide a
                                link on the Town’s Web-site.
                                     Time Frame:                      Ongoing. Provide fair housing
                                                                      brochures and website link by
                                                                      December 2015.
                                     Responsible Agency:              Planning/City Manager
                                     Quantified Objective:            NA
     R.  Policy   Address the housing needs of persons with special needs, including persons with
                  disabilities, and persons in need of emergency or transitional housing.
           36.     Program As part of this Housing Element, the Town has conducted a review
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page HE- 66

                              of zoning, building codes, and permit processing, and has identified
                              the following actions appropriate to better facilitate the provision of
                              accessible housing:
                                   Establish written procedures for reasonable accommodation
                                    requests for persons with disabilities with respect to zoning,
                                    permit processing and building laws.
                                    Time Frame:                     Zoning Ordinance Revisions
                                                                    by December 2016
                                    Responsible Agency:             Planning/City Manager
                                    Quantified Objective:           N/A
            37.    Program       Refer any individual or household in need of emergency shelter to
                                 appropriate agencies and organizations.
                                    Time Frame:                     Ongoing
                                    Responsible Agency:             Planning/City Manager
                                    Quantified Objective:           N/A
            38.    Program       Meet with Hidden Villa, an educational community organization in
                                 the Town’s Sphere of Influence, to discuss potential partnership on
                                 transitional housing services.
                                    Time Frame:                     December 2015
                                    Responsible Agency:             Planning
                                    Quantified Objective:           N/A
VII. Goal Preserve neighborhood quality while ensuring an expedient development review
          process.
      S.  Policy   Review all new proposed residential development via the Site Development
                   Permit process to ensure compatibility among existing community standards.
            39.    Program       Review and update development review procedures in
                                 coordination with city departments and other responsible agencies
                                 to ensure efficient customer service and expedient delivery of
                                 development review services.
                                    Time Frame:                     Ongoing
                                    Responsible Agency:             Planning/City Council
                                    Quantified Objective:           N/A
                                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page HE- 67

T. Policy Encourage rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing residential units
          compatible with the established neighborhood character.
    40.    Program      Modify as needed the existing Fast Track Guide for new residential
                        development to assist in design and review.
                          Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                          Responsible Agency:              Planning/City Manager
                          Quantified Objective:            N/A
U. Policy Maintain and improve necessary community services as needed to accommodate
          new residential development.
    41.    Program      Update the 2013 Senior Community Survey that evaluates the
                        condition and need for senior services and report to City Council.
                          Time Frame:                      December 2018
                          Responsible Agency:              Planning
                          Quantified Objective:            N/A
    42.    Program      Continue to participate as part of the Urban County to access
                        Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and Housing Trust
                        of Santa Clara County funds through Santa Clara County. Apply to
                        the County for specific community service projects to provide
                        financial support for Senior Housing Solutions and Mid-Peninsula
                        Housing Coalition projects.
                          Time Frame:                      Ongoing - Apply to the
                                                           County as specific projects are
                                                           proposed
                          Responsible Agency:              Planning/City Manager
                          Quantified Objective:            N/A
    43.    Program      Work with the City of Los Altos to measure actual sewer capacity
                        by installing flow meters throughout the system.
                          Time Frame:                      Ongoing
                          Responsible Agency:              Public Works
                          Quantified Objective:            N/A
                         2015-2023 Housing Element
                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                 Page HE- 68
VIII. Goal Prevent loss of housing due to wild land fire.
       V.  Policy   Encourage undergrounding of overhead transmission lines in areas of relatively
                    high risk for wildland fires.
             44.     Program        Make available material including brochures and pamphlets to
                                    educate the Town public on the benefits of undergrounding utility
                                    lines.
                                       Time Frame:                   Ongoing
                                       Responsible Agency:           Planning/Building/Public
                                                                     Works
                                       Quantified Objective:         N/A
       W.  Policy   Cooperate with the Fire Department on fire prevention efforts including brush
                    and weed abatement.
             45.     Program        Make available material on the Town’s Web Site to educate the
                                    Town public on the benefits of and requirements for brush and
                                    weed abatement.
                                       Time Frame:                   Ongoing
                                       Responsible Agency:           Fire/Building
                                       Quantified Objective:         N/A
       X.  Policy   Reduce prevalence of invasive, non-native plant species that may contribute to
                    wild land fire.
             46.     Program        Continue the Town’s policy requiring the removal of eucalyptus
                                    trees as a condition of development approval for new residences,
                                    additions, or alterations to structures which individually or
                                    cumulatively equal or exceed 1,200 square feet of floor area.
                                       Time Frame:                   Ongoing
                                       Responsible Agency:           Planning
                                       Quantified Objective:         N/A
       Y.  Policy   Cooperate with Purissima Hills Water Department on hydrant upgrades.
             47.     Program        Make available material on the Town’s Web Site to educate the
                                    Town public on the hydrant upgrades requirements.
                                      2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page HE- 69

                                      Time Frame:                       Ongoing
                                      Responsible Agency:               Public Works
                                      Quantified Objective:             N/A
     Z.     Policy      Continue to implement Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area policies for major
                        additions and new home construction where applicable.
             48.      Program       Amend the Fire Code to address the natural characteristics of the
                                    Los Altos Hills area and amend the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire
                                    Area map to reflect the current fire hazards.
                                      Time Frame:                       December 2015
                                      Responsible Agency:               Fire/Building
                                      Quantified Objective:             N/A
SUMMARY OF OBJECTIVES
671. The Town is required to quantify the Town’s objectives for new residential construction during
     the 2015-2023 planning period and compare this with Los Altos Hills’ Regional Housing Need
     Allocation (RHNA) by income category. Overall, the state adopted RHNA number for the Town
     is 121 total units over the eight year planning cycle. Based on the programs in this Housing
     Element Update along with the current production levels of housing units in Town, it is estimated
     that from 120 to 165 new housing units could be produced over that same planning period.
672. Regarding unit production for individual income categories, it is anticipated that the current rate
     of single family home production (6-7 units annually) will continue, resulting in approximately
     50 new units for above moderate households. This comfortably exceeds the RHNA allocation of
     15 units over the entire 2015-2023 cycle.
673. Second units will continue to be the primary source of affordable units constructed in the town
     and the 2014 Second Unit Survey provides the basis for estimating the affordability of these units.
     As presented earlier in Table 5, 61 percent of secondary dwelling units are rented at ranges
     affordable to extremely low and very low income households, 26 percent to low income and 13
     percent to moderate income households. At the current rate of production (approximately 6 units
     per year) additional measures are needed to meet the RHNA numbers for the next planning cycle.
674. Based on the Housing Element community input process, several programs have been added to
     the Housing Element to further increase the rate of second unit production (Programs 14-18).
     These programs include added flexibility on parking standards, an amnesty program to legalize
     existing unpermitted units, allowing new second units on smaller parcels and an increase in the
     maximum floor area for attached units. These programs are anticipated to result in the production
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page HE- 70

     of 30 very low income units and low income units. Furthermore, the Second Unit Survey reveals
     a moderate level of interest among homeowners in constructing second units, with 22 percent of
     the respondents, totaling 191 households, indicating they were considering building second units
     within the next eight years.
675. These new programs along with recently adopted measures to reduce building and sewer hook-up
     fees, modified parking requirements, increased floor area in basements, expedient administrative
     review, and distribution of a brochure promoting second units are expected to increase production
     of second units from 6 to 10 new units a year for a total of 80 new secondary dwelling units in the
     planning cycle. The annexation of lands into Los Altos Hills will also increase the potential for
     construction of affordable second units on properties that meet the development criteria.
676. In addition to second units and single-family homes, the Town will also address its affordable
     housing needs by encouraging and facilitating the introduction of affordable housing for faculty,
     employees and students on the Foothill College site. This could result in the construction of 40
     new rental units with the majority being rented to very low and low income students and
     employees. Furthermore, housing for employees will be permitted at non-residential institutional
     uses in Town (i.e. religious facilities, Fremont Hills Country Club, Packard Foundation,
     Westwind Barn). Given the nature of such housing, it is assumed that half the employee units
     would be affordable to low income households, and half affordable to moderate income
     households. Based on these programs, the Town has established an objective to achieve up to 50
     new units through the provision of housing at Foothill College and other institutional properties.
677. Table 9 summarizes Los Altos Hills’ residential construction objectives for the entire 2015-2023
     Housing Element period, and compares this with the Town’s RHNA allocation. As illustrated,
     through a combination of second units, single-family home development, and the introduction of
     housing at Foothill College and on-site employee housing at other institutional properties, Los
     Altos Hills is able to address its regional housing needs in each income category.
                                                          Table 9
                            Residential Unit Construction Objectives 2015-2023
                                     ABAG Regional Fair Share              2015-2023 (Estimated Future
        Residential Unit Type
                                               2014-2022                           Production*)
      Extremely Low/Very Low                        46                                    50
      Low                                           28                                    30
      Moderate                                      32                                    35
      Above Moderate                                15                                    50
      Total                                        121                                   165
      * Estimated future production based on 10 second units/year, 6 new single-family residences/year and 40-
      50 units on Foothill College and/or other institutional properties.
                                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page HE- 71

                                    Appendix A – Second Unit Survey
                                            APPENDIX A
                       Los Altos Hills 2014
               Housing Element Update                     Second Unit Survey
A key component of the Housing Element update is planning for future housing needs, including
the provision of affordable housing. In Los Altos Hills, second units provide the greatest
opportunity to meet affordable housing requirements while maintaining the rural character of the
Town. For this reason, the Town is collecting information on second units to determine who lives
in them, rent ranges (if applicable), size, and additional steps the Town can take to encourage
construction of second units.
Note: Please be advised that this survey is to be completed anonymously and that no
identifying information is required or requested from the person completing the survey.
   A second unit, as defined by the State, is a self-contained residential dwelling either
   attached to the main house or in a separate structure on the property. The unit shall include
   all of the following:
                               a. A bedroom
                               b. A full bathroom
                               c. A separate cooking facility
If you have a second unit, please circle the appropriate letter for the responses in Section A
and then proceed to Section C.
If you do not have a second unit, please fill out Sections B and C.
                                             SECTION A
1.        Is the unit:
          a)      Attached to your main house?
          b)      Detached from the main house?
                                       2015-2023 Housing Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page A - 1

                               Appendix A – Second Unit Survey
2. Type of unit:
   a)      Studio
   b)      1 bedroom
   c)      2 bedrooms
   d)      More than 2 bedrooms
3. About how old is your unit?
   a)      Built before 1956
   b)      Built between 1956 and 1989
   c)      Built between 1989 and 1999
   d)      After 1999
4. Is the unit occupied?
   a)      Yes (if “yes,” please answer questions 5 through 9)
   b)      No (if “no,” ignore questions 5 through 9 and go to question 10)
5. What is the monthly rent of your unit?
   a)      No rent is charged
   b)      Under $800
   c)      $800 to $1,200
   d)      $1,201 to $1,600
   e)      $1,601 to $2,300
   f)      Over $2,300 (please fill in amount): $
6. If currently occupied, how many people live in your second unit?
   a)      1 person
   b)      2 people
   c)      3 people
   d)      Other
7. Please select the age groups of current occupants of your unit.
   a)      Under 18 years
   b)      18-30 years
   c)      31-55 years
                                  2015-2023 Housing Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page A - 2

                                 Appendix A – Second Unit Survey
    d)      Over 55 years
8.  Second unit’s occupants’ primary form of transportation:
    a)      Car (if yes, how many?________)
    b)      Public transportation
    a)      Bicycle
    b)      Walk
9.  Second unit occupants’ occupation:
    a)      Student
    b)      Caretaker
    c)      Retired
    d)      Professional
    e)      Other
    f)      Don’t know
10. If you don’t currently rent your unit, what would you expect to charge if you did?
    a)      No rent charged
    b)      Under $800
    c)      $800 to $1,200
    d)      $1,201 to $1,600
    e)      $1,601 to $2,300
    f)      Over $2,300 (please fill in amount): $
                                          SECTION B
                (To be completed by residents with no secondary dwelling)
11. To your best knowledge, do you have at least 1,000 square feet of undeveloped Floor
    Area (building square footage) and Development Area (buildings plus all other structures
    including driveway, patios, pool, etc.) available for additional development?
    a)      Yes
    b)      No
    c)      Don’t know
                                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page A - 3

                              Appendix A – Second Unit Survey
12. Are you considering building a second unit in the next eight years?
    a)      Yes
    b)      No
                                       SECTION C
13. Would you support granting a Floor Area/Development Area bonus allowing increased
    Floor Area/Development Area for the exclusive purpose of constructing a second unit?
    a)      Yes
    b)      No
14. Would you support allowing second units on lots that are less than one acre?
    a)      Yes
    b)      No
15. Please provide any additional thoughts or suggestions on second units in Los Altos Hills,
    including possible ways the Town can encourage their construction.
                                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                         Page A - 4

            Appendix B – Second Unit Survey Results
                         APPENDIX B
      2014 SECOND UNIT SURVEY RESULTS
2014 2nd Unit Survey Results
Total Surveys Mailed:                            2854
                                                       34.27%
Total Responses Received by 7/20/2014:           978
                                                      Response
Respondents with a 2nd Unit:                     191
Respondents without a 2nd Unit:                  787
SECTION A- Respondents with a 2nd Unit
Question 1     -IS THE UNIT ATTACHED OR DETACHED?
A ATTACHED TO MAIN HOUSE                          68    36%
B DETACHED FROM MAIN HOUSE                       123    64%
                                         Total:  191
Question 2     -TYPE OF UNIT
A STUDIO                                          65    34%
B 1 BEDROOM                                       90    47%
C 2 BEDROOMS                                      33    17%
D MORE THAN 2 BEDROOMS                            5      2%
                                         Total:  193
Question 3    -HOW OLD IS YOUR UNIT?
A BEFORE 1956                                     31    16%
B 1956-1989                                       69    36%
C 1989-1999                                       33    17%
D AFTER 1999                                      60    31%
                                         Total:  193
Question 4     -IS UNIT OCCUPIED?
A YES                                             97    51%
B NO                                              94    49%
                                         Total:  191
                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                             Page B- 1

              Appendix B – Second Unit Survey Results
Question 5   -WHAT IS THE MONTHLY RENT?
A No rent charged                                 48
B <$800                                           5
C $800-$1,200                                     11
D $1,201-$1,600                                   9
E $1,601-$2,300                                   18
F >$2,300                                         14
                                       Total:    105
Question 6   - HOW MANY PEOPLE LIVE IN UNIT?
A 1 Person                                        61
B 2 People                                        32
C 3 People                                        1
D Other                                           4
                                       Total:     98
Question 7   -AGE OF OCCUPANTS
A UNDER 18                                        4   6.33%
B 18-30                                           27  21.52%
C 31-55                                           44  48.10%
D OVER 55                                         33  24.05%
                                       Total:    108
Question 8  -OCCUPANT'S PRIMARY MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION
A-1 CAR-1                                         63  64.47%
A-2 CAR-2                                         21  25.00%
A-3 CAR-3+                                        3   2.63%
B PUBLIC TRANSPORT                                2   2.63%
C BIKE                                            9   2.63%
D WALK                                            3   2.63%
                                       Total:    101
Question 9   -OCCUPANT'S OCCUPATION
A STUDENT                                         10  14.47%
B CARETAKER                                       6   5.26%
C RETIRED                                         17  15.79%
D PROFESSIONAL                                    49  44.74%
E OTHER                                           16  18.42%
F DON'T KNOW                                      1   1.32%
                                       Total:    100
                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                            Page B- 2

              Appendix B – Second Unit Survey Results
Question 10   -EXPECTED RENT
A No rent charged                                 10  8.04%
B <$800                                           9   34.82%
C $800-$1,200                                     22  32.14%
D $1,201-$1,600                                   31  16.96%
E $1,601-$2,300                                   38  8.04%
F >$2,300                                         14  0.00%
                                        Total:   112
SECTION B- Respondents without a 2nd Unit
Question 11   -HAVE 1,000 SQ. FT OF DEVELOPMENT AREA?
A YES                                            333  44.39%
B NO                                             368  35.79%
C NOT SURE                                       188  19.82%
                                        Total:   889
Question 12     -ARE YOU CONSIDERING BUILDING 2ND UNIT IN 5
YEARS?
A YES                                            191  17.75%
B NO                                             863  82.02%
                                        Total:   874
SECTION C- Development Bonus
Question 13   -DO YOU SUPPORT F.A. or D.A. BONUS?
A YES                                            521  49.76%
B NO                                             454  36.82%
                                        Total:   978
Question 14 -WOULD YOU SUPPORT 2ND UNITS ON LOTS LESS
THAN ONE ACRE
A YES                                            289
B NO                                             689
                                        Total:   978
                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                             Page B- 3

                      Appendix C – Housing Element Community Comment Survey
                                         APPENDIX C
               HOUSING ELEMENT COMMUNITY COMMENT SURVEY
                                2015-2023
            Housing Element Update                   Public Comment Card
The Town of Los Altos Hills is in the process of updating its Housing Element. The
Housing Element is part of the General Plan, a comprehensive, long-term planning
document which guides the physical development of the Town. As required by State
law, the Housing Element is updated every eight years and must identify key policies,
strategies and programs to maximize affordable housing opportunities for the
community and plan for housing to meet the Town’s “fair share” of regional housing
needs and the future needs of residents. Additional information on Housing Element
requirements and the state’s review process is available on the California Department of
Housing           and          Community               Development          website     at
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/. Housing Element law can also be found in
Sections 65580 through 65589.8 of the California Government Code.
California Government Code Section 65583(c)(8) requires that the Town make a diligent
effort to achieve public participation of all segments of the community in the
development of the Housing Element. The purpose of this questionnaire is to gather
data to assist staff in developing policies and programs that are designed to benefit the
residents of the community.
 Please provide us with your input for the Housing Element update:
1. Choose one of the first five options only if you are retired, or contemplating
    retirement, in the next five years. Otherwise mark the option “This question
    does not apply to me/us.” For purposes of this question, a secondary
    dwelling could be a separate guest house, a “casita” type of adjoining
    structure, or it could be a section of the main house designed as a separate
    living area, for example an “in-law quarters.”
     I/We expect to continue living in the primary dwelling for the foreseeable future
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 1

                      Appendix C – Housing Element Community Comment Survey
    I/We already live in a secondary dwelling in Los Altos Hills, and a younger
      generation of our family occupies the primary dwelling
    I/We are already living in a secondary dwelling in Los Altos Hills; a completely
      unrelated party occupies the primary dwelling
    I/We are planning to move to another community and will likely downsize to a
      smaller dwelling
    I/We do not yet have any firm or even tentative thoughts about housing plans
      subsequent to retirement
    This question does not apply to me/us
    Other                                          _________________________________
2. In order to meet the increased Regional Housing Needs Allocation numbers
   from the state, the Town is considering expanding opportunities for secondary
   dwelling units. Would you support secondary units in any of the following
   circumstances:
   (Check as many as needed)
    On lots between 1/2 acre and one acre if the unit is attached and no larger than
      750 square feet?
    Allow the parking for the secondary unit to encroach into the front or side yard
      setbacks as long as the parking space utilizes existing paved areas?
    Allow for a minor increase in the total Maximum Floor Area for secondary units
      attached to an existing dwelling as long as the owner agrees to keep the unit
      affordable to low or very low income households?
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page C- 2

                   Appendix C – Housing Element Community Comment Survey
    Consider an amnesty program to legalize existing unpermitted secondary units if
     the unit meets current health and safety codes and is not located within the yard
     setbacks?
    Allow for a second unit of up to 1,200 square feet in floor area if the property
     owner agrees to keep the unit affordable?
    Other                                                                         __
                                                                                   __
                                                                                   __
                                                                                   __
3. The median age of residents in Los Altos Hills is increasing over time and
   housing options are limited for seniors who want to retain a Los Altos Hills
   address but do not want to maintain a house and property. Do you have any
   suggestions for providing housing alternatives for seniors other than a single
   family dwelling or secondary unit?
   _______                                                                         __
   ___________________________________________________________________
4. Any additional comments for the Housing Element?
   ___                                                                             __
   ___________________________________________________________________
     When you have completed this form, please mail it in the enclosed envelope.
                No stamp or return address is needed. Thank You!
                                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                          Page C- 3

                        Appendix D – Housing Element Community Comment Survey Results
                                                  APPENDIX D
             HOUSING ELEMENT COMMUNITY COMMENT SURVEY RESULTS
2014 Public Comment Card Results
Total Surveys Mailed:                                                     2,854                100%
Total Responses Received by 11/21/2014:                                    533                 18.7%
QUESTION 1 - Choose one of the first five options only if you are retired or contemplating retirement, in the
next five years. Otherwise mark the option "This question does not apply to me/us." For purposes of this
question, a secondary dwelling could be a separate guest house, a "casita" type of adjoining structure, or it
could be a section of the main house designed as a separate living area, for example an "in-law quarters."
                                                                          Total             Percentage
I/We expect to continue living in the primary dwelling for the
                                                                           398                 74.7%
forseeable future.
I/We already live in a secondary dwelling in Los Altos Hills,
and a younger generation of our family occupies the primary                  3                  0.5%
dwelling.
I/We are already living in a secondary dwelling in Los Altos
Hills; a completely unrelated party occupies the primary                     2                  0.4%
dwelling.
I/We are planning to move to another community and will
                                                                            11                  2.1%
likely downsize to a smaller dwelling.
I/We do not yet have any firm or even tentative thoughts
                                                                            30                  5.6%
about housing plans subsequent to retirement.
This question does not apply to me/us.                                      80                  15%
Other _______________                                                        9                  1.7%
Question 2 - In order to meet the increase Regional Housing Needs Allocation numbers from the state, the
Town is considering expanding opportunities for secondary dwelling units. Would you support secondary
units in any of the following circumstances: (Check as many as needed)
                                                                          Total             Percentage
On lots between 1/2 acre and one acre if the unit is attached
                                                                           217                  41%
and no larger than 750 square feet?
Allow the parking for the secondary unit to encroach into the
front or side yard setbacks as long as the parking space                   205                  39%
utilizes existing paved areas?
Consider an amnesty program to legalize existing
unpermitted secondary units if the unit meets current health               152                  29%
and safety codes and is not located within the yard setbacks?
Allow for a second unit of up to 1,200 square feet in floor
                                                                           215                  40%
area if the property owner agrees to keep the unit affordable?
Other _____________                                                         87                  16%
Question 3 - The median age of residents in Los Altos Hills is increasing over time and housing options are
limited for seniors who want to retain a Los Altos Hills Address but do not want to maintain a house and
property. Do you have an suggestions for providing housing alternatives for seniors other than a single
family dwelling or secondary unit?
Responded                                                                                        141
Question 4 - Any additional comments for the Housing Element?
Responded                                                                                        107
                                             2015-2023 Housing Element
                                             Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                       Page D- 1

                         Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                                          APPENDIX E
                   2009 HOUSING ELEMENT IMPLEMENTATION
The following presents a program by program analysis of the Town’s implementation of the
2009 Housing Element goals, policies and programs.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
I.   Goal Preserve the existing character of the Town and provide housing opportunities for
            persons who desire to reside in a semirural and environmentally sensitive
            environment.
       A.   Policy  Ensure that all new residential development and reconstruction and rehabilitation
                    of existing residences preserves the natural environmental qualities which
                    significantly contribute to the semirural atmosphere of the Town, including the
                    hills, ridgelines, views, natural water courses, and the native trees.
       B.   Policy  Continue to guide residential development in a manner that is sensitive,
                    particularly in areas with significant environmental constraints.
       C.   Policy  Protect areas with exceptional natural value.
       D.   Policy  Ensure that reasonable opportunities are available for new residential
                    development and reconstruction, and rehabilitation of existing residences while
                    preserving, as much as possible, existing views, hills, ridgelines, water courses,
                    riparian vegetation, significant open spaces, and native trees.
       E.   Policy  Require landscaping to soften the visual impact of new development on the
                    surrounding community.
       F.   Policy  Require storm water drainage and erosion control systems to be designed to
                    maintain, to the greatest extent possible, existing water drainage patterns and to
                    protect existing downstream lands from flooding and flooding related hazards.
             1.    Program          Review all new residential development and reconstruction and
                                    rehabilitation of existing residences through the Site Development
                                    Permit review process, which focuses on development siting as
                                    well as issues of grading, drainage, access, and landscape
                                    screening as visual mitigation.
                                    Ongoing.     The Town continues to review all new residential
                                     2015-2023 Housing Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page E- 1

                      Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                                development and rehabilitation projects through the Site
                                Development Permit review process to ensure consistency with
                                applicable regulations and policies related to development
                                standards, grading, drainage, and aesthetics. This program has
                                been carried into the current Element as Program 1.
          2.     Program        Work with County of Santa Clara, mid-peninsula cities, the Mid-
                                peninsula Regional Open Space District and other public agencies
                                to promote open space programs that are compatible with the
                                Town’s goals and policies, especially within the Town and its
                                Sphere of Influence. (Policies A - D)
                                Ongoing. The Town continues to be committed to pursuing its own
                                open space policies outlined in its General Plan, as well as
                                supporting any future regional efforts to promote open space that
                                are consistent with the Town’s policies. This program has been
                                carried into the current Element as Program 2.
II. Goal Maintain and preserve the quality of the Town’s housing stock.
     G.  Policy   Rely on individual property owners to maintain the quality of the Town’s
                  housing stock on an individual basis.
          3.     Program        Participate through Santa Clara County in the Federal Housing and
                                Community Development Block Grant Program to provide
                                housing rehabilitation loans for low and moderate income housing
                                units/households. Make available to the Town residents
                                information about CDBG funds on the Town Website.
                                Ongoing. As previously discussed, the Town’s housing stock is in
                                good condition and the average household income is among the
                                highest in the County. Because of this there has been relatively
                                little need for participation in the CDBG Program. However, the
                                Town did publicize this program in the Town’s newsletter and will
                                continue to work through the County of Santa Clara to make sure
                                funds are available should the need arise to assist Town residents
                                with rehabilitation projects. This program has been carried
                                forward into the current Element as Program 3.
          4.     Program        Enforce the Uniform Housing Code through an on-going program
                                of enforcement and abatement based on complaints from Town
                                residents.
                                  2015-2023 Housing Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page E- 2

                       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                                  Ongoing. The Town’s Municipal Code has provisions for
                                  enforcement, including the use of abatement procedures if
                                  warranted. Abatement procedures are initiated by the Town’s
                                  residents. This program has been carried forward into the Current
                                  Element as Program 4.
III. Goal Ensure that all local housing needs and the Town’s fair share of the regional
          housing needs are met.
      H.  Policy   Facilitate the private development of new residential units and the reconstruction
                   and rehabilitation of existing residential units to meet the identified housing
                   needs for all income levels of the community and provide for variety of housing
                   opportunities.
            5.    Program         Continue to facilitate and expedite the development of new units
                                  and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing residential
                                  units.
                                  Ongoing. The prompt processing of subdivision, design review
                                  applications and building permits has resulted in average
                                  construction rates consistent with the projected demand for
                                  housing in Los Altos Hills. The Town will continue to assist the
                                  property owners and development community in the housing
                                  development process.
                                  The Town approved for occupancy 87 new residential dwelling
                                  units in the previous cycle, exceeding the 2007-2014 RHNA
                                  number of 81 units.
                                  The Town has made available a “fast-track” program for
                                  developers and homeowners that expedites the review process
                                  when the project meets all of the Town’s regulations and there is
                                  little or no neighborhood opposition. A pamphlet has been created
                                  and made available to inform residences and prospective builders
                                  on the fast-track review process. The Town will continue to
                                  explore ways to develop new strategies of informing its residents
                                  and prospective builders of the permitting process. This program
                                  has been carried forward into the current Element as Program 5.
            6.    Program         Continue the annexation of lands within the Town’s Sphere of
                                  Influence to increase the Town’s supply of lands suitable for
                                    2015-2023 Housing Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page E- 3

       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                residential development.
                Ongoing. In the previous planning cycle, the Town annexed
                approximately 45 pre-zoned properties which increased the total
                number of units in Town. The annexation of the parcels added to
                the total supply of available housing in the Town of Los Altos Hills
                and all lots of one or more acres in size can potentially
                accommodate a secondary dwelling unit thus increasing the supply
                of affordable rental units.
                The Town has pre-zoned the remaining properties in the West
                Loyola area. While some pre-zoned land has not yet been annexed,
                the pre-zoning process is an important step in the future
                annexation of the properties. This program will be carried into the
                current Element as Program 6.
7. Program      Analyze the potential annexation of the pre-zoned 95 lots within
                the Spalding/Magdalena neighborhood, potentially including an
                evaluation of the desire of residents to be annexed.
                Ongoing. The Town had discussions with the residents in the
                Spalding/Magdalena neighborhood to determine their interest in
                annexing to the Town but no decision was made and no timetable
                has been established for annexation. The Town continues to
                evaluate the desire of residents to be annexed. This program will
                be carried into the current Element as Program 7.
8. Program      Modify the Zoning Ordinance to allow non-residential uses with
                approved Use Permits located within Los Altos Hills to provide
                on-site housing for employees.
                Modify the zoning ordinance to change conditional uses to
                allow housing for employees. Through this revision, non-
                residential uses will be able to create opportunities for a number
                of employees of these non-residential uses to live on-site in Los
                Altos Hills. This will help in the creation of affordable housing
                opportunities in Los Altos Hills, including housing for
                extremely low income households, while helping in the
                reduction of commute traffic.
                Not completed. Some non-residential properties, such as the
                Fremont Hills Country Club, Daughters of Charity and the
                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                           Page E- 4

               Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                         Packard Foundation, have employee/caretaker housing as part
                         of their Conditional Use Permits. This program is continued to
                         the next Housing Element as Program 8. It remains an
                         appropriate program, considering high housing costs in Los
                         Altos Hills.
    9.    Program        Continue to encourage room rentals as means of providing
                         affordable housing options within existing housing stock.
                         Ongoing. Room rentals provide affordable housing for students
                         who attend Stanford University. The Town does not have
                         restrictions on this practice and the proximity to the university
                         allows for students to use alternative transportation to get to the
                         campus. This program is continued to the next Housing Element
                         as Program 9.
    10.    Program       Maintain and make available on the City’s website information on
                         the construction of new, and rehabilitation of existing, residential
                         units.
                         Ongoing. A new website was launched during the planning cycle
                         which includes information on the process of obtaining Site
                         Development and Building permits for the construction of new
                         residential units and the rehabilitation of existing residential units.
                         This program is continued to the next Housing Element as
                         Program 10.
I. Policy Provide opportunities for lower cost housing through the development of
          residential second units, including new second units and those developed through
          the conversion of portions of existing primary units. The Town’s goal is that 20
          percent of all newly constructed residential units are new or converted secondary
          units.
    11.    Program       Continue to provide a review process to allow staff level approval
                         of all residential second units.
                         Ongoing. Since the adoption of the 1998 Housing Element, the
                         Town has successfully adopted an administrative review process
                         for residential second units whereby any second units that conform
                         to development standards may be approved at staff level. This has
                         resulted in an expedited process and the production of 40-second
                         units during the last planning period from 2007 through 2014.
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                    Page E- 5

       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                The Town will continue to encourage and facilitate the production
                of second units through the expedited administrative review
                process. This program is continued to the next Housing Element as
                Program 11.
12. Program     Develop a residential second unit brochure for placement on the
                Town’s website, to be made available at the Town’s public
                information counter and provided to each applicant for
                development of a residential parcel within the Town, to existing
                residents interested in developing new second units or converting
                portions of existing primary units, and to seniors seeking
                opportunities to remain in Los Altos Hills. The second unit
                brochures shall also be provided to all owners of property pre-
                zoned and annexed to the Town of Los Altos Hills. Brochures shall
                include information regarding incentives for construction of
                secondary units, such as an expedient administrative review
                process; waiver of the housing fee, and under specified criteria, the
                building permit and sewer hook-up fees; and modified parking
                requirements. The Town will annually review these incentives to
                evaluate their effectiveness in encouraging second units affordable
                to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households
                and report to State HCD as part of the Town’s annual Housing
                Element review. To the extent these incentives appear ineffective,
                the Town will adopt additional incentives and revise its Housing
                Element accordingly.
                Completed/Ongoing. A brochure has been completed and placed
                on-line which outlines the requirements for second units and the
                approval process. In addition, the brochure is available at the
                counter and staff encourages the creation of second units on all
                new residences. Based on the most recent Second Unit Survey,
                there is community support for increased incentives and new
                programs (14 through 17) have been added to the next Housing
                Element update. The brochure continues to be updated as
                necessary. This program is continued to the next Housing Element
                as Program 12.
13. Program     Develop and adopt reasonable criteria for reducing or waiving
                building permit and sewer hook-up fees for second units.
                Not Completed. The Town currently waives the housing fee for all
                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                          Page E- 6

              Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                       second units and continues to review potential reductions in permit
                       fees for new second units. This program is continued to the next
                       Housing Element as Program 13.
    14.    Program     Evaluate changing or reducing parking requirements for second
                       units (i.e. allowing tandem parking for second units).
                       Completed. The Zoning Ordinance was updated to allow for
                       tandem type parking for second units.
    15.    Program     Update the Second Unit ordinance to allow detached second units
                       to have basements which do not count towards Maximum Floor
                       Area (MFA). This will allow the second units to be developed with
                       more than two (2) bedrooms, accommodating larger extremely low
                       income (ELI) households.
                       Completed. The Zoning Ordinance was updated to allow for
                       basements on second units that do not count towards the total floor
                       area.
J. Policy Work and cooperate with the Foothill-DeAnza Community College District in
          the development of student, faculty and employee housing apartments at Foothill
          College.
    16.    Program     Support Foothill College in potential future development of
                       affordable student, faculty, and employee housing on the College
                       properties, and provide incentives for development through an
                       expedited review process, establishment of enabling provisions in
                       the General Plan and Zoning, and provision of funding support.
                       The Town will meet twice within the planning period in an effort
                       to explore the possibility of student and employee housing
                       including affordable housing for extremely low income household.
                       The Town will amend the General Plan to change the Foothill
                       College designation from P (Public School) to PC (Public
                       College), and identify multi-family residential as a permitted use.
                       In addition, the Zoning Code will be amended to permit sites
                       designated PC in the General Plan to allow multi-family residential
                       at densities of 20 units/acre. When there is an appropriate
                       opportunity, the Town will meet with multi-family housing
                       developers and the college to discuss the proposal and work to find
                       ways to expedite the processing of permits. Apply to the Santa
                       Clara County Office of Affordable Housing for CDBG and HOME
                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                   Page E- 7

              Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                        funds, and to the Housing Trust Fund of Santa Clara County in
                        support of development of housing affordable to extremely low,
                        very low and low income households at the College.
                        Not Completed. Staff did meet with Foothill College officials in
                        2014 about the potential for student, employee and faculty housing
                        on the campus similar to recently constructed housing at Canada
                        College in San Mateo County. In addition, ongoing annual
                        meetings between Town staff and the college have been established
                        to discuss housing and other development issues. The Town will
                        proceed with the amendments to the General Plan and Zoning
                        Code. This program is continued to the next Housing Element as
                        Program 19.
K. Policy Participate with Santa Clara County, the Association of Bay Area Governments,
          and the State Department of Housing and Community Development in the
          routine assessment of local and regional housing needs as they relate to the
          Town.
    17.    Program      At least once every eight years participate in the determination of
                        the Town’s local housing needs.
                        Completed/ongoing. This Element Update assesses the Town’s
                        housing needs since the 2009 Element. The Town is committed to
                        continuing this pattern of frequently reassessing its housing needs
                        as necessary. This program has been carried forward into the
                        current Element as Program 20.
    18.    Program      Maintain an inventory of sites, either manually or by computerized
                        data base, suitable for residential development, based on available
                        environmental and infrastructure information.
                        Completed/ongoing. A chart and map identifying underutilized
                        parcels with potential for residential development was prepared in
                        2014 as part of the current Housing Element update, which will be
                        updated periodically. This program has been carried forward into
                        the current Element as Program 21.
    19.    Program      At least once at the beginning and once at the end of the eight-year
                        timeframe of the Housing Element, conduct Town-wide surveys to
                        ascertain information on rental rates of rooms and second units,
                        occupancy status, structural condition of unit or room.
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                   Page E- 8

              Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                         Completed/ongoing. A second unit survey was sent to all residents
                         of the Town in July 2014, inquiring about the size and rent of
                         second units within the Town. No such work has been done for
                         room rentals, although a review of local rental listings as
                         background research for the current Housing Element provides
                         cursory information on room and home rentals. This program is
                         continued to the next Housing Element as Program 22.
    20.    Program       Maintain an inventory of second units and provide monthly and
                         yearly updates on the construction of second units.
                         At mid-point in the timeframe of the Housing Element, the
                         Town will compare the results of the tracking system with its
                         regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) for extremely low,
                         very low, low and moderate-income families. If RHNA is not
                         being met, the City will develop alternative strategies for
                         addressing the housing needs of low, lower and moderate-
                         income families.
                         Ongoing. A list of all approved second units is maintained by
                         the Town, and monthly reports on building permit activity for
                         new residences include permits issued for second units. This
                         has remained an effective strategy to track the number of
                         second units approved within the Town. This program is
                         continued to the next Housing Element as Program 23.
L. Policy Review Town policies and regulations on a regular basis to ensure that the
          regulations, the process, and the fees do not lead to unnecessary impediments to
          housing development nor unnecessary increases in housing development costs.
    21.    Program       Review all building and planning fees on a regular basis to assure
                         that fees charged provide for but do not exceed the Town’s costs of
                         delivering services and adjust accordingly. The Town completed a
                         review of development fee charges in fall of 2002 that resulted in
                         the recommendation to reduce building permit fees for new single-
                         family residences and residential second units. Town Council
                         approved the recommended reductions and adopted the Ordinance
                         in March 2003.
                         Ongoing. The Town reviews its fee structure on an annual basis to
                         ensure that fees cover the cost of services for the community while
                          2015-2023 Housing Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                    Page E- 9

                      Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                                 not being to excessive. This program has been carried forward into
                                 the current Element as Program 24.
     M.  Policy   Maintain and provide pertinent information pertaining to environmental
                  constraints affecting residential development.
           22.     Program       Develop, maintain, and make available pamphlets, brochures, and
                                 other written information on the Town’s development and
                                 environmental constraints and permitting process.
                                 Ongoing. The Town maintains brochures and handouts on the
                                 development review process both at the front counter and on the
                                 Town’s website. Handouts and website documents are updated
                                 regularly. This program has been carried forward into the current
                                 Element as Program 25.
           23.     Program       As per Government Code Section 65302 requirements, the Town
                                 will amend the Safety and Conservation Elements of the General
                                 Plan to include analyses and policies regarding flood hazard and
                                 management. The Town shall also annually review the Land Use
                                 Element of the General Plan for those areas subject to flooding as
                                 identified by the Flood Plan prepared by the Federal Management
                                 Agency or the Department of Water Resources (DWR). Upon any
                                 amendment to the General Plan, the Housing Element will be
                                 reviewed for internal consistency and amended as appropriate.
                                 Completed/Ongoing. The Safety and Conservation Elements were
                                 updated in 2008 and are updated on an ongoing basis as
                                 necessary. Very few properties in Town are affected by flooding as
                                 the Town restricts development within riparian/creek corridors
                                 and watersheds are largely undeveloped which allows for greater
                                 absorption of storm water. This program has been carried
                                 forward into the current Element as Program 26.
IV. Goal To encourage energy conservation and lower housing operation costs, reduce
         demands on existing energy systems, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and
         preserve non-renewable resources.
     N.  Policy   Recommend and promote energy conservation in existing and new housing.
           24.     Program       Enforce the use of energy conserving features required by the latest
                                  2015-2023 Housing Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page E- 10

       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                edition of the Uniform Building Code and applicable provisions of
                the California Government Code.
                Ongoing. The Town’s Building Department reviews all building
                permits for compliance with applicable energy conservation
                requirements including Title 24 of the Uniform Building Code.
                This program has been carried into the current Element as
                Program 27.
25. Program     Refer interested citizens to PG&E for information on energy
                conservation.
                Ongoing. Contact information and referrals to PG&E are made
                readily available by the Town to residents interested in energy
                conservation. This program has been carried forward into the
                current Element as Program 28.
26. Program     Monitor the results of the Town’s Development Area bonus
                program for solar panels to quantify the number of new solar
                panels constructed annually.
                Ongoing. The development area bonus for solar systems has been
                successful based on the number of photovoltaic systems that have
                been installed (an average of 60 systems a year since the bonus
                program started in 2007). The bonus program was extended for
                an additional two years in 2014. This program has been carried
                forward into the current Element as Program 29.
27. Program     Monitor the results of the pervious surface Development Area
                credit program.
                Ongoing. The development area credit for removing impervious
                surfaces and replacing them with paving stones, pervious concrete
                and other more pervious surfaces has resulted in the increased
                removal of impervious driveways and decks with more pervious
                surfaces. This program has been carried forward into the current
                Element as Program 30.
28. Program     Monitor the results of the Town’s Green Building Ordinance.
                Ongoing. The recently adopted 2013 CalGreen Code from the state
                incorporates many aspects of the Town’s Green Building
                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                          Page E- 11

                    Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                               Ordinance. Monitoring programs have been developed to track
                               compliance with the new code and the Town will continue to
                               modify the monitoring programs to ensure compliance. This
                               program has been carried forward into the current Element as
                               Program 31.
    O.  Policy  Recommend and promote water conservation in existing and new housing.
         29.     Program       Study, create, and implement a plan incentivizing and enforcing
                               water conservation measures in new residential construction to
                               comply with state law.
                               Complete. In 2011, a Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance was
                               adopted by the Town.
         30.     Program       Publicize the County Water-Wise Audit and Lawn removal
                               incentive program. Under the program residents can receive up to a
                               $1,000 rebate and commercial, industrial, and institutional
                               properties can receive up to a $10,000 rebate by replacing high
                               water using plans such as turf grass, with low water using plants
                               from our Approved Plant List or by installing permeable
                               hardscape.
                               Ongoing. This program has been carried forward into the current
                               Element as Program 32.
V. Goal Encourage older residents/senior citizens to remain members of the community.
    P.  Policy  Support and encourage participation in programs for seniors in cooperation with
                local and regional non-profit agencies.
         31.     Program       Continue to provide financial support to the Community Services
                               Agency and the Los Altos Senior Center for the provision of such
                               services as emergency assistance, nutrition and hot meal programs,
                               information and referral, and senior care management.
                               Ongoing. The Town has contributed $65,230 to the CSA of
                               Mountain View and $7,350 to the Los Altos Senior Center between
                               2007 and 2014. The town intends to continue this financial
                               support. This remains an appropriate mechanism for Los Altos
                               Hills to assist with emergency assistance needs. This program has
                               been carried forward into the current Element as Program 33.
                                2015-2023 Housing Element
                                Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                         Page E- 12

                       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
           32.     Program        Support Senior Housing Solutions (formerly Project Match), a
                                  home sharing service that matches seniors interested in sharing
                                  their homes with other seniors, including publicizing Senior
                                  Housing Solutions its services via articles in local newspapers and
                                  newsletters, and including financial support to assist Senior
                                  Housing Solutions. Senior Housing Solutions is headquartered in
                                  Milpitas and operates throughout the Peninsula.
                                  Ongoing. The Town has contributed annually to Senior Housing
                                  Solutions which provides affordable housing services for seniors
                                  throughout the county. The town intends to continue this financial
                                  support. This program has been carried forward into the current
                                  Element as Program 34.
VI. Goal Eliminate discrimination in housing access based on race, religion, national origin,
         age, sex, marital status or physical handicap, and other arbitrary barriers that
         prevent choice of housing.
     Q.  Policy   Refer complaints of discrimination to groups such as the Mid-peninsula Citizens
                  for Fair Housing to provide fair housing services.
           33.     Program        The County of Santa Clara contracts with Mid-Peninsula Citizens
                                  for Fair Housing for provision of fair housing education, outreach
                                  and counseling services. While not providing direct funding to
                                  Mid-Peninsula Citizens for Fair Housing, the Town of Los Altos
                                  Hills is one of several jurisdictions that participate with the County
                                  of Santa Clara in providing fair housing services to its residents
                                  and make use of the programs available through Mid-Peninsula
                                  Citizens for Fair Housing. The Town will prepare a handout with
                                  information on this service and will make it available at the public
                                  counter, and provide a link on the Town’s Web-site.
                                  Ongoing. This program has been carried forward into the current
                                  Element as Program 35.
     R.  Policy   Address the housing needs of persons with special needs, including persons with
                  disabilities, and persons in need of emergency or transitional housing.
           34.     Program        As part of this Housing Element, the Town has conducted a review
                                  of zoning, building codes, and permit processing, and has
                                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page E- 13

       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                identified the following actions appropriate to better facilitate the
                provision of accessible housing:
                 Amend the definition of “family” within the zoning ordinance to
                   be inclusive and non-discriminatory.
                 Establish written procedures for reasonable accommodation
                   requests for persons with disabilities with respect to zoning,
                   permit processing and building laws.
                Completed/Ongoing. In 2013, the definition of a family was
                amended in the Zoning Ordinance to be inclusive and non-
                discriminatory. In addition, the Town’s zoning code allows for
                walkways (and ramps) in setback areas up to four feet in width and
                the Town continues to explore additional policies on universal
                design. This program has been carried forward into the current
                Element as Program 36.
35. Program     Refer any individual or household in need of emergency shelter to
                appropriate agencies and organizations.
                Ongoing. The Town has an informal referral service for
                individuals or households in need of emergency shelter. This
                program has been carried forward into the current Element as
                Program 37.
                Consistent with its commitment to implement this Policy, the Town
                has expanded programs to further assist and address housing
                needs for special population groups as part of the current Housing
                Element.
36. Program     As required by State Law, amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow
                an emergency/homeless shelter at the Foothill Community College
                District site by right. It will be allowed as a permitted use without a
                conditional use permit or other discretionary permit. The size of
                the District property is adequate to accommodate future, potential
                homeless population in the Town. The Foothill parcel is 122 acres,
                with over 20 acres of undeveloped land. This is rare part of Los
                Altos Hills that is close to public transit and other services, and is
                thus the most realistic area for an emergency shelter - larger,
                flatter, and more connected than most of the Town. In addition, the
                landowner/major stakeholder has been involved in the
                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                           Page E- 14

                       Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                                 conversation about the rezoning to allow for emergency shelters
                                 and is amenable to the potential for an emergency shelter. The
                                 Town will also permit single room occupancy structures at Foothill
                                 Community College with a conditional use permit.
                                 Completed. In 2014, the Zoning Ordinance was amended to
                                 include emergency shelter housing as a permitted use on
                                 properties designated as institutional throughout the community.
            37.    Program       Meet with Hidden Villa, an educational community organization in
                                 the Town’s Sphere of Influence, to discuss potential partnership on
                                 transitional housing services.
                                 Ongoing. Town staff has met annually with Hidden Villa to
                                 discuss issues relevant to the Town. This program has been
                                 carried forward into the current Element as Program 39.
            38.    Program       Pursuant to SB 2, amend the Zoning Code permit transitional and
                                 supportive housing as a residential use within the R-A zone, and
                                 only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses
                                 of the same type in the same zone.
                                 Completed. In 2013, the Zoning Ordinance was amended to
                                 include transitional housing as a permitted use throughout the
                                 community.
VII. Goal Preserve neighborhood quality while ensuring an expedient development review
          process.
      S.  Policy   Review all new proposed residential development via the Site Development
                   Permit process to ensure compatibility among existing community standards.
            39.    Program       Review and update development review procedures in
                                 coordination with city departments and other responsible agencies
                                 to ensure efficient customer service and expedient delivery of
                                 development review services.
                                 Ongoing. The Town continues to explore additional improvements
                                 in the design review process. This program has been carried
                                 forward into the current Element as Program 40.
                                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                           Page E- 15

                        Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
       T.  Policy   Encourage rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing residential units
                    compatible with the established neighborhood character.
             40.     Program      Establish and implement residential development guidelines to
                                  assist in design and review.
                                  Completed. A Fast Track Guide for new development was adopted
                                  by the Town in 2010 which outlines design guidelines for new
                                  dwellings.
       U.  Policy   Maintain and improve necessary community services as needed to accommodate
                    new residential development.
             41.     Program      Update 2006 Community Survey that evaluates the condition and
                                  need for community services and report to City Council.
                                  Completed. A community services survey was completed in 2011.
                                  As this is a continuing need, this program is continued to the next
                                  Housing Element as Program 42.
             42.     Program      Continue to participate as part of the Urban County to access
                                  Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and Housing Trust
                                  of Santa Clara County funds through Santa Clara County. Apply to
                                  the County for specific community service projects to provide
                                  financial support for Senior Housing Solutions and Mid-Peninsula
                                  Housing Coalition projects.
                                  Ongoing. The Town contributed CDBG money to the Housing
                                  Trust of Santa Clara County in the last planning cycle. This
                                  program has been carried forward into the current Element as
                                  Program 43.
             43.     Program      Work with the City of Los Altos to measure actual sewer capacity
                                  by installing flow meters throughout the system.
                                  Not Completed. The Town is continuing to study the issue and this
                                  program is continued to the next Housing Element as Program 44.
VIII. Goal Prevent loss of housing due to wild land fire.
       V.  Policy   Encourage undergrounding of overhead transmission lines in areas of relatively
                                   2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page E- 16

              Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
          high risk for wildland fires.
    44.    Program        Make available material including brochures and pamphlets to
                          educate the public on the benefits of undergrounding utility lines.
                          Ongoing. Brochures and pamphlets have been made available at
                          the counter and on the Town’s website and are updated regularly.
                          This program will be carried through to the next Housing Element
                          under Program 45.
W. Policy Cooperate with the Fire Department on fire prevention efforts including brush
          and weed abatement.
    45.    Program        Make available material on the Town’s Web Site to educate the
                          Town public on the benefits of and requirements for brush and
                          weed abatement.
                          Ongoing. Brochures and pamphlets have been made available at
                          the counter and on the Town’s website and are updated regularly.
                          In addition, the Fire District has a program to remove eucalyptus
                          trees throughout the community at no cost to the Town. This
                          program will be carried through to the next Housing Element
                          under Program 46.
X. Policy Reduce prevalence of invasive, non-native plant species that may contribute to
          wild land fire.
    46.    Program        Continue the Town’s policy requiring the removal of eucalyptus
                          trees as a condition of development approval for new residences,
                          additions, or alterations to structures which individually or
                          cumulatively equal or exceed 1,200 square feet of floor area.
                          Ongoing. All new dwellings and major remodels are conditioned
                          to have eucalyptus trees removed. This program will be carried
                          through to the next Housing Element under program 47.
Y. Policy Cooperate with Purissima Hills Water Department on hydrant upgrades.
    47.    Program        Make available material on the Town’s Web Site to educate the
                          Town public on the hydrant upgrades requirements.
                          Ongoing. Brochures and pamphlets have been made available at
                            2015-2023 Housing Element
                            Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                    Page E- 17

             Appendix E– 2009 Housing Element Implementation
                       the counter and on the Town’s website and are updated regularly.
                       This program will be carried through to the next Housing Element
                       under Program 48.
Z. Policy  Continue to implement Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area policies for major
           additions and new home construction where applicable.
    48.   Program      Amend the Fire Code to address wildland fire hazards that are
                       inherent to the Town of Los Altos Hills.
                       Completed/Ongoing. In 2014, the Fire Code was amended to
                       address wildland fire hazards. As this is an ongoing concern and
                       state codes are updated every three years, this program will be
                       carried through to the next Housing Element under program 49.
                        2015-2023 Housing Element
                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                 Page E- 18

        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                                   APPENDIX F
                                           VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED SITE INVENTORY
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
       APN                   Address                                                Potential in                            Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
                                                                                                                        Owner dedicated conservation
 1   182 31 065       2000 Old Page Mill Rd            D            10.9               3 to 6          A       SFD
                                                                                                                         easement over entire property
                                                                                                                        Open space designation in GP;
 2   182 31 067       2050 Old Page Mill Rd            V             7.2               1 to 2          C         -
                                                                                                                                Moderate slope
 3   182 31 078       2055 Old Page Mill Rd            D             3.5               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 4   182 31 064             Jarvis Way                 V             5.4               1 to 2          C         -      Open space designation in GP
 5   182 32 017           14000 Tracy Ct               D             3.6               1 to 2          B       SFD          50% of lot >30% slope
                                                                                                                        75% of lot has 50% slope. Rest
 6   182 32 030         13920 Mirmirou Dr              D             3.8               1 to 2          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                      17%
 7   182 32 029         13875 Mirmirou Dr              D             3.6               1 to 2          B       SFD        80% of lot has 30%+ slope
 8   182 32 025     13735 Paseo Del Roble Dr           D             4.1               1 to 2          B       SFD     Consistent average slope of 33%
 9   182 32 024        14975 Page Mill Rd              D             3.9               1 to 2          B       SFD       75% has 34.25%, rest is 10%
 10  182 08 012        13906 Page Mill Rd              D              3                1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 11  182 08 011        13830 Page Mill Rd              D              5                1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                       Odd lot configuration + Matadero
 12  182 08 034        13816 Page Mill Rd              D             3.4               1 to 2          F       SFD
                                                                                                                                     Creek
 13  182 50 029        27925 Roble Alto Dr             D              3                1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                        60% of lot has 30% slope, rest
 14  182 08 004        13818 Page Mill Rd              D             9.4               2 to 3          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                      20%
                                                                                                                        50% of lot has 30% slope, rest
 15  182 08 022        13820 Page Mill Rd              D             4.3               1 to 2          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                      25%
                                                                                                                         landslide deposit at southwest
 16  182 08 020        13822 Page Mill Rd              D             3.6               1 to 2          E       SFD
                                                                                                                                  corner of lot
                                                                                                                          Fremont Hills Country Club
 17  175 55 049          12889 Viscaino Pl             D           17.04                 2              I      SFD
                                                                                                                               employee housing
 18  182 02 014           28011 Elena Rd               D             4.4               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 1
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
        APN                  Address                                                Potential in                          Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
                                                                                                                       Over 50% of lot is steeper than
 19  182 02 016           28011 Elena Rd               V            41.2               4 to 6          B          -
                                                                                                                                   30%
                                                                                                               Group   Daughters of Charity religious
 20  182 24 012         26000 Altamont Rd              D            44.5                 3             G
                                                                                                               Living             facility
                                                                                                                       Monta Vista Fault, mudslides,
 21  182 03 038        13115 Maple Leaf Ct             D            10.7               2 to 4          E          -
                                                                                                                             slopes, and gorge
 22  182 09 001          13466 N. Fork Ln              D              7                1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 23  182 09 044          13480 N. Fork Ln              D             9.8               2 to 4          A        SFD                   -
 24  182 10 034           13124 Byrd Ln                D              3                1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 25  182 10 006           27501 Elena Rd               D             4.8               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 26  182 18 029        13400 Country Way               D             3.1               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 27  182 18 030        13430 Country Way               D             3.4               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 28  182 18 049     28525 Matadero Creek Ln            D             3.4               1 to 2          B        SFD     Average slope of lot >30%
 29  182 18 050     28520 Matadero Creek Ln            D             3.5               1 to 2          B        SFD     Average slope of lot >30%
 30  182 52 003         28120 Story Hill Ln            D             5.6               1 to 2          B        SFD    Average slope of lot is 40-45%
                                                                                                                       45% of lot has 60% slope, rest
 31  182 52 002         28130 Story Hill Ln            D             6.1               1 to 2          B        SFD
                                                                                                                                >25% slope
 32  182 18 053       28505 Matadero Creek             D             3.8               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 33   182 18 54     28500 Matadero Creek Ln            D             4.4               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 34  182 18 044     28555 Matadero Creek Ln            D             5.2               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
 35  182 18 043     28560 Matadero Creek Ln            D              4                1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
                                                                                                                       Landslide areas, Monta Vista
 36  182 10 057          28030 Natoma Rd               D            18.1              7 to 14         D, E      SFD
                                                                                                                                   Fault
 37  182 11 029          12400 Melody Ln               D             3.7               1 to 2          A        SFD                   -
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 2
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
       APN                   Address                                                Potential in                            Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
 38  182 11 084          27861 Natoma Rd               D              3                1 to 2          F       SFD           Long and narrow lot
 39  182 12 078     27860 Black Mountain Rd            D             3.2               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 40  182 42 011       27600 Via Cerro Gordo            D             3.4               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 41  182 42 042        12606 Page Mill Rd              D             3.3               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                       65% of lot has 23.5% slope, rest
 42  182 52 017        28140 Story Hill Ln             D             6.5               1 to 2          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                    35.7%
                                                                                                                       Lot has an average slope of about
 43  182 27 001        12345 Page Mill Rd              D             10                1 to 2          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                     77%
 44  182 26 046        12320 Page Mill Rd              D            3.04               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                       50% near 100% slope, rest 10%:
 45  182 26 045         27927 Briones Way              D             3.2               1 to 2         B-F      SFD
                                                                                                                                  Odd shape
 46  182 26 052         27321 Altamont Rd              D            1.13               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 47  182 26 001         27241 Altamont Rd              D             6.6               2 to 4          A       SFD                     -
 48  182 20 062          27270 Natoma Rd               D             2.3               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
 49  182 20 051        12833 La Vida Real              D            4.84               1 to 2          A       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                        Purissima Creek Conservation
 50  182 20 052        12821 La Vida Real              D             6.1               1 to 2          C       SFD
                                                                                                                                     Area
                                                                                                                        Purissima Creek Conservation
 51  182 20 060        27500 La Vida Real              D             5.5               1 to 2          C       SFD
                                                                                                                                     Area
 52  182 05 041           26437 Elena Rd               D             3.3               1 to 2          F       SFD          Steep and oddly shaped
 53  182 05 038           26201 Elena Rd               D             6.7               2 to 4          B       SFD     Lot has an average slope of 25%
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 3
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
       APN                   Address                                                Potential in                            Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
 54  182 13 031          26541 Taffee Rd               D             3.3               1 to 2          H        SFD                     -
 55  182 14 003          26498 Taffee Rd               D             4.9               1 to 2          B        SFD       50% of lot has >30% slope
 56  182 14 030          26580 Taffee Rd               D            38.4               6 to 8          B        SFD       30% of lot has >30% slope
                                                                                                                         Lot has an average slope fo
 57  182 14 034          26790 Taffee Rd               D             5.6               1 to 2          B        SFD
                                                                                                                                     15.5%
                                                                                                                       80% of lot has >35% slope, rest
 58  182 29 043        27650 Central Drive             D            15.7               2 to 4        B, H       SFD
                                                                                                                                      16%
                                                                                                                       80% of lot has >32% slope; two
 59  182 29 016        27800 Central Drive             D              5                1 to 2       B, F, H     SFD
                                                                                                                                opposing slopes
                                                                                                                         Lot has an average slope of
 60  182 29 063          Buena Vista Lots              V             9.7               3 to 6       B, F, H      -
                                                                                                                           39%:two opposing slopes
                                                                                                                         Lot has an average slope of
 61  182 29 060       11641 Buena Vista Dr             D            10.2               1 to 2        B, H       SFD
                                                                                                                                     32.2%
                                                                                                                        Average slope of lot is 11.5%:
 62  182 28 016        27961 Central Drive             D              3                1 to 2       B, F, H     SFD
                                                                                                                                  odd slopes
 63  182 28 006        11990 Page Mill Rd              V             3.2               2 to 4          H         -
                                                                                                                       Property is oddly shaped: hole in
 64  182 29 022         27490 Sherlock Rd              D             5.1               1 to 2         F, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                     center
                                                                                                                       70% of lot has 46.4% slope, rest
 65  182 30 044         27461 Sherlock Ct              D             4.4               1 to 2        B, H       SFD
                                                                                                                                   is 31.03%
                                                                                                                         Oddly shaped and with steep
 66  182 29 036          27168 Moody Ct                D             3.2               1 to 2         F, H     -SFD
                                                                                                                             slopes over 1/2 of lot
 67  182 29 020          27150 Moody Ct                D             3.4               1 to 2          H        SFD                     -
 68  182 30 027          27271 Moody Rd                D             3.3               1 to 2        B, H       SFD     Average slope of lot is 35.29%
 69  182 30 023          27161 Moody Rd                D              3                1 to 2        B, H       SFD        Uniform steep slope 50%
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 4
         Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                   Vacant (V)
                                                                                    Development
Map                                                     Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
         APN                  Address                                                Potential in                           Constraint Comments
Code                                               Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                   Number of Units
                                                       (D)
                                                                                                                         60% of lot has 30% slope, rest
 70   182 30 014        27260 Sherlock Rd               D             3.2               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                     18%
 71   182 30 015        27070 Sherlock Rd               D             3.6               1 to 2        B, H      SFD      Average slope of lot is 32.5%
 72   182 30 004          26950 Moody Ct                D             4.5               1 to 2        B, H      SFD       Average slope of lot is 57%
 73   182 48 036      27431 Deer Springs Way            D             3.5               1 to 2        B, H      SFD        Uniform steep slope 50%
 74   182 23 023       27369 Chaparral Way              D             3.3               1 to 2          H       SFD                     -
                                                                                                                         45% of lot has 27% slope, rest
 75   182 25 004          26045 Moody Rd                D             4.4               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                     15%
 76   182 23 039          26420 Eshner Ct               D             3.3               1 to 2        B, H      SFD       Average slope of lot is 10%
                                                                                                                           Open space conservation
 77   182 23 031        26285 Altamont Rd               D            12.9               1 to 2        C, H      SFD
                                                                                                                             easement north of lot
                                                                                                                        65% of lot has 18.5% slope, rest
 78   182 23 032           Altamont Road                V             9.6               1 to 2          B         -
                                                                                                                                     12%
 79   182 16 048         12500 Corbetta Ln              D             4.7               1 to 2          G       SFD         Creek & oddly shaped
 80   182 15 020           25750 Elena Rd               D            21.5               2 to 4          H      Orchard       Packard Foundation
      182 25 021,
 81                       Blue Oaks Place               V            15.6               4 to 8          D         -          Recently Subdivided
     022, 023, 024
                                                                                                                        85% of lot has > 35% slope, rest
 82   182 25 014        26030 Altamont Rd               D              8                1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                      5%
                                                                                                                        70% of lot has >50% slope, rest
 83   182 25 019          26041 Moody Rd                D             9.6               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                     23%
                                                                                                                        Average slope of lot ranges from
 84   182 25 012       26747 Tanglewood Ln              D             3.9               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    35-50%
                                                                                                                        Average slope of lot ranges from
 85   182 25 013       26789 Tanglewood Ln              D             4.2               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    33-50%
                                                               2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                               Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                        Page F1- 5
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
       APN                   Address                                                Potential in                           Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
                                                                                                                       80% of lot has >38% slope, rest
 86  182 25 010       26750 Tanglewood Ln              D             3.1               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    10%
                                                                                                                       80% of lot has >40% slope, rest
 87  182 24 002          26100 Moody Rd                D             6.1               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    20%
                                                                                                                       Adobe Creek, 90% of lot>60%
 88  351 37 012          26220 Moody Rd                D            44.4               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    slope
 89  351 03 018       11888 Francemont Rd              D            21.3               1 to 2        B, H      SFD     Ave. slope =55%; odd shape lot
 90  351 03 016       11800 Francemont Rd              D             3.2               1 to 2         F, H     SFD              Adobe Creek
                                                                                                                        60% lot has 63% slope; rest is
 91  336 31 019       12001 Rhus Ridge Rd              D             5.3               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    16%
 92  336 32 084         25400 La Loma Dr               D             4.5               1 to 2          H       SFD                    -
 93  336 32 083         25398 La Loma Dr               D             3.1               1 to 2          H       SFD                    -
                                                                                                                          50% of lot > 38% slope; 2
 94  336 27 003        24840 Prospect Ave              D            17.1               2 to 4        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                  summits
 95  336 27 012       12012 Emerald Hill Ln            D              3                1 to 2        B, H      SFD            Ave. slope =38%
 96  336 27 005        24680 Prospect Ave              D             3.8               1 to 2        B, H      SFD            Ave. slope =23%
 97  336 25 022        24008 Oak Knoll Cir             D             3.8               1 to 2        B, H        -            Ave. slope =23%
 98  336 34 018           28120 Laura Ct               V             3.9               1 to 2        B, H        -            Ave. slope =26%
 99  336 26 030           12260 Kate Dr                D             9.6               1 to 2          H       SFD                    -
                                                                                                                       90% of lot =38% slope; 10% is
100  336 25 025        24020 Oak Knoll Cir             D             3.5               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                    25%
101  336 41 026           24301 Elise Ct               D              3                1 to 2         F, H     SFD         Ravine runs through lot
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 6
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
        APN                  Address                                                Potential in                           Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
102  182 03 038        13115 Maple Leaf Ct.            D            10.6               3 to 6          E      Stables                  -
103  182 10 041          28210 Natoma Rd               D            17.3              5 to 10         E, G    Convent       Poor Clares Convent
104  336 37 010            Encinal Court               V             3.5               1 to 2        B, H        -               Steep slopes
105  336 37 011       23219 Ravensbury Ave             D             3.1               1 to 2          H       SFD                     -
     336 42 027,
106                       Magdalena Road               V            12.5               3 to 6          D         -          Recently Subdivided
      028, 029
107  336 25 045         12131 Oak Park Ct              V             3.2               1 to 2          H         -                     -
108  336 28 003        12355 Stonebrook Dr             D             3.8               1 to 2          H       SFD                     -
109  182 19 049         27283 Ursula Lane              V             1.8               1 to 2          H         -                     -
110  175 39 018         25295 Cantata Way              V             4.4               1 to 2         F, H       -              Odd shape lot
111  175 37 011           13190 Burke Rd               D             3.1               1 to 2         F, H     SFD          Odd shape and slope
                                                                                                                       60% of lot has slope of 36%, rest
112  175 37 038       12800 W Sunset Drive             D             4.3               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                     22%
113  182 18 035       28600 Matadero Creek             D              3                1 to 2          F       SFD      Oddly shaped, Matadero Creek
                                                                                                                       Ave. slope=37%; Steep slope in
114  175 27 039       12995 W Sunset Drive             D              3                1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                 center of lot
                                                                                                                       Odd shape and slope; creek runs
115  175 37 033         12940 Atherton Ct              D             3.3               1 to 2       B, F, H    SFD
                                                                                                                                  through lot
                                                                                                                       55% of lot has 26.4%; creek runs
116  175 48 055         12870 Robleda Rd               D             4.5               1 to 2        B, H      SFD
                                                                                                                                  through lot
117  175 46 002         13171 S Alta Lane              D             3.3               1 to 2        B, H      SFD        50% of lot has 27% slope
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 7
        Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                  Vacant (V)
                                                                                   Development
Map                                                    Or       Approximate                       Development Existing
       APN                   Address                                                Potential in                            Constraint Comments
Code                                              Developed     Area in Acres                     Constraints   Use
                                                                                  Number of Units
                                                      (D)
118  175 47 003        26481 Purissima Rd              D             3.1               1 to 2          A       SFD                      -
                                                                                                                       30% of lot has 37% slope, rest is
119  175 46 014        13310 La Paloma Rd              D             3.6               1 to 2          B       SFD
                                                                                                                                  under 30%
                                                                                                                       Existing 27,000 sq. ft. building on
120  175 36 032        13310 La Paloma Rd              D            11.5               2 to 4          A       SFD
                                                                                                                                      site
121  182 19 054         27800 Edgerton Rd              D             3.5               1 to 2          F       SFD      Oddly shaped, Matadero Creek
122  175 45 066       25855 Westwind Way               D             4.8               1 to 2          A       SFD                      -
123  175 36 042         13445 Robleda Rd               D              5                1 to 2          H       SFD                      -
124  175 36 036         13441 Robleda Rd               D             3.6               1 to 2          H       SFD                      -
125  175 25 020        13850 Templeton Pl              D             3.1               1 to 2          H       SFD                      -
126  182 15 020           25750 Elena Rd               D             7.9               1 to 2          H       SFD                      -
127  182 28 045        12501 Zappettini Ct             V             1.2               1 to 2          A         -
128  175 43 035        27641 Purissima Rd              D             12               6 to 12         D, F     SFD            Recently Subdivided
                                                                                                                        Beth-Am Synagogue employee
129  175 32 001       26790 Arastradero Rd             D             9.2                 2             G       SFD
                                                                                                                                    housing
130  175 32 059        27060 Old Trace Rd              D             3.2               1 to 2          A       SFD                      -
131  175 03 047          26026 Scarff Way              D            10.5               3 to 6          A       SFD                      -
132  175 21 102          26228 Scarff Way              D             3.5               1 to 2          H       SFD                      -
133  336 30 058         25099 La Loma Dr               V              1                1 to 2       B, E, F      -       Very steep slope, narrow lot
                                                              2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                       Page F1- 8
           Appendix F-1- Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory
                                                     Vacant (V)
                                                                                      Development
Map                                                       Or       Approximate                       Development     Existing
           APN                 Address                                                 Potential in                           Constraint Comments
Code                                                  Developed    Area in Acres                      Constraints      Use
                                                                                     Number of Units
                                                         (D)
134     175 37 037         12950 Robleda Pl               D             12                2 to 4          B            SFD              -
        Potential
          Units                   -                       -              -             185 to 356          -             -              -
        Available
    General Plan and Zoning Designation: All properties have a General Plan and Zoning Designation of R-A (Residential
    Agricultural)
     Key to Development Constraints
              A.                     No known significant constraints.
              B.                     Steep topography.
              C.                     Existence of easements restricting development (scenic, drainage, access, etc.).
              D.                     Parcel recently subdivided or subdivision pending.
              E.                     Geological (landslides, fault zones, etc.)
              F.                     Irregular lot size and shape and/or unusual property features (creeks, tree cover, etc.)
              G.                     Religious institution.
              H.                     Limited sewer capacity-Los Altos sewer basin
              I.                     Other
                                                                 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                                                 Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                                          Page F1- 9
Appendix F-2- Vacant and Underutilized Parcel Map
          2015-2023 Housing Element
          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                   Page F2- 1
                      Appendix G- Residential Construction 2007-2014
                                   APPENDIX G
         NEW RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT CONSTRUCTION BY YEAR
                                       2007-2014
 Building
  Permit    2007 2008     2009     2010       2011      2012     2013 2014 Totals
  Finals
New Single-
  Family     5     4        5        7         4          6       10   6    47
Residences
  Second
 Dwelling    5     3        4        4         7          5        6   6    40
   Units
                               2015-2023 Housing Element
                               Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                        Page G- 1
                         Appendix H – Estimated Fees For Housing Construction in 2014
                                              APPENDIX H
               ESTIMATED FEES FOR HOUSING CONSTRUCTION IN 2014
                                   Cost for Single Family Home (4
                                                                         Cost for Secondary Dwelling Unit
             Item                 bedroom, 5,000 sq. ft. house with
                                                                                    (1,000 sq. ft.)
                                          400 sq. ft. garage)
 Building Permit                   $ 12,912                                $ 2,767
                                   $ 14,850
 Schools Fees                      ($2.97 per sq. ft., Set by Palo Alto    $ 2,970
                                   or Los Altos School Districts)
 Planning Fees (Fast Track or
                                   $ 4,625                                 $ 885
 Planning Commission)
 Pathway In-Lieu Fee               $ 5,700 (Estimate based on 1 acre
 (Varies- $53 per linear ft.                  parcel with average lot      N/A
 based on average width of lot)               width of 150’)
                                   1.65 x (.15 x building permit fee)
                                   $1,500 (15% of building permit fee
 Energy Fee                                                                $ 3,196
                                   for habitable portion of the
                                   structure)
                                                                           $ 7,950 (not charged if there is an
                                   $ 7,950 + (depending on number of       existing sewer connection and the
 Sewer Connection
                                   fixtures)                               total number of fixtures is 60 or
                                                                           less)
                                   $ 4,050 (varies, $0.96 per sq. ft. of   $ 810 (varies, $0.90 per sq. ft. of
 Planned Drainage Facilities:
                                   development being added)                impervious surface)
 Housing Fee (not for 2nd units)   $ 1,150.00                              N/A
 Total:                            $ 44,255 (estimate)                     $ 7,098 to $ 15,048 (estimate)
As a means of assessing the cost that fees contribute to development in Los Altos Hills, the Town has
calculated the total Planning, Building, Public Works and Non-Town Agency Fees associated with
development of two different residential prototypes. The fee for the first prototype is based on
construction of a four bedroom, 5,000 sq. ft. house with 400 sq.ft. garage. The second prototype consists
of a 1,000 sq. ft. secondary dwelling unit. For both prototypes, fees include building permits, Building
and Planning Department plan check fees, sewer and drainage fees, school impact fees, and energy fees.
Single-family residences also pay a housing fee, which has been waived for second units since 2004, and
a pathway in-lieu fee. In total, development fees for a single-family home average approximately
$44,000, representing less than two percent of current home prices in the community. While fees on
second units are approximately one-third to one-sixth of that for a single-family home, they could
potentially serve as a disincentive for a homeowner to add a second unit. As the sewer connection and
building permit fees represent the highest fees charged on second units, a program has been added to the
Housing Element to develop criteria for reducing these two fees as a means of better facilitating second
units.
                                         2015-2023 Housing Element
                                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                   Page H- 1

 Adopted November 8, 2007
                                     Safety Element
         INTRODUCTION
         Purpose
801.     The protection of public safety is one of the principal, if not foremost, responsibilities of
         government. Risks to life, property and the environment associated with both natural and
         human-caused hazards can affect the entire community by requiring costly public and
         private expenditures and physically changing the environment. It is thus the Town’s
         responsibility to protect the public interest by making informed land use decisions,
         requiring safe development practices, and ensuring that Los Altos Hills continues to be a
         safe, secure community.
802.     The Safety Element identifies safety hazards and establishes goals, policies and programs
         that protect the community from natural hazards such as earthquakes, landslides,
         flooding, and wildfires. The Safety Element also addresses human-caused threats to
         public safety such as structural fires, crime, and hazardous waste. The contents of the
         Safety Element are presented in the following sections:
                  •   General Safety Measures
                  •   Seismic and Other Geologic Hazards
                  •   Flood Hazards
                  •   Fire Hazards
                  •   Law Enforcement
                  •   Hazardous Waste
                  •   Disaster Response
803.     While the Safety Element has implications for land use policy, it also provides direction
         for needed actions in other aspects of Town government. It is of utmost importance that
         development regulations such as zoning, subdivision, grading and building codes provide
         effective controls and procedures related to Safety Element policies. In addition,
         recommendations in the Safety Element relate to programs for disaster response and
         recovery, fire protection, law enforcement, and utility systems.
         State Requirements
804.     State law requires every General Plan to have a Safety Element that addresses natural and
         human-caused hazards and dangers. State law does not dictate what local policy should
         be with respect to safety, only that the hazards be recognized and addressed. The Safety
         Element is closely related to other General Plan elements and overlaps topics addressed
         in the Land Use, Housing, Circulation and Scenic Roadways, Conservation, and Open
         Space and Recreation Elements.
                                            Safety Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 1

Adopted November 8, 2007
                         GENERAL SAFETY MEASURES
805.    The Town of Los Altos Hills takes the following approach to ensuring the safety of its
        residents:
            •    Use all practical measures to reduce existing high hazard levels, and
            •    Avoid creating further hazards through prudent planning, building, and
                 development practices.
        Moreover, the Town is committed to the principle that development shall be designed,
        located and regulated to minimize the effects of natural hazards such as earthquakes,
        landslides, flooding, and wildfire.
806.    Thoughtful land use decisions are fundamental to public safety. Structures should not be
        built on sites that are subject to high hazard levels unless such construction is
        unavoidable or the risk to life and property can be mitigated to acceptable levels. When
        development is contemplated in areas subject to natural hazards, issues such as the
        stability of the underlying geologic formations, the location of flood plains, and the
        ability to prevent and fight fires should be considered. Building or grading should
        proceed only after all the likely consequences on the entire neighborhood (not just the
        applicant’s property) have been evaluated and approved by competent professionals.
807.    Structures should not be built unless the project geologist, architect, engineer, planner
        and builder are satisfied that they meet adequate safety standards designed to prevent life-
        threatening collapse or major damage in future earthquakes, landslides, flooding or fire.
                                              GOAL 1
                  Protect the public from risk of personal injury and
                    property damage due to natural safety hazards.
        Policy 1.1       Open space easements, zoning and other land use regulations shall
                         be used to limit and, in some cases, prohibit development in areas of
                         unstable terrain, active fault traces, water channels, flood plains,
                         excessively steep slopes and other areas determined to be hazardous
                         to public welfare and safety.
        Policy 1.2       Unstable terrain, active fault traces, water channels, flood plains,
                         excessively steep slopes and other areas determined hazardous to
                         public welfare and safety shall not be developed unless unobtrusive
                         corrective measures can assure public safety.
        Policy 1.3       The geologic and soils conditions of proposed development sites shall
                         be analyzed to ensure land stability and foundation bearing
                         capabilities.
                                            Safety Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 2

Adopted November 8, 2007
                  SEISMIC AND OTHER GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
808.    The primary geologic hazards within Los Altos Hills are landslides and seismic impacts
        related to earthquakes. Seismically induced ground shaking, surface fault rupture,
        liquefaction and other various forms of earthquake-triggered ground failure are
        anticipated during major earthquakes. These geologic hazards present potential risks to
        property and public safety.
        Earthquakes
809.     The Town of Los Altos Hills is located in the San Francisco Bay Area, which is
         recognized as one of the most active seismic regions in the United States. The U.S.
         Geological Survey estimates that there is a 62% probability that at least one earthquake
         of magnitude 6.7 or greater will
         occur in the San Francisco Bay
         region before 2032. As shown on
         the accompanying map, the
         greatest probability is that a major
         earthquake will occur on the
         Hayward Fault. There is a 21%
         chance of it occurring on the San
         Andreas Fault, which would more
         directly affect Los Altos Hills.
         While the effects of a major
         earthquake would be widespread,
         the effects would be most intense
         on lands with steeper slopes and
         weak soils, which represent much
         of the remaining undeveloped land
         within Los Altos Hills and its
         Sphere of Influence.
                   Source: Map and data from
                         Putting Down Roots in
                         Earthquake Country, a
                   handbook developed by the
                   USGS, ABAG, the American
                      Red Cross-Bay Area and
                      others specifically for the
                               Bay Area (2005).
810.     The Town is traversed by three major fault lines, all of which are considered to be
         potentially active:
             •   Berrocal Fault, which runs from the western Town border to the southeastern tip
                 of the Town boundaries.
             •   Altamont Fault, which runs parallel to the Berrocal Fault to the north.
             •   Monte Vista Fault, which meanders from the northwest quadrant to the southeast
                 quadrant of the Town.
                                                Safety Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                    Page 3

Adopted November 8, 2007
811.    Additionally, there are two large fault lines within Santa Clara County that are known to
        be currently active and could endanger the stability of hillsides in Los Altos Hills:
           •   San Andreas Fault, located along the west coast.
           •   Calaveras Fault, located further inland.
       Although these two faults do not traverse Los Altos Hills, it is likely that more earth
       movement would result within Town limits than within nearby communities due to the
       Town’s steep topography and unstable soils.
812.   In October 1989, the Loma Prieta earthquake
       originated in the Santa Cruz Mountains and caused
       significant damage in Los Altos Hills, resulting in
       the demolition of 7 homes and necessitating
       substantial repairs to more than 25 residential units.
       The damage seen from the Loma Prieta earthquake
                                                                                               Cotton, Shires & Associates
       bears out the continued necessity for stringent
       seismic safety regulation in Los Altos Hills,
       including restrictions on the siting of development
       and requirements for high standards of engineering
       design to ensure adequate safety levels in the event
       of strong earth movement.
813.   Most of the development in Los Altos Hills is of
                                                              This home on La Cresta Drive was
       one- or two-story residential woodframe damaged in the 1989 magnitude 6.9
       construction. Woodframe structures lacking lateral Loma Prieta earthquake.
       bracing adequate to resist seismic forces may suffer
       structural failure. Any unreinforced brick or concrete structures also could receive
       considerable damage. Schools, fire stations, major utility lines and installations,
       communications systems and freeway interchanges were constructed to meet the seismic
       standards that were in effect at the time of construction. A review of such sites with
       regard to current standards might be warranted, however.
       Ground Failure
814.   Most of the valleys and flatlands along the bay are underlain by recent loose materials
       that have not been compacted and hardened by long-term natural processes. Landslides
       are common on most of the hills and mountains as loose material moves downslope. In
       addition, many human activities tend to make earth materials less stable and thus increase
       the chance of ground failure. Some of the natural causes of instability are earthquakes,
       weak earth materials, stream and coastal erosion, and heavy rainfall. Human activities
       that contribute to instability include oversteepening of slopes by undercutting them or
       overloading them with artificial fill, extensive irrigation, poor drainage, withdrawal of
       groundwater, and removal of stabilizing vegetation. These causes of failure, which
       normally produce landslides and differential settlement, are augmented during
       earthquakes by strong ground motions that result in rapid changes in the state of earth
       materials. These changes, through liquefaction and loss of strength in fine-grained
       materials, result in landslides during earthquakes as well as differential settlement,
       subsidence, ground cracking, ground lurching, and a variety of transient and permanent
       changes in the ground surface.
                                         Safety Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 4

Adopted November 8, 2007
815.   It is very difficult to anticipate the extent of probable ground failure in Los Altos Hills in
       response to seismic shaking. Experts agree that many seismic induced land failures in the
       hills in the Bay Area are certain to occur, especially where man has disturbed the natural
       slope equilibrium through cutting, filling and placing structures. One would also assume
       that other types of ground failures would occur along valley floors on alluvial materials
       that can lose their strength under shaking conditions.
       Landslides
816.   A landslide is the downhill movement of masses of earth material under the force of
       gravity. Landslides can be induced by natural processes such as heavy rainfall or fault
       ruptures or by human activities such as grading, construction, or excessive watering.
       Damage due to landslides can be reduced in areas undergoing development through
       avoidance, removal, or permanent stabilization of slide masses. In all cases, a first and
       critical step is to recognize the existence of an old slide or the probability of a future
       slide. This is accomplished through detailed geologic mapping, trenching, drilling, and
       the photo-interpretation of surface geologic conditions.
817.   Based on available data and experience, it appears that there are probably no massive
       landslide areas in most of the Town. However, there are small landslide areas ranging in
       size from less than an acre to a few acres. In recent years, landslides have occurred on La
       Cresta Drive, Atherton Court, Edgerton
       Drive, Page Mill Road and Stonebrook
       Avenue near the old quarry. There are
       also areas of potential landslide. These
                                                                                                        Cotton, Shires & Associates
       conditions require care on the part of
       the Town and developers since even
       small slides can destroy or badly
       damage       homes        and     streets.
       Considerable care should be taken in
       development of those portions of Los
       Altos Hills where known landslide
       hazards exist. Good review procedures
       of the geologic aspects of development            Landslide on Edgerton Drive in 1998.
       are especially critical.
       Erosion and Sedimentation
818.   Erosion generally involves two distinct problems: the wear and removal of material from
       one site, and the deposition of sediment at another. Factors influencing the rate of
       erosion at any particular location include climate, weather, rock and soil characteristics,
       slope and vegetation. Erosion occurs chiefly on steeper slopes in the upper reaches of
       drainage basins where runoff velocities are high. Sedimentation takes place mainly in
       the lower reaches of drainages where stream gradients and velocities are reduced.
819.    Soils maps of Santa Clara County prepared by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service
        indicate that 80% to 90% of Los Altos Hills has soil classifications with high to very
        high soil erosion hazard. These soils are in the mountain and hill areas. Moderately high
        erosion potential also exists along some short, steep drainages. Sedimentation occurs
        along the main creeks and tributary drainages, chiefly where human activities have
        altered stream flow characteristics.
                                          Safety Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 5
Adopted November 8, 2007
        Expansive Soils
820.    Expansive soils are earth materials that greatly increase in volume when they absorb
        water and shrink when they dry out. Expansion is most often caused by clay minerals
        that attract and absorb water from moisture in the air or ground. When buildings are
        placed on expansive soils, their foundations may move and crack, distorting the building
        structure and warping the doors and windows. The adverse effects of expansive soils can
        be avoided through proper drainage and foundation design. Soils maps indicate that
        practically the entire Town is included in soil groups with high shrink-swell
        characteristics, with some limited areas noted as having moderate shrink-swell
        characteristics.
821.    Adequate engineering techniques can control damage from expansive soils and expansive
        bedrock, but regulatory vigilance should be exercised and improved to ensure that site
        investigations and, if warranted, proper engineering are carried out before construction.
                                GEOTECHNICAL MAPPING AND
                                 SITE-SPECIFIC INVESTIGATION
                  The geotechnical and seismic hazards map at right identifies
                  potential hazard zones where there is a possibility of fault
                  rupture, slope instability, or ground deformation. In addition, the
                  California Geological Survey has prepared seismic hazard zone
                  maps that identify areas susceptible to amplified shaking,
                  liquefaction, earthquake-induced landslides, and other ground
                  failures. Pursuant to the California Seismic Hazards Mapping
                  Act, the Town requires applicants to submit site-specific
                  geological hazard investigations for construction projects located
                  within seismic hazard zones.
                  The site-specific investigation evaluates the site to determine its
                  ability to support the proposed structures. The Town’s consulting
                  geotechnical engineers review the soils reports and the
                  recommended mitigation measures to ensure that structures are
                  safely designed to meet requirements for the geologic conditions
                  on the site. Soils reports are kept in Town files to provide a
                  record of site-specific information on geologic conditions and
                  potential hazards in Los Altos Hills.
                                              Safety Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page 6

Adopted November 8, 2007
                               Safety Element
                         Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                   Page 7
Adopted November 8, 2007
                                            GOAL 2
            Minimize the risk of personal injury and property damage
                     due to seismic and other geologic hazards.
        Policy 2.1     Reduce the potential effects of seismic and other geologic hazards,
                       including slope instability.
        Policy 2.2     Locate development so as to avoid geologic hazards, including slope
                       instability, to the maximum extent feasible.
        Policy 2.3     In areas with known geologic hazards, limit development to minor
                       structures and improvements where damage would not threaten
                       human life or cause significant financial loss.
        Policy 2.4     In the event that significant structures are required in geologically
                       hazardous areas, all reasonable measures shall be taken to minimize
                       the amount of risk involved.
        Program 2.1    Maintain a map of known earthquake faults and other geologic hazards
                       in the Los Altos Hills planning area, and review and update the map as
                       new information emerges.
        Program 2.2    Continue to utilize the geologic hazards map and other available
                       information from reliable sources such as the United States Geological
                       Survey and California Geological Survey to evaluate proposed
                       development and mitigate known geologic hazards.
        Program 2.3    Ensure that proper erosion and sedimentation control measures are
                       undertaken for all development projects.
        Program 2.4    Regularly review the Town’s development regulations and building
                       codes and update them as necessary to incorporate the best available
                       standards for seismic safety and other geologic hazards.
        Program 2.5    Continue to require applicants to submit a geotechnical report prepared
                       by a licensed geotechnical engineer for proposed new residences and
                       major additions on sites that have a potential geologic hazard. In cases
                       where a geologic hazard is confirmed, the engineering recommendations
                       in the geotechnical report shall be implemented to avoid or mitigate the
                       probable effects of the hazard.
                                          Safety Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 8

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                       FLOOD HAZARDS
822.      Although most of the Town is outside the 100-year flood plain boundary defined by the
          Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), certain areas along the creeks are
          subject to flooding in a 100-year storm. These areas are designated as a Special Flood
          Hazard Area on FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Map and are regulated under the Flood
          Plain Management provisions of the Town’s Municipal Code to minimize erosion,
          maintain natural creek characteristics, and ensure safe housing conditions. While minor
          flooding can occur in undrained depressions or poorly graded areas in Los Altos Hills, the
          main concern for flooding is centered on major creeks such as Adobe Creek and adjoining
          areas. The Town has been working with the Santa Clara Valley Water District, which is
          responsible for flood control, to minimize flooding along Adobe Creek and other flood-
          prone areas.
                           Fremont Road                      Adobe Creek
                                                             near Edith Park
                                                                    Edith Road
            Flood maps
       published by the
  Federal Emergency
           Management
            Agency are
     available online at
        the FEMA Map
      Service Center at
        www.fema.gov.
823.     One factor that contributes to flooding in Los Altos Hills is the reduced percolation
         potential of the land caused by increased development and/or paving. During extended
         periods of heavy rainfall, open/undeveloped lands are not sufficient to absorb the rainfall
         and become saturated. Once soils are saturated, rainfall will sheet flow toward the lower
         elevations, seeking available outlets. If an adequate storm drainage system is not in place
         to dispose of the surface runoff, the end result will be flooding.
824.     Traditionally the Town’s approach to drainage has been to utilize natural drainage
         channels rather than to install pipe drainage systems or to increase capacity by
         straightening, widening, or lining creek channels. Given the policy of the Town to
         preserve the natural quality of creeks and riparian corridors, it is important to prevent
         development from increasing runoff to the point that channels become overloaded, and to
         avoid new development in natural flood plains.
                                              Safety Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page 9

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                        GOAL 3
                                   Minimize the risk of personal injury and
                                      property damage due to flooding.
                     Policy 3.1      Leave natural channels and flood plains in a natural state,
                                     unencumbered by development to the maximum extent feasible.
                                     Exceptions shall be made only in situations where it is essential to
                                     protect established property values or for public safety.
                     Program 3.1     Continue to cooperate with the Santa Clara County Valley Water District
                                     in planning to minimize flood problems.
                     Program 3.2     Continue to limit the amount of runoff in site development projects.
                     Program 3.3     Continue to implement the Flood Plain Management provisions of the
                                     Municipal Code.
                     Program 3.4     Continue to maintain an adequate storm drain system.
                            Flooding has occurred along
                            this stretch of Adobe Creek,
                                 where it passes through
                                              Edith Park.
                                                                                                               LAH Open Space
                                                                  Concerned citizens formed the Adobe
                                                                  Creek Watershed Group, which worked
    LAH Open Space
                                                                  with the Santa Clara Valley Water District
                                                                  to prevent flooding, erosion and loss of
                                                                  habitat. The group received an
                                                                  environmental stewardship award in
                                                                  recognition of its efforts.
                                                      Safety Element
                                                Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                          Page 10
Adopted November 8, 2007
                                    FIRE HAZARDS
825.   Native plants and brush, combined with steep hillsides and canyons, make Los Altos
       Hills a high-risk area for wildland fires. In July of 1985, extreme weather conditions
       and dry vegetation fueled a fire that spread unchecked over an area of approximately 150
       acres. Nine residences and three outbuildings were destroyed, with property damage
       totaling more than $9 million. Wildfires such as this usually occur in the “fire season”
       when high temperatures, low humidity and sustained or erratic winds combine with dry,
       flammable vegetation to create highly volatile fires. Additional factors such as steep
       terrain, limited access for emergency vehicles, and lack of water for firefighting can
       make wildfires very difficult to combat. Measures should be taken to control high-risk
       vegetation species, particularly Blue Gum Eucalyptus.
826.   Structural fires also pose a threat. Structural fires can occur any time of the year and are
       generally contained by the use of fire resistant construction materials and building
       setbacks, as well as the provision of adequate emergency vehicle access, water supplies,
       and fire department emergency operations.
827.   Emergency access roads, also known as fire
       roads, are located at strategic locations
       throughout Los Altos Hills. Fire roads allow
       emergency vehicles access to neighborhoods
       that do not have a through road. They are
                                                                                                      Town Crier
       typically secured by chain and padlock to
       prevent through traffic from using the fire
       roads except in emergencies. Figure C-4 in
       the Circulation and Scenic Roadways                   A Santa Clara County Fire Department
       Element illustrates the Town’s network of             vehicle patrols the Rhus Ridge Open
       emergency roads.                                      Space Preserve for fire hazards.
828.   Fire protection, suppression and safety services are provided by the Los Altos Hills
       County Fire District. The District contracts with the Santa Clara County Fire Department
       for paramedic and fire protection services in the Town and neighboring unincorporated
       areas. The District augments County Fire Department services by purchasing equipment
       such as specialized fire apparatus for use in the high hazard brush and grass fire areas. In
       addition, the District funds the following programs:
               •   Replacement of undersized water mains and installation of
                   new water mains and fire hydrants
               •   Brush chipping program to reduce flammable vegetation
               •   Garden debris drop-off program to eliminate stockpiling
               •   Fuel reduction/fire break program at Byrne Preserve and
                   other Town-owned properties
               •   Annual mailing of fire prevention and emergency
                   preparedness information to all Los Altos Hills residents
       The Fire District also maintains emergency access roads and provides citizen emergency
       preparedness training and peak-load staffing (additional personnel during the fire season).
       Ambulance service is provided by EMS Santa Clara County on contract with the Fire
       District.
                                         Safety Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 11

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                       GOAL 4
           Strive to prevent and reduce potential damage related to fire hazards.
       Policy 4.1                  Development shall not be permitted unless an acceptable level of fire
                                   protection and adequate water supplies can be provided.
       Policy 4.2                  Emergency vehicle access shall be provided through adequately
                                   designed roads, streets and driveways, as well as alternate
                                   emergency roads to reach potentially “cut-off” neighborhoods.
       Program 4.1                 Continue to cooperate with the Santa Clara County Fire Department in
                                   undertaking programs to minimize the fire hazards in the Town,
                                   particularly in remote areas with heavy vegetation.
       Program 4.2                 Continue to refer plans for proposed site development projects to the
                                   Santa Clara County Fire Department for review and comment.
       Program 4.3                 Educate property owners on the benefits of reducing and mitigating fire
                                   hazards.
       Program 4.4                 Work with water purveyors, the Los Altos Hills County Fire District and
                                   the Santa Clara County Fire Department to ensure the availability of
                                   adequate water, particularly during peakload periods, to meet fire-
                                   fighting needs.
       Program 4.5                 Continue to enforce the Town’s landscaping ordinance requiring the
                                   removal of certain types of eucalyptus trees when building permits for
                                   new residences or major additions are issued.
       Program 4.6                 Require public roads, private roads, and driveways to be constructed and
                                   maintained according to Fire Department standards in order to
                                   accommodate fire trucks and other emergency vehicles.
       Program 4.7                 Emergency access roads shall be maintained by the Los Altos Hills
                                   County Fire District according to District fire road standards and
                                   consistent with pathway requirements.
       Program 4.8                 Encourage the use of fire resistant building materials and fire sprinklers.
                                                                                        The El Monte Fire Station is
                                                                                        owned by the Los Altos Hills
        LAH County Fire District
                                                                                        County Fire District and
                                                                                        staffed by the Santa Clara
                                                                                        County Fire Department.
                                                    Safety Element
                                              Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                        Page 12

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                    LAW ENFORCEMENT
 829.   The Town of Los Altos Hills is a safe, quiet residential community with a low rate of
        crime. Like several other small cities, the Town contracts with the Santa Clara County
        Sheriff’s Department for law enforcement and public safety services. The Sheriff has an
        office in the Heritage House next to Town Hall.
                                                GOAL 5
                  Minimize the risk of personal injury and property damage
                                            due to crime.
        Policy 5.1         Continue to provide law enforcement services that maintain the
                           community’s low crime rate and ensure a high level of public safety.
        Program 5.1        Continue to support the Santa Clara County Sheriff’s efforts to minimize
                           crime in Los Altos Hills.
        Program 5.2        Encourage residents to participate in the Neighborhood Watch Program
                           and coordinate with the Santa Clara County Sheriff’s Department to
                           implement it.
        Program 5.3        Use the Town’s emergency notification phone system to alert
                           neighborhoods to potential danger from criminal activities.
                  NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH PROGRAM
         Neighborhood Watch is a nationwide crime prevention program that
         enlists the active participation of citizens in cooperation with law
         enforcement agencies to reduce crime in their communities.
              The program involves:
              •   Neighbors getting to know each other and
                  working together in a program of mutual
                  assistance.
              •   Citizens being trained to recognize and report
                  suspicious activities in their neighborhoods.
              •   Education in crime prevention techniques such
                  as home security, bicycle safety, and
                  identification of belongings.
         Contact the Santa Clara County Sheriff’s Department
          for additional information.
                                             Safety Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page 13

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                   HAZARDOUS WASTE
830.    Federal, State and local laws regulate the production, storage, handling, and disposal of
        hazardous materials and waste. Hazardous materials are those that, because of quantity,
        concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, pose a significant present or
        potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment. Hazardous materials
        most commonly used in Los Altos Hills include pesticides and garden chemicals,
        combustible fuels, motor oil, paint and cleaning supplies, batteries, and pool chemicals.
        Computers and other electronic equipment also contain hazardous materials that must be
        disposed of properly. A more detailed list of household hazardous wastes is provided in
        Appendix A.
831.    Improper storage and disposal of hazardous waste can result in environmental
        contamination of surface and groundwater. Heavy metals such as lead, zinc, copper,
        nickel, mercury and cadmium can enter the waste stream via residential sewage and
        urban runoff. To ensure proper disposal, Los Altos Hills joined with Santa Clara County
        and the other cities in the county in developing the County Hazardous Waste
        Management Plan. The CHWMP establishes a comprehensive and coordinated
        countywide approach to hazardous waste management.
832.    Los Altos Hills residents may safely dispose of household hazardous waste through the
        Santa Clara Countywide Household Hazardous Waste Program. The County and 14
        cities (including Los Altos Hills) participate in the program and share costs based on the
        number of households served from each jurisdiction. The program provides safe
        methods of recycling and disposing of household hazardous waste. An increased number
        of disposal sites would make drop-offs more convenient and improve participation in the
        program.
                                             GOAL 6
                       Reduce dangers from hazardous materials.
        Policy 6.1       Facilitate the proper disposal of hazardous waste.
        Program 6.1      Continue to work with Santa Clara County and participating cities to
                         implement the County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and the
                         Countywide Household Hazardous Waste Program.
        Program 6.2      Provide information to all user groups about:
                              •   Commonly used hazardous materials.
                              •   Environmentally friendly alternatives.
                              •   Safe recycling and disposal methods.
        Program 6.3      Encourage the Santa Clara County Household Hazardous Waste Program
                         to sponsor and advertise drop-off days in locations that are convenient
                         for residents of Los Altos Hills.
                                           Safety Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 14

Adopted November 8, 2007
                              DISASTER RESPONSE
833.    The Town’s Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is located in the Heritage House
        adjacent to Town Hall. The EOC serves as the headquarters for coordinated response to
        disasters such as a major earthquake or fire. Town
        staff includes a Public Safety Officer who is
        responsible for overseeing emergency services.
834.   In compliance with state and federal guidelines, the
       Town has adopted an Emergency Operations Plan
                                                                                                    Steve Garcia
       (EOP) that identifies and allocates resources in
       response to emergencies, from preparation through
       recovery.      The EOP identifies the Town’s
       emergency planning, organizational, and response
       policies and procedures and establishes how they          The Emergency Operations Center
       will be coordinated with emergency responses from         is in the Heritage House next to
       other levels of government.                               Town Hall.
835.   The Emergency Operations Plan assigns key roles in the EOC, at Town Hall, and in the
       field in response to a disaster. The main function of the EOC is to collect, analyze and
       disseminate information to first responders, residents, Council members, media and the
       State Office of Emergency Services. The EOC also manages volunteers such as
       Emergency Communications Committee (ECC) members and Community Emergency
       Response Team (CERT) members wishing to assist in a disaster. These volunteers have
       special skills and training and are sworn in as Disaster Service Workers. They will
       provide emergency communications to staff in the EOC and will also assist with
       information gathering during an emergency. CERT members may be called upon to
       assist first responders such as firefighters and law enforcement personnel.
836.   The Town’s Emergency Response Program also is proactive in educating the community
       on emergency preparedness for all hazards. The Town collaborates with the Palo Alto
       Chapter of the American Red Cross and the Los Altos Hills County Fire District to
       provide residents with valuable knowledge to better prepare their families for a disaster.
837.   The ability to respond to emergencies depends, in large part, on the continued operation
       of critical facilities—facilities that house emergency responders and those that provide
       emergency services. Critical facilities owned and operated by the Town include Town
       Hall, the Emergency Operations Center, and the Corporation Yard. Constructed in 2006,
       Town Hall is built according to up-to-date standards for seismic safety and fire
       protection. All Town facilities should be maintained up to code.
                                        Safety Element
                                  Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                            Page 15

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                  GOAL 7
              Provide quick, coordinated response to emergencies.
       Policy 7.1              Minimize damage from all hazards through planning for emergency
                               management.
       Policy 7.2              In the event of a disaster, the major transportation, communication
                               and emergency facilities shall be capable of continued functioning.
       Policy 7.3              In times of emergency, evacuation routes shall be determined and
                               implemented by fire protection and law enforcement personnel.
       Program 7.1             Inform residents of potential hazards from earthquakes, landslides,
                               flooding and fire, and of reasonable precautions that can be taken.
       Program 7.2             Train and equip Town emergency personnel so they will be able to make
                               a quick, coordinated response to emergencies.
       Program 7.3             Review the Emergency Operations Plan and update it on a regular basis
                               to ensure that it provides for adequate response to the full range of
                               disasters identified in the Safety Element.
       Program 7.4             Operate and maintain critical facilities owned by the Town, including
                               Town Hall, the Emergency Operations Center, and the Corporation Yard,
                               to withstand seismic shaking, fire and other hazards.
       Program 7.5             Work with other agencies through programs such as the Silicon Valley
                               Regional Interoperability Project (SVRIP) to improve communications
                               and provide a coordinated emergency response on a regional level.
       Program 7.6             In conjunction with the Los Altos Hills County Fire District, provide an
                               emergency notification telephone system. Use the system to alert
                               residents to emergencies and to communicate information on evacuation
                               routes and other disaster-related information.
                                                                         An emergency generator
                                                                         at Town Hall ensures
                                                                         continued operation of critical
                                                                         facilities.
                Steve Garcia
                                                Safety Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                    Page 16
Adopted November 8, 2007
                                           APPENDIX A
                      Household Hazardous Waste
             This quick reference is based on information provided by the
               Santa Clara County Household Hazardous Waste Program.
Aerosol cans
Asbestos
Automotive fluids (antifreeze, oils, various fluids, and other chemicals)
Batteries (vehicle batteries as well as household alkaline and
  rechargeable batteries)
Battery acid
Chemistry sets                                                                       Batteries
Cleaners/household chemicals
Cooking oil
Cosmetics and toiletries
Degreasers/solvents
Electronic equipment                                         Pesticides
                                                                Fertilizers, weed killers and pesticides
                                                                                     Fire extinguishers
                                                                                              Fireworks
                                                                         Flares (except airborne flares)
                                                          Fluorescent tubes, spiral and compact bulbs
                                                                                                  Freon
                                                                                         Gasoline/fuels
                                                                          Gun powder and ammunition
                                                                              Helium and oxygen tanks
                                                                                                   Lead
                                                                                                  Mace
                  Fertilizers and weed killers
Mercury (including thermostats, button batteries, relays, etc.)
Motor oil and oil filters
Paint supplies and cans
Pesticides
Photo chemicals
Prescription medicines                                       Paint cans
Propane tanks
Refrigerators
Syringes and needles
             For information about recycling and
         disposal of household hazardous waste,
                                           contact the
            Santa Clara County HHW Hotline at
                                     (408) 299-7300.
                                            Safety Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 17
 Adopted November 8, 2007
                                      Noise Element
         INTRODUCTION
         Purpose
701.     Freedom from excessive noise is a major factor in the quality of life for Los Altos Hills
         residents. Noise can disrupt sleep, cause stress and tension, and interfere with
         conversation and many other aspects of day-to-day life. The Noise Element is intended
         to protect residents from unwanted noise, thereby assuring their continued enjoyment of
         the quiet, peaceful community envisioned in the Introduction to the General Plan.
                           Los Altos Hills should be a community dedicated to
                           maintaining a semi-rural atmosphere, where people
                           can live in the midst of open space, exposed to
                           minimum noise, congestion, and confusion, and with
                           sufficient space on each lot to allow activities such as
                           gardening, cultivating vineyards and orchards,
                           keeping horses, and enjoying outdoor recreation.
                                                 Community Goal 1
                                          Introduction to the General Plan
         Scope
702.     The Noise Element provides a basis for evaluating noise issues and limiting the exposure
         of the community to excessive noise levels. The Noise Element identifies current noise
         conditions and projects future noise conditions resulting from continued growth in Los
         Altos Hills and surrounding communities. It establishes policies and programs to
         mitigate the current and future potential impacts of noise. In addition, it provides
         direction for reviewing existing Town standards and establishing new standards and
         criteria, as appropriate, for the mitigation of noise impacts determined to be unacceptable.
         State Requirements
703.     State law requires every General Plan to have a Noise Element that identifies noise
         problems in the community and works toward their resolution. The State also provides
         guidelines for the preparation of the Noise Element. These guidelines were initially
         adopted by the Office of Noise Control, California Department of Health, in 1976. The
         Los Altos Hills Noise Element has been prepared in recognition of these guidelines and
         the requirements of State law.
         Relationship to Other Elements
704.     Since traffic is one of the major sources of noise, there is a direct relationship between
         the Noise Element and the Circulation & Scenic Roads Element. The Noise Element is
         also closely related to the Housing Element and the Open Space & Recreation Element,
         which address two of the Town’s most noise-sensitive land uses—residential
         development and open space. All of these components are integrated in the Land Use
         Element, which provides for the compatibility of land uses.
                                               Noise Element
                                        Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                   Page 1

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                      NOISE BASICS
        Subjective Factors
705.    Defined simply as unwanted sound, noise is a subjective phenomenon that depends upon
        the listener’s attitude toward the sound. The degree to which noise is irritating depends
        on a variety of factors, some independent of the noise source itself. Time of day,
        background sound level, the listener’s activity, and surrounding land use can all influence
        the degree to which a particular sound is perceived as annoying. Value judgments also
        enter into tolerance for urban sound levels. Most people tolerate emergency sirens and
        loud lawnmowers because they represent necessary actions related to public safety and
        neighborhood upkeep. However, loud noises from cars with defective or modified
        mufflers are usually perceived as annoyances.
        Noise Measurements
706.    Three important characteristics of noise are its level of intensity or loudness, its
        frequency range, and the variation in noise level with time. Each of these factors is
        addressed in the following methods of measurement:
            1. Noise levels are measured in decibels                              Figure 7-1
                 (dB). A decibel is a unit for describing              Typical sound levels
                 the amplitude of sound.                                    measured in dBA
            2. The A-weighted filter network adjusts                       Stock car races              130
                                                                                  Chainsaw              125
                 the measured noise level to account for                      Band concert              120
                 the frequency range of noise so that it           Leafblower, power saw                110
                 most closely relates to human perception                    School dance               100
                 of loudness. The A-weight filter de-                         Tractor, truck             90
                                                                    Manual machine, tools                80
                 emphasizes the very low and very high                      Freeway traffic              70
                 frequency components of sound in a                   Normal conversation                60
                 manner similar to the response of the                          Large office             50
                 human ear and gives good correlation                                Library             40
                                                                          Secluded woods                 30
                 with subjective reactions to noise.                    Whisper (at 5 feet)              20
                 Typical sound levels measured in the A-
                                                                  Source: Noise Levels in Our Environment,
                 weighted scale (dBA) are shown in                   League for the Hard of Hearing, 2007
                 Figure 7-1.
            3. The Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the average equivalent A-
                 weighted sound level during a 24-hour day, obtained after adding 5 decibels to
                 sound levels in the evening from 7 pm to 10 pm, and 10 decibels to sound levels
                 in the night from 10 pm to 7 am. The State has adopted the Community Noise
                 Equivalent Level (CNEL) as the standard metric because it corresponds well to
                 community annoyance over noise.
        Noise Terminology
707.    The ambient noise level is the composite of noise from all sources near and far. The
        ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a
        given location.
        Noise attenuation is the reduction of sound intensity by various means.
                                           Noise Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 2

Adopted November 8, 2007
                              THE NOISE ENVIRONMENT
708.    Residents of Los Altos Hills enjoy a relatively quiet noise environment. Because the
        community is characterized by low-density residential development and has no industrial
        or commercial areas, a majority of noise-producing sources normally found in Bay Area
        cities are not located within its boundaries. Noise is not confined by city limits, however,
        and the community’s noise environment is affected by noise-producing sources in
        neighboring cities. It is not possible to control all noise sources that affect Los Altos
        Hills, but the negative impacts of excessive noise can and should be mitigated to the
        greatest extent possible.
709.    As in most Bay Area communities, motor vehicle traffic is the primary source of noise in
        Los Altos Hills. The level of noise produced by vehicular traffic generally fluctuates in
        relation to the volume of traffic, the percentage of trucks, and average traffic speed.
        Other sources of community noise include air traffic, construction activities, the use of
        home maintenance equipment such as chainsaws and gas-powered leaf blowers, and the
        operation of residential pool equipment and air conditioning units. The noise issues of
        greatest concern to the community are briefly described below, including suggestions for
        evaluating noise problems and mitigating their impacts.
        Motor vehicle traffic
710.    The Town is bisected by Interstate 280, which is the primary source of noise in the
        community. Freeway noise has often affected the normal use of residential properties
        and associated activities, both indoors and outdoors. In addition, it is likely that some
        property values have decreased as a result of freeway noise. Another major source of
        noise is traffic on Foothill Expressway and Arastradero Road, portions of which are
        maintained by Santa Clara County and the City of Palo Alto. The Town should continue
        to work with the appropriate agencies to minimize noise generated by Interstate 280,
        Foothill Expressway and Arastradero Road. To a lesser degree, traffic on local roadways
        also can be a significant source of noise for adjacent residents. Vehicle noise is regulated
        by the State’s noise emissions standards, and cities are generally prohibited from
        applying stricter standards. The Sheriff’s Department will continue to enforce the State’s
        noise emission standards for all vehicles, including motorcycles.
711.    Air traffic
        Low-flying airplanes and helicopters are another significant source of noise. Most of the
        air traffic is generated by the San Francisco, Oakland and San Jose airports, as well as
        Moffett Field. In addition, medical transport airplanes and helicopters fly in and out of
        Stanford Medical Center. The Regional Airport Planning Commission (RAPC) serves as
        a public forum for issues such as airport noise. Town residents should continue to work
        with the RAPC and the Federal Aviation Administration to minimize air traffic noise and
        flight patterns that impact Los Altos Hills.
        Schools, recreation facilities and other conditional uses
712.    Public and private recreation facilities, schools, churches and other conditional uses can
        be a significant source of noise, particularly at peak-use periods. Noise generated by the
        use of these facilities can be disruptive to neighboring residents. The conditional use
        permits for these uses typically restrict the hours of operation and the use of loud
        speakers so that noise impacts are minimized.
                                            Noise Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 3

Adopted November 8, 2007
        Construction activities
713.    Although construction noise usually lasts only a limited period of time, it can severely
        restrict the enjoyment of residential properties. Due to the topography of the community,
        noise from construction activities such as grading and the operation of other heavy
        equipment often carries for great distances. The Town’s Municipal Code limits the hours
        and days of outside construction activities to 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through
        Saturday, with no construction allowed on Sundays or public holidays. (These
        restrictions do not apply to the use of domestic power tools by homeowners.) All
        construction equipment operating within the Town should be encouraged to be equipped
        with the most up-to-date muffling devices generally available.
        Residential activities
714.    Amplified music, loud parties and other social gatherings, barking dogs, crowing
        roosters, auto repair and the operation of power mowers, chainsaws, workshop
        equipment, home improvement tools and similar equipment are sources of potentially
        annoying noise. Under provisions of the Town’s Municipal Code, homeowners are
        prohibited from keeping or permitting barking dogs, and the use of power tools is
        generally limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset on weekdays and between 9:00
        a.m. and sunset on weekends.
                                     Los Altos Hills Municipal Code
                                         Sec. 6-1.510. Barking dogs
                      It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit in or
                      upon any premises within the Town any barking dog that is
                      under the control of that person. “Barking dog” means a dog
                      that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise
                      continuously and incessantly for a period of ten (10)
                      minutes within a fifteen (15) minutes period to the
                      disturbance of any other person. The issuance of a citation
                      shall be within the discretion of the Animal Control Officer or
                      other enforcement person.
        Air conditioning units and pool equipment
715.    The operation of heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) units, pool equipment,
        generators and similar equipment can be noisy. The recent trend to construct larger
        homes has in some cases involved the installation of commercial-scale equipment, which
        is even more likely to annoy neighbors. To protect them from excessive noise, the Town
        does not allow HVAC or pool equipment to be located in setback areas. HVAC
        equipment, pool equipment, generators, and similar types of equipment should be
        enclosed as much as possible, and the enclosures should be insulated to minimize noise
        impacts. Specific standards for this type of equipment should be developed and
        implemented through the Town’s planning and building permit process.
                                              Noise Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 4

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                       The Noise Ordinance
                The Town’s Noise Ordinance identifies a series of noise sources and
                specifies the maximum decibel levels for day and night (defined as
                the period between sunset and 7:00 a.m.). Violation of these
                standards constitutes a public nuisance and is subject to nuisance
                abatement. Exceptions are made for alerting persons to the
                existence of an emergency and the performance of emergency work,
                neither of which are subject to the maximum noise levels established
                in the ordinance. The Noise Ordinance should be periodically
                reviewed and updated to ensure that the noise standards are
                appropriate and attainable.
                                    Los Altos Hills Municipal Code
                                           Title 5, Chapter 2
        Noise Contours
716.    The noise environment for Los Altos Hills can be described with noise contour maps that
        have been developed for land use planning purposes. Noise contours define areas of
        equal noise exposures based on noise measurements at given locations. Figures N-2 and
        N-3 are noise contour maps for present-day conditions (Year 2007) and future conditions
        (2030) based on projected local and regional growth.
        Existing Conditions
717.    Larger roadways such as Interstate 280, Foothill Expressway and Arastradero Road are
        corridors with high noise levels generated by heavy volumes of traffic. As shown on
        Figure 7-2, the high-noise contours extend a considerable distance beyond the roadways,
        indicating greater noise impacts on residents living within those contours. In contrast,
        residents who live farther away from the roadways and outside the high-noise contours
        experience a significantly quieter environment, with CNELs in the low 50s and 40s and
        noise levels sometimes dropping down to 30 dbA at night. Roadways that were not
        modeled for noise contours also experience traffic noise, with noise levels along local
        streets expected to be similar or quieter than those on modeled streets.
        Future Conditions
718.    Figure 7-3 shows the noise contours projected to 2030 based on traffic growth projections
        by the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority and the Metropolitan Transportation
        Commission. The projected contours are similar to existing noise conditions, with
        significant increases in noise levels occurring at major freeway intersections, especially at
        El Monte Road. The increase in traffic will result primarily from regional growth, over
        which the Town has no control. However, the Town can and should require new
        development in high-noise contours to include noise mitigation measures.
                                            Noise Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 5

  Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                  Figure 7-2
                                                                  © Charles M. Salter Associates, Inc.
NOTE: Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the average equivalent A-weighted sound level during a
24-hour day, obtained after adding 5 decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7 pm to 10 pm, and 10 decibels
to sound levels in the night from 10 pm to 7 am.
                                                 Noise Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                    Page 6

  Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                  Figure 7-3
                                                                    © Charles M. Salter Associates, Inc.
NOTE: Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the average equivalent A-weighted sound level during a
24-hour day, obtained after adding 5 decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7 pm to 10 pm, and 10 decibels
to sound levels in the night from 10 pm to 7 am.
                                                 Noise Element
                                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                    Page 7

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                                 GOAL 1
                  Minimize noise levels so that residents may enjoy the amenities
                             of living in a quiet, semi-rural community.
        Policy 1.1     Noise levels shall be compatible with the Town’s semi-rural
                       atmosphere and consistent with Town standards.
        Policy 1.2     All appropriate methods for reduction of noise at the source (i.e.
                       automobile, aircraft, etc.) shall be supported.
        Policy 1.3     Individual use of noise-generating equipment should not interfere
                       with the normal use and enjoyment of outdoor or indoor areas on
                       surrounding properties.
        Policy 1.4     Noise generated by construction equipment shall be attenuated to
                       the maximum extent possible. Hours of construction activity shall be
                       regulated to minimize the impact of noise on surrounding residential
                       properties.
        Program 1.1    Update the Noise Ordinance to provide for clear interpretation of the
                       regulations and effective enforcement of appropriate standards based on
                       the A-weighted scale in order to protect residents from unwanted noise,
                       thereby ensuring their continued enjoyment of the quiet, peaceful
                       community envisioned in the Introduction to the General Plan.
        Program 1.2    Continue to restrict the hours of non-emergency grading and construction
                       activities to specified days of the week and times of day to minimize
                       noise impacts on neighboring residents and other sensitive land uses.
        Program 1.3    Encourage construction contractors to use construction equipment that
                       incorporates the best available noise control technology.
        Program 1.4    Continue to prohibit the location of heating, ventilating and air
                       conditioning (HVAC) equipment, pool equipment, pumps and similar
                       equipment in setbacks. Develop siting and noise attenuation standards
                       for HVAC equipment, pool equipment, pumps and similar equipment.
                       Standards should be more stringent for these types of equipment that
                       produce continuous noise than for sources that emit noise occasionally.
        Program 1.5    Encourage the use of quiet pavement materials in repaving projects
                       including the repaving of Interstate 280.
        Program 1.6    Work with appropriate State, regional and local agencies such as
                       Caltrans, Santa Clara County and the City of Palo Alto to reduce noise
                       from roadways adjacent to Los Altos Hills.
        Program 1.7    Work with the Federal Aviation Administration, the Regional Airport
                       Planning Commission and other appropriate agencies to reduce noise
                       levels generated by aircraft flying over Los Altos Hills.
        Program 1.8    Continue to address potential noise impacts when reviewing applications
                       for new or renewed conditional use permits.
        Program 1.9    Make residents aware of noise limits by providing a copy of the Town’s
                       Noise Ordinance to all applicants for site development permits. In
                       addition, provide a copy of the Town’s construction hours to all residents
                       and contractors who obtain building permits.
                                          Noise Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 8

Adopted November 8, 2007
                              LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
719.    In larger cities, many undesirable noise effects can be reduced or avoided if noise
        conditions are considered when assigning uses to specific parcels of land. In Los Altos
        Hills however, there is limited opportunity to address land use compatibility in this
        manner because the community is almost fully developed, little growth is anticipated,
        and major land uses are primarily single-family residential, open space and recreation,
        and institutions such as schools and churches. The community has no commercial or
        industrial uses. Moreover, the Town has little or no control over major sources of noise
        generated by motor vehicle traffic on Interstate 280, Arastradero Road and the Foothill
        Expressway.
720.    Compatibility of land uses in Los Altos Hills is best achieved through analysis of each
        proposed use on a case-by-case basis through the site development review process. To
        ensure that new development is not adversely impacted by noise sources, or is itself a
        source of noise, the Town uses land use compatibility guidelines as part of planning and
        site development review. Figure N-2 summarizes the compatibility of specific land uses
        with various noise levels. Given the semi-rural nature of the community, the Town may
        adopt more restrictive standards as part of the Noise Ordinance.
        Mitigation Measures
721.    The potential impacts of traffic noise and other unwanted sound should be identified and
        mitigation measures required as needed to meet the Town’s noise standards. The most
        effective measures for noise attenuation include the following:
            •    Site planning that is sensitive to potential noise impacts
            •    Careful orientation of buildings and placement of windows
            •    Increased setbacks
            •    Buffers consisting of earthen berms and landscaping
            •    Sound proofing and double-glazed windows
            •    Use of acoustically treated or quiet-design equipment such as furnaces, fans,
                 motors, compressors, generators, pool equipment and air conditioning units
722.    In determining the best combination of noise attenuation techniques for a specific
        project, noise mitigation measures should be weighed against other community values
        such as open space and aesthetics. Noise mitigation is usually less expensive and more
        effective if it is included during the design phase of a project rather than as an after-
        thought.
        Sound Walls
723.    In many communities, sound walls are used to reduce freeway noise impacts on adjacent
        residences. In Los Altos Hills, however, sound walls are prohibited on private property
        adjacent to Interstate 280, primarily because they block views of surrounding countryside
        and tend to bounce sound to other locations. Although the Town has no authority to
        prohibit the construction of sound walls in the State right-of-way, it should convey its
        sound wall policy to Caltrans. In the event that sound walls are constructed, the Town
        should work with Caltrans to ensure that the walls are screened with evergreen trees,
        vines and other landscaping to soften their visual impact.
                                             Noise Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 9

Adopted November 8, 2007
                                              Figure 7-4
                 Land Use and Noise Compatibility Guidelines
                                                              Exterior Noise Exposure
                Land Use Category                                (Ldn or CNEL, dB)
                                                       55      60     65    70     75    80
      Single-family residential and
      open space
      Outdoor sports and recreation,
      Neighborhood parks and playgrounds
      Schools, libraries, museums,
      hospitals, personal care, meeting
      halls, churches
      Office buildings, business
      commercial, and professional
      (such as Town Hall)
      Auditoriums, concert halls, amphi-
      theatres
                  NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE Specified land use is satisfactory, based
                  on the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional
                  construction, without any special insulation requirements.
                  CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE Specified land use may be
                  permitted only after detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements and
                  needed noise insulation features included in the design.
                  UNACCEPTABLE New construction or development should generally
                  not be undertaken because mitigation is usually not feasible to comply with
                  noise element policies.
                          Source: Adapted from General Plan Guidelines,
                       Office of Planning and Research, Appendix C, 2003.
                                             Noise Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 10
Adopted November 8, 2007
                                           GOAL 2
              Provide compatible noise environments for new development.
        Policy 2.1     All development adjacent to Interstate 280, Arastradero Road or
                       Foothill Expressway should be designed so as to minimize the
                       impacts of noise generated by traffic movement.
        Policy 2.2     Residential construction in high-noise-level areas shall include
                       provisions for structural insulation as necessary to ensure maximum
                       possible noise attenuation, with the objective of ensuring a maximum
                       of CNEL 45 dB.
        Policy 2.3     Mitigation measures such as site planning, building orientation,
                       window placement, increased setbacks, landscaped berms, and
                       sound-proofing shall be required in new development when
                       necessary to reduce the impacts of noise.
        Policy 2.4     The construction of sound walls on private property adjacent to
                       Interstate 280 and within the State right-of-way shall be
                       discouraged.
        Policy 2.5     The potential for new development to generate noise levels higher
                       than Town standards shall be evaluated, and significant impacts
                       shall be appropriately mitigated.
        Policy 2.6     Work with adjoining municipalities and public and private
                       landholders to assure noise-compatible land uses across
                       jurisdictional boundaries.
        Program 2.1    Evaluate noise impacts on surrounding land uses during the site
                       development review and permitting process.
        Program 2.2    Utilize the Land Use and Noise Compatibility Guidelines as a basis for
                       determining the compatibility of land uses.
        Program 2.3    To determine noise exposure, use the noise contour maps or more
                       detailed noise analysis if appropriate.
        Program 2.4    Require the mitigation of all significant noise impacts as a condition of
                       project approval.
        Program 2.5    Convey the Town’s sound wall policy to Caltrans and work with the
                       agency to develop more acceptable alternatives such as landscaped
                       berms along Interstate 280.
                                         Noise Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 11

Adopted April 26, 2007
             Open Space and Recreation Element
        INTRODUCTION
401.    Residents of Los Altos Hills accord the highest value to the Town’s open space and
        recreation areas. These areas help maintain the unique character and semi-rural
        atmosphere of Los Altos Hills and provide important balance to the more densely
        urbanized areas of the San Francisco Bay region. In addition, these areas provide
        significant opportunities for the conservation of natural resources and scenic views as
        well as the enjoyment of outdoor recreation.
402.    The Open Space and Recreation Element addresses the management and use of open
        space lands in the Los Altos Hills planning area. It also addresses recreation programs
        and provides guidelines for meeting the
        recreation needs of Town residents. The
        element is organized into three sections:
        •   Open Space
        •   Recreation Areas and Facilities
        •   Recreation Programs
                                                                                               Saul Chaikin
        Each section provides an inventory of
        resources and includes goals, policies and
        programs related to the specific topics
        addressed.
                                                          Aerial View of Byrne Preserve
403.    Under California law, open space is a mandatory element of the General Plan. Open
        space also is addressed in other elements of the General Plan including the Land Use
        Element, the Conservation Element, and the Pathway Element. Public health and safety
        issues related to open space are addressed in the Safety Element.
404.    Recreation is an optional element of the General Plan. However, the Quimby Act
        (Section 66477 of the State Government Code) requires cities to have an adopted plan
        containing policies and standards for park and recreation facilities in order to require the
        dedication of land or payment of fees for park or recreation purposes.
                                      OPEN SPACE
405.    Open space resources in the Los Altos Hills planning area include public open space
        preserves; public and private parks and recreation areas; off-road pathways; and
        conservation and open space easements on private land, primarily along portions of creek
        corridors and steep slopes. In addition to providing opportunities for outdoor recreation
        and the conservation of natural and scenic resources, open space enhances the semi-rural
        character of the Town and the quality of life for local and regional residents.
                                Open Space and Recreation Element
                                   Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                             Page 1

Adopted April 26, 2007
        ACCESSIBILITY
406.    Publicly owned open space preserves such as Byrne Preserve are accessible to the public.
        Private lands protected by conservation and open space easements are not accessible to
        the public unless they include a dedicated off-road pathway. Off-road pathways allow
        the public to cross through private property; public access is limited to the dedicated
        pathway and does not extend to other portions of private land even when it is protected
        by a conservation or open space easement that has been dedicated to the Town of Los
        Altos Hills.
        THE TOWN’S OPEN SPACE LEGACY
407.    Los Altos Hills has a long history of protecting open space, a history highlighted by acts
        of generosity on the part of conservation-minded individuals as well as the continued
        efforts by the Town and groups of dedicated residents. These efforts have resulted in the
        permanent protection of several local treasures, including Byrne Preserve and Westwind
        Community Barn.
408.    Byrne Preserve was originally established in the mid-sixties through the generosity of Dr.
        Albert Byrne, who donated a scenic 55-acre parcel of open grassland to the Nature
        Conservancy. The Town then voted to increase property taxes in order to purchase the
        property from the Nature Conservancy. Additional fundraising efforts aided by generous
        contributions from prominent individuals later allowed the Town to expand the preserve.
        Today Byrne Preserve comprises 88 acres of grassland and woodlands that are
        permanently protected as Town-owned open space used by the public for horseback
        riding, hiking and outdoor education.
409.    Adjacent to Byrne Preserve, Westwind Community Barn is another Town-owned treasure
        that has been preserved through individual generosity and public foresight. In 1975, the
        Town purchased a portion of the 15-acre property and the Countess Margit Bessenyey
        donated to the Town the remaining land and the 24,000-square-foot barn. The Town now
        leases the barn to the Friends of Westwind, a private non-profit organization that
        manages the facility.
                                                                   Westwind Community Barn
                                                                   The facility is used for:
                                                                   •   Stabling of horses
                                                                   •   Riding instruction
                                                                   •   4-H therapeutic riding program
                                                                       for disabled children
                                                                   •   Town Parks & Recreation
                                                                       Programs
                                                                   •   Horse management classes
                                                                   •   Summer riding camp
                                                                   •   Home to the Pacific Ridge
                                                                       Chapter of the U.S. Pony Club
                                Open Space and Recreation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 2

 Adopted April 26, 2007
         REGIONAL OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
 410.    The Town of Los Altos Hills was one of the first cities to support the creation of the
         Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District, a special district formed in 1972. Supported
         by property tax monies, MROSD is responsible for the acquisition and protection of open
         space in the undeveloped area surrounding Los Altos Hills.
         OPEN SPACE INITIATIVE
 411.    On December 19, 2002, the City Council unanimously adopted an open space initiative
         that reaffirmed the community’s commitment to the preservation of open space as stated
         below.
                       Residents of Los Altos Hills accord the highest value to the Town’s
                       open space and recreation areas. These areas, many of which are
                       owned by the Town itself, help supply and preserve the unique
                       character and semi-rural atmosphere of Los Altos Hills, provide
                       important balance to the more densely urbanized San Francisco Bay
                       plain, and provide numerous recreational, scenic, open space, and
                       conservation resources and opportunities for the Town and its
                       residents.
                                             Open Space Initiative, 2002
 412.    With adoption of the Open Space Initiative, the General Plan was amended to add Policy
         1.10, which ensures that Town-owned open space and recreation properties will not be
         sold or developed for other uses without a vote of the people. In addition, the Land Use
         Diagram was amended to designate additional Open Space Preserves and Public
         Recreation Areas.
         OPEN SPACE PRESERVES
 413.    The Town of Los Altos Hills is surrounded by large expanses of open space to the west
         and south. Constraints to development in this area include steep slopes and geologic
         hazards such as landslides, earthquake faults and other areas of extreme relative geologic
         instability, inaccessibility due to ridge alignment; difficulty in providing water and other
         services; and fire hazard including limitations to fire equipment response. The ridges are
         also important for their scenic qualities visible from many vantage points within the
         Town and the Mid-Peninsula region. To protect these areas and ensure that they remain
         free of development, local residents and public agencies have worked to establish open
         space preserves.
414.     Open space preserves are undeveloped, natural areas that provide wildlife habitat, scenic
         views, and opportunities for nature study and low-impact outdoor recreation. These lands
         are owned by various public agencies including the Town of Los Altos Hills, the City of
         Palo Alto, and the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District (MROSD).
                                    Open Space and Recreation Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                  Page 3

Adopted April 26, 2007
415.    A large area south of Moody Road and southwest of Interstate 280 has been designated
        and protected as open space through the acquisition of land by public agencies. MROSD
        has purchased most of this area, including Rancho San Antonio, the Neary Quarry Ridge
        area, and the Windmill Pasture area. In addition, the Town has acquired an area on the
        upper slopes of Murietta Lane. The steeper
        slopes below the ridge areas are under private
        ownership, but conservation or open space
        easements have been placed over much of the
        land.     Hidden Villa also is in private
        ownership and should be encouraged to
        remain as open space. The Town should also
        encourage the cities of Palo Alto and Los
        Altos to keep open space lands in their
        undeveloped, natural condition because they
        enhance the semi-rural, open character of Los
        Altos Hills.                                            Approach to Windmill Pasture
                                                                  from Rancho San Antonio
                     Town-owned Open Space and Recreation Areas
                Open Space Preserves                                 Size (Acres)
                    Byrne Preserve                                      88
                    Juan Prado Mesa Preserve                            13
                    Murietta Ridge Preserve                             14
                    O’Keefe Lane Preserve                                8
                    Rhus Ridge Preserve                                  5
                    Central Drive Preserve                               1
                    Saddle Mountain Preserve                             3
                                                                       132 acres
                Recreation Areas and Facilities
                    Westwind Community Barn                             15
                    Edith Park                                           1
                    Little League Fields & Riding Arena                 10
                                                                        26 acres
                                 Open Space and Recreation Element
                                     Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                               Page 4

 Adopted April 26, 2007
416.     Town-owned Open Space Preserves
         The following open space preserves are owned and managed by the Town of Los Altos
         Hills:
                  •   Byrne Preserve is the largest and most significant open space area in Los
                      Altos Hills. The area consists of 88 acres of grasslands and woodlands
                      located along the upper length of Altamont Road and adjacent to Westwind
                      Community Barn. The land was purchased by the Town in 1968 from the
                      Nature Conservancy. Under the purchase agreement, the Town is required to
                      keep the land in open space. Byrne Preserve is used for horseback riding,
                      hiking and outdoor education, as well as grazing horses.
                  •   Juan Prado Mesa Preserve consists of 13 acres located between Dawson
                      Drive and Neary Lake. The area can be reached by off-road pathways
                      leading from Dawson Drive, Kate Drive and Stonebrook Drive. The area
                      features a pathway through the Hale Creek canyon and provides a number of
                      scenic, open space and recreation opportunities.
                  •   Murietta Ridge Preserve consists of 14 acres located south of Moody Road.
                      This area serves as a valuable open space buffer between Hidden Villa and
                      the adjacent MROSD open space preserve, and provides a heavily wooded
                      refuge for a variety of animals, birds, and native plants and trees. This area
                      is relatively inaccessible and is considered to be more appropriate for
                      conservation than for recreation use.
                  •   O’Keefe Lane Preserve consists of 8 acres located north of Interstate 280
                      along O’Keefe Lane. This beautiful area includes two recreational pathways,
                      a magnificent Heritage Oak, and shady, creekside thickets that provide
                      shelter for both land animals and pond-dwellers. Access is provided by a
                      footbridge off O’Keefe Lane.
                  •   Rhus Ridge Preserve consists of approximately 5 acres located south of
                      Moody Road. This area provides access to MROSD open space preserves
                      via the Rhus Ridge pathway and a scenic pathway that connects the off-road
                      trail from Hidden Villa to the Rhus Ridge hiking area and Summit Road.
                  •   Central Drive Preserve is a narrow, 1-acre strip of undeveloped land
                      adjacent to the western boundary of Byrne Preserve and provides an
                      extension of the larger preserve.
                  •   Saddle Mountain Preserve is 3 acres located near the junction of
                      Arastradero and Page Mill Roads, between Saddle Mountain Drive and
                      Stirrup Way, and includes a walking path.
                                   Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 5

Adopted April 26, 2007
                       Open Space and Recreation Element
                          Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                    Page 6
Adopted April 26, 2007
417.    MROSD Open Space Preserves
        In addition to the Town-owned preserves listed above, several open space preserves
        owned and managed by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District (MROSD) are
        located adjacent to or near the Town:
                 •    Rancho San Antonio Open Space Preserve is a 3,800-acre preserve located
                      to the south of Los Altos Hills. The preserve has 23 miles of trails for
                      hiking, bike riding, or horseback riding. Rancho San Antonio can be
                      accessed by off-road pathways on the Los Altos Hills borders.
                 •    Foothills Open Space Preserve consists of 211 acres located in the Adobe
                      Creek watershed above Hidden Villa Ranch and adjacent to Palo Alto's
                      Foothills Park.
                 •    Monte Bello Open Space Preserve consists of 2,943 acres that encompass
                      the upper Stevens Creek watershed from Monte Bello Ridge to Skyline
                      Ridge. The Stevens Creek riparian corridor is considered to be one of the
                      finest in the Santa Cruz Mountains.
                 •    Los Trancos Open Space Preserve is a 274-acre area located in the
                      foothills off Page Mill Road. The preserve is split by the San Andreas Fault
                      and is an excellent place to study earthquake geology.
                                                                   Adjacent MROSD lands provide
                                                                   many recreational opportunities
                                                                   for Los Altos Hills residents.
          Karl Gohl
                     Photos courtesy of
                  Midpeninsula Regional
                    Open Space District
                                   Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 7

Adopted April 26, 2007
418.    City of Palo Alto Open Space Preserves
                 •    Enid W. Pearson-Arastradero Preserve is a 609-acre open space preserve
                      located in the foothills on the west side of Highway 280. The preserve is
                      owned and maintained by the City of Palo Alto and can be accessed by off-
                      road pathways in Los Altos Hills.
                 •    Foothills Park is a 1,400-acre recreation area located 2.7 miles west of
                      Highway 280 at 3300 Page Mill Road. The park is adjacent to the Town of
                      Los Altos Hills and within its planning area, but the park is open only to
                      residents of Palo Alto.
                                       Planning and Zoning
                   Open space preserves are designated Open Space Preserve
                   (OSP) on the Land Use Diagram and zoned Open Space
                   Reserve (OSR). Permitted uses in the OSR zoning district
                   include agriculture, forestry, and low-impact outdoor recreation
                   such as horseback riding, hiking and bird watching. No buildings
                   or other development are allowed.
                   Steep canyons and creek corridors that should be protected are
                   designated as Open Space Conservation Areas on the Land Use
                   Diagram. Development in these areas is generally limited to off-road
                   pathways; no structures are allowed. In addition to canyons and
                   creek corridors, visually important open space lands associated with
                   major religious and educational institutional facilities or with Stanford
                   Industrial Park are designated Open Space Conservation Areas.
                   Other open space lands that are used primarily for recreation are
                   designated Public Recreation Area or Private Recreation Area on
                   the Land Use Diagram. These recreation areas are protected from
                   other types of development and uses.
                                   Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 8

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                              GOAL 1
           Protect and preserve open space lands for future generations.
Policy 1.1       Provide, during the development process, for the maximum feasible
                 preservation of open space in and adjoining the Town, with spaces ranging
                 in size from regional scale to small-scale open space on individual lots.
Policy 1.2       Protect and maintain those areas necessary to the integrity of natural
                 resources and processes, with special emphasis on, but not limited to, the
                 groundwater recharge and drainage system, open spaces vital for wildlife
                 habitat, open spaces suitable for agriculture, and other areas of major or
                 unique ecological significance.
Policy 1.3       Provide open space for outdoor recreational needs and for the preservation
                 of sites of historical and cultural significance.
Policy 1.4       Preserve the natural beauty and minimize disturbance of the natural terrain
                 and vegetation.
Policy 1.5       Preserve the important vistas, such as Monte Bello, Kaiser, Neary and
                 Ewing Hill Ridges, and the hillsides leading to these ridges.
Policy 1.6       Preserve open space where necessary for the protection of public health and
                 safety.
Policy 1.7       To the extent possible, link open spaces together visually and physically to
                 form a system of open spaces.
Policy 1.8       Ensure that land uses and structures are compatible with the general open
                 space quality of the planning area.
Policy 1.9       Actively support, to the extent possible, the efforts of Palo Alto residents to
                 preserve their open space lands.
Policy 1.10      The lands owned by the Town of Los Altos Hills commonly known as Byrne
                 Preserve, Central Drive, Juan Prado Mesa Preserve, O’Keefe Property,
                 Rhus Ridge Properties, Murietta Ridge, Little League Fields on Purissima
                 Road, Westwind Community Barn, and Edith Park shall not be conveyed,
                 sold or abandoned in whole or in part for any purpose, except pursuant to a
                 vote of the Town electorate; provided, however, that this paragraph shall
                 not require a vote of the electorate for any conveyance by the City of a
                 leasehold, easement, or other property interest in these lands for a use
                 consistent with the property’s General Plan designation.
Policy 1.11      Encourage the use of Murietta Ridge Preserve as a conservation area, rather
                 than a recreation area, in order to protect the existing vegetation and
                 wildlife habitat.
                                  Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 9

Adopted April 26, 2007
Policy 1.12      Ensure that open space lands achieve the following objectives:
            •    Preserve visually and environmentally significant open space resources; and
            •    Provide for recreation activities compatible with the enjoyment and
                 preservation of each site’s natural resources, with pathway linkages to
                 adjacent and nearby parks and open space preserves.
        Program 1.1     Continue to encourage the voluntary grant of conservation easements on
                        open space and environmentally sensitive areas. For example, the
                        Crozier-Hogle conservation easement was voluntarily granted to protect
                        11 acres that abut Stanford University open space lands.
        Program 1.2     Continue to require the dedication of open space easements as a
                        condition of approval for development of parcels in designated Open
                        Space Conservation Areas in order to protect steep slopes, canyons and
                        ravines, generally in excess of 30% slope, as well as areas with Heritage
                        oak trees, or other environmentally sensitive areas such as along creeks
                        and riparian corridors.
        Program 1.3     Continue to require the dedication of pathway easements and the
                        construction of pathways or payment of in-lieu fees when development is
                        proposed on parcels that include portions of on-road or off-road
                        pathways designated on the Pathway Master Plan.
        Program 1.4     Encourage the cities of Palo Alto and Los Altos to keep open space lands
                        that are within their city limits or spheres of influence (such as the Upper
                        Foothills, Arastradero Preserve, Foothill Park, Stanford University
                        Lands, Esther Clark Park, the El Retiro Retreat Site and Redwood
                        Grove) in their undeveloped, natural condition because they enhance the
                        semi-rural, open character of Los Altos Hills.
        Program 1.5     Explore and encourage tax relief programs such as the Williamson Act,
                        income tax allowances for land gifts, and other kinds of financial rebates
                        that can provide effective incentives to property owners interested in
                        protecting their land.
        Program 1.6     Not all lands with significant open space value, whose maintenance may
                        be essential for preservation of the area's atmosphere and character, are
                        identified in this element. Other open lands of various scales exist that
                        the community may feel deserve preservation, including open hillsides
                        adjacent to major corridors of movement such as Interstate 280, which
                        has been designated as a State scenic highway. It is especially important,
                        therefore, that the Town inventory and analyze medium and small-scale
                        open spaces in the Town and add recommendations to this plan to ensure
                        that all land significant to the maintenance of community character will
                        be preserved.
                                 Open Space and Recreation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 10

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                 Putting Action into the General Plan
                       Conservation and Open Space Easements
              State law enables the Town to accept or acquire easements from
              private landowners for open space and resource conservation
              purposes. The grant of conservation and open space easements is,
              in effect, a transfer of development rights. The deed granting an
              easement to the Town restricts the use of the transferred property to
              open space or resource conservation activities. Lands subject to
              conservation or open space easements are still under private
              ownership; the easements are held by the Town, but the public does
              not have access to the property.
              Conservation and open space easements provide a form of tax relief
              to property owners. For property tax purposes, the value of lands
              subject to conservation or open space easements is established on
              the basis of the easement restrictions rather than potential
              development uses. This form of tax relief provides landowners with
              an incentive to grant easements.
              There is a subtle distinction between conservation easements and
              open space easements as defined by state law. Under the
              Conservation Easement Act (Civil Code sections 815-816), a
              conservation easement is voluntarily created and is perpetual in
              duration. Pursuant to the Open Space Easement Act of 1974
              (Government Code section 51070 et seq.), an open space
              easement can be required by the Town as a condition of approval
              for site development permits and other entitlements. The Town must
              have an adopted open space element as a prerequisite to acquiring
              an open space easement, and the easement must be consistent with
              the Town’s General Plan.
              In establishing conservation and open space easements,
              landowners and the Town agree upon the permitted land uses within
              the conservation area. The easement is binding upon successive
              owners of the land.
                                  Open Space and Recreation Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 11

Adopted April 26, 2007
                        RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES
   419.     PUBLIC RECREATION AREAS
            The following parks and recreation areas are owned and managed by the Town of
            Los Altos Hills:
            •    The Little League Fields and Town Riding Arena on Purissima Road are
                 home to the Town’s Parks and Recreation Department programs as well as the
                 local Little League program and
                 various horsemanship programs.
                 The Town has enjoyed a long-
                 standing relationship with the Little
                 League, which uses the fields on a
                 regular basis. In addition, the Town
                 rents the fields to individuals and
                 groups. The Town Riding Arena
                 provides equestrian facilities for
                 Town residents and is co-managed
                 by the Los Altos Hills Horsemen’s
                 Association.
                                                                     Town Riding Arena
            •    Westwind Community Barn, located at Black Mountain and Altamont Roads,
                 is a 24,000-square-foot, “U” shaped barn on approximately 15 acres. The facility
                 is leased to the Friends of Westwind, a private non-profit organization that has
                 managed the facility since 1978. The facility is used for riding, boarding and
                 pasturing horses, as well as equestrian events. Residents of the Town have
                 priority for membership. Westwind Barn and its adjacent facilities currently
                 house the Westwind 4-H Riding for the Handicapped program, the Pacific Ridge
                 Chapter of the United States Pony Club, and various recreation programs
                 sponsored by the Town’s Parks and Recreation Department. Originally
                 constructed in the 1940’s, Westwind Barn needs restoration and seismic updates.
            •    Edith Park is located at Edith and Fremont Roads along Adobe Creek and
                 serves as a gateway to Los Altos Hills. The park features a plaque
                 commemorating the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail, which is used
                 as a route to the Bullis-Purissima school grounds.
            In addition to the Town-owned facilities listed above, several other publicly-owned
            recreation facilities are located in or near the Town and would benefit residents if
            greater access were made available:
            •    Publicly owned school facilities such as Bullis-Purissima School, Pinewood
                 School, and Foothill Community College can potentially serve as a vital
                 supplement to the Town-owned Little League Fields and Riding Arena.
            •    Esther Clark Park is located at the end of Old Trace Road off of Arastradero
                 Road in the northeast portion of the Town’s planning area, adjacent to Los Altos
                 Hills. The park is an undeveloped nature preserve that offers opportunities for
                 hiking, riding and nature study. The park is owned by the City of Palo Alto and
                 is accessible to residents of Los Altos Hills via the Town’s pathway system.
                                   Open Space and Recreation Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 12

Adopted April 26, 2007
420.    PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITIES
            •    Hidden Villa is a 1,600-acre open space preserve that is owned and operated by
                 a private non-profit corporation known as the Trust for Hidden Villa. Located on
                 Moody Road, Hidden Villa consists of an educational farm, wilderness area,
                 visitor center, nature shop, trails and a youth hostel. The hostel is available for
                 day or overnight use, and the farm and hiking trails are open to visitors on a
                 limited basis.
            •    Fremont Hills Country Club is located in Los Altos Hills and provides
                 swimming, tennis and horseback riding opportunities.
            •    The Palo Alto Hills Golf and Country Club and the Los Altos Country Club
                 supply private golfing facilities, as well as large, attractive open spaces near
                 Town boundaries.
            •    The University Club of Palo Alto and the Foothills Tennis and Swim Club in
                 Palo Alto provide swimming and tennis opportunities close to Los Altos Hills.
            •    Stanford University lands are located in the foothills west of Interstate 280,
                 adjacent to the Arastradero Preserve, and provide trails that are accessible to the
                 public from Junipero Serra Boulevard.
            •    Private boarding stables provide other important private recreation facilities.
421.    PATHWAYS
        The Town of Los Altos Hills has a unique
        system of public paths that meander
        across hills and valleys, connecting
        various parts of the community. This
        network of roadside and off-road paths is
        a valuable recreation asset for residents,
        providing non-motorized access to the
        Town for walkers, runners, bicyclists and
        equestrians. Additional information about
        pathways is available in the Pathway
        Element and the Pathway Master Plan.                       Pathways provide access
                                                                      to recreation areas.
422.    HISTORIC SITES AND STRUCTURES
        Historic places, buildings and landmarks can provide significant recreation and education
        resources. Historic preservation is addressed in the Conservation Element, and an
        inventory of historic sites and structures is provided in Appendix A.
                                  Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 13

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                              GOAL 2
       Provide recreation areas and facilities that meet the neighborhood
                         and community needs of Town residents.
Policy 2.1       Open space preserves shall provide a variety of recreational experiences
                 such as hiking, riding and free play, as well as visual pleasure.
Policy 2.2       Recreation activities requiring organized and developed spaces such as
                 basketball and soccer shall be accommodated at public recreation areas and
                 school sites rather than in open space preserves.
Policy 2.3       Public recreation areas shall be specifically adapted to meet local needs and
                 interests.
Policy 2.4       The private sector shall be encouraged to supply specialized recreation
                 facilities that are not deemed a Town responsibility.
Policy 2.5       Trails and paths shall continue to be a major recreation facility in the Town
                 and should link all recreation areas.
Policy 2.6       New residential subdivisions shall provide open space for recreation in order
                 to meet their appropriate share of local recreation needs.
Policy 2.7       Park and recreation areas shall be utilized, and uses controlled, so as to not
                 adversely affect the surrounding residential areas.
Policy 2.8       The acquisition and development of new parks and recreation areas shall be
                 pursued when necessary to meet the recreational needs and interests of
                 Town residents.
Program 2.1      Continue to require subdividers to dedicate land for parks and recreation or, in
                 the alternative, pay fees through which residential developments might facilitate
                 park land acquisition. The standard for park and recreation dedications or in lieu
                 fees established under the Quimby Act is a maximum of 5 acres per 1,000
                 population.
Program 2.2      Continue to require the dedication of pathway easements as a condition of
                 approval of tentative maps and site development permits for new residences and
                 major additions, consistent with the Pathway Element and the Master Pathway
                 Plan. Where deemed appropriate, the actual construction of these pathways will
                 be required as per Town standards.
Program 2.3      Continue to evaluate the recreation needs of the community and the availability
                 of resources.
Program 2.4      Study and establish mechanisms for funding and maintaining new park
                 acquisitions.
                                  Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 14
Adopted April 26, 2007
Program 2.5      Consider acquisition of parkland under any of the following conditions:
                      •    Where community need or use demands.
                      •    Where the acquisition can provide greenbelt connections
                           between open spaces.
                      •    When acquisition opportunities arise.
Program 2.6      Individual citizens, community organizations, and businesses should be
                 encouraged to aid in parkland acquisition, development and maintenance.
                         PARKS AND RECREATION STANDARDS
              1. All residential areas should have public land available for
                   recreation within approximately one-half to one mile distances.
                   This requirement may be met by Open Space Preserve land in
                   public ownership and by public recreation areas.
              2. The acreage of public land available for recreation shall be not
                   less than five percent of the residential area of the Town. These
                   areas should be located or distributed as equitably as possible
                   throughout the Town.
                                        THE QUIMBY ACT
                Section 66477 of the Government Code provides local
                jurisdictions with the authority to acquire parkland in association
                with new land divisions. Commonly referred to as the Quimby
                Act, this provision of state law allows a city, by ordinance, to
                require the dedication of land, payment of an in-lieu fee, or a
                combination of both, for park and recreational purposes as a
                condition of approval for a subdivision map. Local ordinances
                must establish specific standards for determining the proportion
                of the subdivision that must be dedicated and the amount of fees
                to be paid.
                Los Altos Hills has adopted such an ordinance (included in the
                Subdivision Ordinance) to require the dedication of land and/or
                the payment of in lieu fees for the purpose of providing park and
                recreational facilities. Revenues generated under the Quimby
                Act cannot be used for operation or maintenance of park
                facilities.
                                  Open Space and Recreation Element
                                      Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                Page 15

Adopted April 26, 2007
                      PARKS AND RECREATION PROGRAMS
423.    Historically Los Altos Hills preferred not to spend the Town’s scarce resources on
        recreation programming, opting instead to invest in open space, pathways, and recreation
        facilities, horse facilities and similar amenities. Town residents who sought recreational
        programs found opportunities in adjacent cities. However, as it became increasingly
        difficult for Town residents to participate in other recreation programs, the need arose for
        programs within Los Altos Hills. Started originally with volunteer labor, the Los Altos
        Hills recreation program has grown, and there is now a full-time staff position devoted to
        developing and maintaining recreation programs.
424.    The Los Altos Hills Parks and Recreation Department provides or facilitates a variety of
        activities and programs that serve the needs of Town residents of all ages. These
        programs include the following:
             •    Youth camps such as Ohlone camp, summer riding
                  camp, and various sports and non-athletic camps.
             •    Fitness and yoga classes.
             •    Pet programs such as the annual community
                  dog walk and the Hoppin’ Hounds Easter Egg
                  Hunt.
             •    Equestrian programs such as horseback riding
                  at Westwind Barn and the Town’s public
                  riding arena.
             •    Special events such as the annual Pathways
                  Run.
                                                                    Hoppin’ Hounds Easter Egg Hunt
             •    The annual Town Picnic sponsored by the
                  Community Relations Committee.
                                       Annual Pathways Run
                                   Open Space and Recreation Element
                                       Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                                 Page 16

Adopted April 26, 2007
                                             GOAL 3
               Provide recreation programs that meet neighborhood
                        and community needs of Town residents.
Policy 3.1       The Town shall support continued and expanded recreation programs for
                 Los Altos Hills residents of all ages.
Policy 3.2       Recreation activities and programs shall be located and designed to be
                 compatible with the long-term sustainability of each site’s natural resources,
                 with particular attention to the preservation of unique, rare, or endangered
                 resources (including historic and archeological sites, as well as plant and
                 animal species).
Policy 3.3       The Town shall continue to develop partnerships with local school districts
                 and community organizations to expand recreation programs and facilities.
Program 3.1      Continue to implement and update the Strategic Action Plan.
Program 3.2      Support and coordinate with organizations such as the Los Altos Little League,
                 the Los Altos Hills Horsemen’s Association, the Friends of Westwind Barn, and
                 other groups involved in recreation activities in the community.
           Holiday Barn Lighting Festivities
                                 Open Space and Recreation Element
                                    Los Altos Hills General Plan
                                              Page 17
































