C ITY OF    P LYMOUTH
HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE
                                   Prepared for:
                           CITY OF PLYMOUTH
                            9426 MAIN STREET
                         PLYMOUTH, CA 95669
                                    Prepared by:
                          PMc··
          2729 PROSPECT PARK DRIVE, SUITE 220
                  RANCHO CORDOVA, CA 95670
                             FEBRUARY 2015

                     CITY OF PLYMOUTH
                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                        2014-2019
                              Prepared for:
                 Plymouth Planning Department
                          City of Plymouth
                             P.O. Box 429
                           9426 Main Street
                         Plymouth, CA 95669
                            (209) 245-6941
                               Prepared by:
                             PNIC'"
                    2729 Prospect Park Drive, Suite 220
                       Rancho Cordova, CA 95670
                            February 2015
City of Plymouth                                        2014 – 2019 Housing Element
                                    2

 POLICY DOCUMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
  Framework for the Joint Amador County Housing Element................................................................. 1
  Data Sources .................................................................................................................................................. 1
  Housing Element Overview ........................................................................................................................ 2
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................... 7
  Document Organization .............................................................................................................................. 7
  Joint Policy document .................................................................................................................................. 7
  Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment ................................................................................................. 7
  Appendix B: Constraints .............................................................................................................................. 8
  Appendix C: Resources ..............................................................................................................................11
  Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements ...........................................................................12
  Appendix E: SB 244 Analysis ....................................................................................................................13
Goals, Policies and Programs .........................................................................................................................14
  Joint Goals, Policies and Programs ..........................................................................................................14
  Individual Programs ....................................................................................................................................24
  Quantified Objectives .................................................................................................................................28
Appendices
  Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment
  Appendix B: Constraints
  Appendix C: Resources
  Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements
  Appendix E: SB 244 Analysis
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                             February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                              i
                                                     POLICY DOCUMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                           ii
  POLICY DOCUMENT
INTRODUCTION
FRAMEWORK FOR THE JOINT AMADOR COUNTY HOUSING ELEMENT
In California, it is typical for each city or county to prepare and maintain its own general plan and
housing element. However, Amador County and four of the five cities in the county have chosen to
collectively prepare a joint countywide housing element. While unusual, this collaborative approach
to the housing element has a number of advantages, including the following:
    Over the past several decades, the trend in dealing with complex public policy issues has been
     toward a regional approach to problem-solving.
    Housing markets are regional in nature and do not stop at jurisdictional boundaries.
    Coordinated regional strategies offer the potential to be more effective in addressing housing
     needs than when each jurisdiction operates individually.
    In difficult economic times such as these, economies of scale accruing from shared resources
     can result in significant cost savings to jurisdictions that jointly prepare housing elements.
DATA SOURCES
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) developed a data packet for
jurisdictions in Amador County that contains much of the information required for the Housing
Needs Assessment of this Housing Element and is the primary source of data for this document.
Where additional information is required, the US Census, which is completed every ten years, is the
preferred data source, as it provides the most reliable and in-depth data for demographic
characteristics of a locality. This report uses the 2010 US Census for current information and the
2000 US Census to track changes since the year 2000. The California Department of Finance (DOF)
is another source of valuable data that is more current than the Census. However, the DOF does
not provide the depth of information that can be found in the 2010 US Census. Whenever possible,
the Amador County data packet, DOF data, and other local sources were used in the Housing
Needs Assessment in order to provide the most current profile of the community.
The 2010 US Census did not collect information in several categories that are required for the
Housing Needs Assessment. Where this is the case, historical DOF data is used. Where DOF data
is not available, information from the 2000 US Census is retained. In cases where this is not feasible
or useful, this assessment references US Census Bureau American Community Survey (ACS) data.
The ACS provides estimates of numerous housing-related indicators based on samples averaged
over a five-year period. Where the US Census provides complete counts of various demographic
indicators, the ACS provides estimates based on statistically significant samples. Due to the small
size of the sample taken in Amador County, the estimates reported by the ACS have large margins
of error. Where ACS data is used, the numbers should not be interpreted as absolute fact, but rather
as a tool to illustrate general proportion or scale. Although Amador City is not a participating
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                       1

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
jurisdiction in this joint Housing Element update, information for Amador City is included in many
tables in the Housing Needs Assessment section in order to show complete totals for the whole
county.
HOUSING ELEMENT OVERVIEW
Accommodating the County’s fair share of the housing needs of the State of California is an
important goal. To accomplish this goal, a comprehensive assessment of housing needs provides the
basis for developing responsive policies and programs. This section presents and analyzes
demographic, economic, and housing characteristics and their impact upon housing needs in the
cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek and in unincorporated Amador County.
Recognizing the importance of providing adequate housing, the state has mandated a Housing
Element within every General Plan since 1969. This Housing Element was created in compliance
with state General Plan law pertaining to Housing Elements and was certified by HCD on
XXXXXXXX. [to be completed after Housing Element certification]
-
Purpose
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance
and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
family is a priority of the highest order.” In addition, government and the private sector should
make an effort to provide a diversity of housing opportunities and accommodate regional housing
needs through a cooperative effort, while maintaining a responsibility toward economic,
environmental and fiscal factors and community goals within the general plan.
Further, state Housing Element law requires “[a]n assessment of housing needs and an inventory of
resources and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires the element to
include the following:
    An analysis of population and employment trends.
    An analysis and documentation of households characteristics.
    An inventory of land suitable for residential development.
    The identification of a zone or zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use
     without a conditional use or other discretionary permit.
    An analysis of potential or actual governmental and non-governmental constraints on the
     improvement, maintenance, and development of housing.
    An analysis of any special housing needs.
    An analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential development.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                      City of Plymouth
                                                    2

 POLICY DOCUMENT
    An analysis of publicly assisted housing developments that may convert to non-assisted housing
     developments within the next 10 years.
    An analysis of the County’s fair share of the regional housing needs.
The purpose of these requirements is to develop an understanding of the existing and projected
housing needs within the community and to set policies and schedules promoting the preservation,
improvement, and development of diverse housing types available at a range of costs in Amador
County.
Relationship to Other Elements
State law requires that “the general plan and elements and parts thereof comprise an integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies.” Each element of the General Plans of
the four cities and Amador County, including the goals, policies, and implementation measures
(actions) for environmental management, community development, public safety, circulation, and
land use, have been reviewed for their internal consistency with this Housing Element. In addition,
the Zoning Code of each of the four cities and the county has been reviewed for compatibility with
this Housing Element’s goals, policies, and implementation measures to identify places where the
Zoning Codes will need to be updated for consistency.
Due to the passage of Assembly Bill (AB) 162 relating to flood protection in 2007, the jurisdictions
may be required to amend the Community Safety and Seismic Safety Element and the Open Space,
Conservation and Recreation Element of their General Plans. If amendments are needed, the
Housing Element will be amended to be consistent with these elements. As required by law, the
jurisdictions will continue to review any amendments to other elements of the General Plan, or to
the Housing Element, to ensure that internal consistency is maintained. If any disadvantaged
unincorporated communities are identified in the cities’ spheres of influence (SOI) or in the
unincorporated county (outside cities’ SOIs) due to analysis required to comply with Senate Bill (SB)
244, the jurisdiction or jurisdictions will amend their Land Use Elements per SB 244 requirements.
Public Participation
Joint Stakeholder Meeting
The County and the Cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek held a housing stakeholder
meeting on February 27, 2014, at 3 p.m. in the Amador County Administration Center-Board
Chambers. A flyer inviting over 65 service providers in the region was sent out. There were
approximately 25 participants at the meeting, which started with a brief presentation made by the
consultant. The presentation included a summary of Housing Element state law requirements,
identification of new laws affecting this Housing Element update, a summary of demographic
information from the 2010 Census, and a timeline for the next step in the process for adoption of
the 5th round Housing Element update that is due to be adopted by June 2014.
Agencies, advocacy groups, and residents in attendance included the following:
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                    3

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
  A representative from Ability Mortgage
  A representative from Coldwell Banker
  A representative from Cavaliere Properties
  A representative from Mother Lode Tea Party
  A representative from Area 12 Agency on Aging
  A representative from Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency
  Residents from Pine Grove, Pioneer, and Jackson
  A representative from the California Senior Legislature representing older Californians in Alpine,
   Amador, Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne counties
  A representative Board of Supervisors, District 3
Following the presentation a roundtable discussion was held about needs throughout the
county.
During the group discussion, participants were asked to provide feedback on housing issues and the
programs on which they would to see more emphasis placed during this Housing Element update.
The group identified the following needs/programs:
  The majority of age 60+ individuals desire to age in place; incorporate aging in place options.
  Additional senior housing: Increase low-income multi-unit housing, single-family dwellings that
   have been modified for accessibility and in close proximity to needed services (medical offices,
   hospital, pharmacy, grocery store).
  Expand on veterans housing that is accessible and in close proximity to needed services (medical
   office, hospital, pharmacy, grocery store).
  Add home modification or residential repair programs to ensure that seniors who have home
   repairs are able to access programs which provide funding for the specific service.
  Add a program that gives incentives to developers who desire to build smoke-free, tobacco-free
   multi-unit housing.
  Better access to loans and grants for affordable housing.
February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                  4

 POLICY DOCUMENT
   Provide more information regarding the grants that are available to residents throughout the
    county.
   What housing programs/loans are available to second- and third-time buyers?
   USDA funding: What types of programs are available with this funding?
   The high cost of building fees throughout the county is contributing to the lack of housing being
    built.
   There are currently no construction loans or loans for purchasing land available in the county.
   More incentives are needed to build housing throughout the county.
Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency and Area 12 Agency on Aging provided
information on their current funding sources programs and needs.
   There is a need for more transitional housing for large families.
   There is a need for more supportive housing programs.
   Currently operating a first-time homebuyer program.
   Current funding sources:
   ESG grants
   CDBG grants
   Neighborhood Stabilization Programs
Plymouth Community Workshop August 7, 2014
City staff and the consultant held a Housing Element workshop with the Planning Commission and
the City Council on August 7, 2014. The meeting was noticed in the local paper, on the City’s
website and at City Hall. The meeting kicked off with a presentation by the consultant that covered
the update process, new state law requirements and the plan to make the Housing Element a joint
document with the cities of Jackson, Ione, Sutter Creek and the County of Amador. Following the
presentation was a question and answer session to discuss the schedule and benefits to a joint
Housing Element approach. Several members of the community attended but there were no
comments received. The public draft Housing Element was released in mid August for review.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  5

                                                                  POLICY DOCUMENT
Plymouth Planning Commission and City Council Hearing September 4, 2014
City staff and the consultant presented the draft Housing Element to the Planning Commission and
the City Council on September 4, 2014. The meeting was noticed in the local paper, on the City’s
website and at City Hall. The meeting kicked off with a presentation by the consultant that covered
the format of the document and the approach to make this a joint Housing Element with the cities
of Jackson, Ione, Sutter Creek and the County of Amador. Following the presentation was a
question and answer session to discuss the next steps in the process. None of the public was in
attendance.
The draft Housing Element was submitted to HCD on October 3rd. Notices of the availability of
the draft were sent out and a hardcopy of the draft is available at City Hall for review.
February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                      City of Plymouth
                                                  6

 POLICY DOCUMENT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Below is an outline of the document and all its components.
DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION
    Joint Policy Document
         o Introduction
         o Executive Summary
         o Goals Policies and Programs (Joint)
         o Individual Programs
    Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment
    Appendix B: Constraints
    Appendix C: Resources
    Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements
    Appendix E: SB 244
JOINT POLICY DOCUMENT
This section includes the introduction and basis for the joint Housing Element approach, executive
summary, Goals, Polices and Programs countywide and then individual programs for each of the
jurisdictions.
APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment analyzes population and housing characteristics, identifies special
housing needs among certain population groups, evaluates housing conditions, and provides other
important information to support the goals, policies, and programs that will meet the needs of
current and future residents.
Key findings include the following:
    The county’s population is expected to increase by 29 percent over its 2010 population of 35,009
     to a little over 45,100 by 2060. With this rate of anticipated population growth, the demand for
     new housing to accommodate these new residents will increase.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                    7

                                                                  POLICY DOCUMENT
   More than half of the very-low and extremely-low-income households in each jurisdiction, in
    most cases in both owners and renters, were reported to be overpaying for housing. With the
    exceptions of Amador City and Jackson, over three-quarters of renters were overpaying. Ione
    had the highest percentage of renters overpaying (83%), while Amador City had the highest
    percentage of owners overpaying (79%). Overall, 57% of households in Amador County were
    overpaying in 2011.
   Although population growth strongly affects total demand for new housing, housing needs are
    also influenced by age characteristics. Typically, different age groups have distinct lifestyles,
    family characteristics, incomes, and housing preferences. As people move through each stage of
    life, their housing needs and preferences change. Age characteristics are thereforeimportant in
    planning for the changing housing needs of residents. The median age for Amador County in
    2012 was 48.4 years, significantly older than the California average (33.2). The most populous
    age cohort across most of the jurisdictions was 50 to 59 year olds.
   The large majority of seniors own rather than rent their home in Amador County. This is true
    across all jurisdictions, although seniors are much more likely to rent in Plymouth (26%) and
    Sutter Creek (25%) than in the rest of the county.
   A high proportion of female-headed and single-parent households have incomes below the
    poverty line. Jackson has the highest percent of female-headed households in the county living
    under the poverty line, 12% of all households, while the other cities range from 0 to 5% of
    female-headed households living under the poverty line.
   Commuting patterns reflect that there is an imbalance between where people live and work in
    Amador County. Roughly a fifth (19%) of residents in Amador County drive for between 25 and
    60 minutes to work each day and another 15% drive for more than an hour to work. Those in
    Amador City (26%) and Plymouth (22%) are most likely to commute the longest, while Jackson
    residents are most likely to have the shortest commute, with over 90% traveling less than 25
    minutes. The median commute time for residents countywide is 28.5 minutes.
Refer to Appendix A for the complete Housing Needs Assessment.
APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Various interrelated factors may constrain the ability of the private and public sectors to make
available adequate housing and meet the housing needs for each economic segment of the
community. These factors can be divided into two categories: (1) non-governmental and (2)
governmental. Non-governmental constraints consist of land availability, the environment, vacancy
rates, land cost, construction costs, and availability of financing. Governmental constraints consist
of land use controls, development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code
enforcement, site improvement costs, development permit and approval processing, and provision
for a variety of housing.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                  City of Plymouth
                                                   8

 POLICY DOCUMENT
In general, non-governmental constraints can be looked at in an integrated fashion across the cities
of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and the unincorporated area of Amador County while
governmental constraints are specific to each jurisdiction.
Key findings include the following:
Non-governmental constraints
   Portions of Amador County have flood risks because of the county’s high average annual
    rainfall, the number of watercourses that traverse the County, and the location of development
    adjacent to flood-prone areas. Flooding events occur countywide, and have caused significant
    damage in the western portion of the county near population centers, especially in the
    incorporated areas surrounding the Cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek.
   Substantial water exists beyond the projected 2020 demand and therefore there is no supply
    constraint to housing development. However, there are specific issues with water treatment that
    affect each jurisdiction’s ability to provide water and could potentially constrain residential
    development.
Governmental constraints
   California law states that local governments must provide incentives to developers of specified
    housing developments, and a density bonus can be used to accomplish this requirement. In
    return for these requirements, the developer must reserve these units for this purpose for a
    certain number of years (OPR, 2003). Requirements for density bonuses are not included in the
    zoning ordinances of Amador County and Sutter Creek. While density bonuses are mentioned in
    Section 17.32 of the City of Jackson’s Development Code, an ordinance to allow density
    bonuses per state law has not been included in the code.This can be a constraint in the
    development of affordable housing. In addition, since density bonuses ordinances are required
    under state law, modifying the zoning ordinance to include density bonus regulations is included
    in the Housing Element’s implementation programs for these three jurisdictions.
   Senate Bill (SB) 2 requires that transitional and supportive housing types be treated as residential
    uses and subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in
    the same zone. Both transitional and supportive housing types must be explicitly permitted in
    the municipal code. In addition SB 2 requires that jurisdictions allow emergency shelters without
    discretionary review in at least one zone. The jurisdictions in the joint Housing Element have
    complied with this portion of SB 2. Amador County and Sutter Creek will need to amend their
    Zoning Code to allow transitional and supportive housing by right in zones that allow residential
    uses in the same way othge residential uses are allowed.
   State law (Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code, Employee Housing Act)
    require that employee housing for farmworkers and other employees be allowed ministerially in
    zones allowing single-family residential structures (Section 17021.5). Section 17021.6 requires
    that farmworker housing consisting of 36 beds or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single
    family or household be allowed ministerially in zones that allow agricultural uses. No conditional
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                    9

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
   use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of this employee
   housing that is not required of any other agricultural activity in the same zone. Programs will be
   included for the City of Ione, Jackson, and Sutter Creek to amend their Zoning Codes to comply
   with the Employee Housing Act.
  To ensure fair and efficient process for persons with disabilities to make necessary accessibility
   adjustments to their homes, Amador County and the City of Jackson will amend their codes to
   create a reasonable accommodation procedure. The City of Sutter Creek will amend their
   reasonable accommodation procedure to fully comply sith SB 520 (see County Program H-13,
   Jackson Program H-11, and Sutter Creek Program H-7). Additionally the definition of “family”
   in the City of Ione, City of Jackson and Amador County’s Development Code has been updated
   to state “One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit with common access to and
   common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit.”
  Extremely low-income households have special housing needs because they are unlikely to find
   market-rate housing that is affordable. Many of the extremely low-income households will fall
   within a special needs category (disabled, seniors, large families or female-headed households)
   and require supportive housing services. Assembly Bill 2634 (Lieber, 2006) requires the
   quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
   households. Housing elements must identify zoning to encourage and facilitate supportive
   housing and single-room occupancy units (SROs). Amador County has included Program H-12
   which states that the County will update its Zoning Code to allow for single-room occupancy
   units. Program H-2.2 states that the County and four cities will prioritize funding and/or offer
   financial incentives or regulatory concessions to encourage the development or rehabilitation of
   single-room occupancy units and/or other units affordable to the extremely low-income, such as
   supportive and multi-family units. The cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek currently allow
   SROs.
  Manufactured and factory-built housing can be integral parts of the solution for addressing
   housing needs. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.3, the siting and permit process for
   manufactured housing should be regulated in the same manner as a conventional or stick-built
   structure. Specifically, Government Code Section 65852.3(a) requires that with the exception of
   architectural requirements, a local government, shall only subject manufactured homes (mobile
   homes) to the same development standards to which a conventional single-family residential
   dwelling on the same lot would be subject, including, but not limited to, building setback
   standards, side and rear yard requirements, standards for enclosures, access, and vehicle parking,
   aesthetic requirements, and minimum square footage requirements. The City of Plymouth and
   Sutter Creek have included programs to review their Zoning Codes to comply with Government
   Code Section 65852.3.
Refer to Appendix B: Constraints for a complete analysis of governmental and non-governmental
constraints.
February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                 10

 POLICY DOCUMENT
APPENDIX C: RESOURCES
Appendix C: Resources provides an overview of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), land
inventory, and energy conservation measures in each of the five jurisdictions. The Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for anticipated
growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction for the 8-
year period from January 2014 through June 2019. Communities then determine how they will
address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General Plans.
The intent of the RHNA is to ensure that local jurisdictions address their fair share of the housing
needs for the entire region. A major goal of the RHNA is to assure that every community provides
an opportunity for a mix of affordable housing to each economic segment of its population. The
RHNA jurisdictional allocations are made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning are provided to
address existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and that market forces
are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs of a particular community.
State law (Government Code Section 65583[a][7]) requires housing elements to contain an analysis
of opportunities for residential energy conservation. The energy conservation section of a housing
element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to encourage the incorporation of energy
saving features, energy saving materials, and energy efficient systems and design for residential
development. Housing element policies and programs should address the environmental significance
and operational benefits of employing energy conservation in the building and retrofitting of
housing.
Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all levels: individual dwelling units,
residential projects, neighborhoods, communities, and regions. Conservation can be achieved
through a variety of approaches, including reducing the use of energy-consuming appliances and
features in a home, physical modification of existing structures or land uses, and reducing the
reliance on automobiles by encouraging more mixed-use and infill development and providing
pedestrian access to commercial and recreational facilities.
Key findings include the following:
    Each jurisdiction has sufficient land zoned for residential development to accommodate their
     RHNAs for the 5th Housing Element cycle.
    The County and Cities actively promote energy conservation programs offered through local
     service and utility providers including the CARE program, REACH, and The Family Electric
     Rate Assistance (FERA). The CARE program provides a 20 percent monthly discount on gas
     and electric rates to households with qualified incomes, certain nonprofit organizations,
     homeless shelters, hospices, and other qualified nonprofit group living facilities. The REACH
     program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have no other way to pay their
     energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income households, particularly the elderly,
     disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed, who experience hardships and are unable to
     pay for their necessary energy needs. FERA is a program that provides a rate reduction for large
     households of three or more people with low to middle income.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  11

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
Refer to Appendix C: Resources for a complete analysis of the RHNA, land inventory, and energy
conservation.
APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENTS
In an effort to ensure the policies and implementation programs included in the Housing Element
are relevant to addressing the current housing needs in Amador County, an evaluation of
achievements under the previous Housing Elements was undertaken in Appendix D: Review of Previous
Housing Elements. This evaluation provided the basis for recommended modifications and the
establishment of new objectives in the Housing Element.
Key achievements from the previous planning period include:
   Amador County reduced development-related fees during Fiscal Year 2008-2009. So far no
    affordable housing projects have taken advantage of the fee reduction.
   Amador County has amended the Zoning Code to allow small family day care homes as a
    permitted use in all residential zones and large family day care homes as a conditional use in all
    residential zones, to amend the definition of “family” to comply with state law, and to allow
    emergency and transitional housing as a permitted use in the C-1 zone.
   The City of Ione’s density bonus program (codified in Zoning Code Section 17.46) was updated
    to be consistent with State density bonus law as part of the 2009 comprehensive Zoning Code
    update.
   As part of the General Plan update, the City of Ione rezoned land to allow higher density
    residential development. 8.4 acres were rezoned to the High Density Multiple-family or Light
    Commercial.
   In February 2014, the City of Jackson amended Section 17.32 of the Development code to
    require portions of new development to provide for housing opportunities for extremely low
    income households.
   The City of Jackson is currently working with Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency
    (A-TCAA) on a transitional housing project located on Clinton Road. The City will continue to
    meet regularly and support A-TCAA in their efforts to provide transitional, supportive and
    female headed household housing.
   The City of Plymouth adopted a comprehensive update to its Zoning Code on March 27, 2014.
    The update achieves consistency with the General Plan and implements a number of the
    programs listed in the Housing Element. Amendments incorporated range of densities and uses
    within the City’s residential zoning districts and incorporated several affordable housing-related
    concepts, including density bonus provisions and use listings required by state law.
   In 2010, the City of Sutter Creek amended the Zoning Ordinance to provide minimum densities
    for the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                   12

 POLICY DOCUMENT
A separate review of the previous Housing Element was completed for each jurisdiction and can be
found in Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements.
APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
Senate Bill (SB) 244 (Wolk) was approved by Governor Brown in October 2011 and requires cities
and counties to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged unincorporated communities
(DUC) in city and county general plans, Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) Municipal
Service Reviews (MSR), and annexation decisions.
Government Code Section 65302.10(a) requires that before the due date for adoption of the next
housing element after January 1, 2012, the general plan land use element must be updated to identify
and describe each DUC (fringe community, legacy community, and/or island community) that exists
within unincorporated areas of the county or in spheres of influence (SOI) of each city; analyze for
each identified community the water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and structural fire protection
needs; and identify financial funding alternatives for the extension of services to any identified
communities.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  13
                                                                  POLICY DOCUMENT
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
JOINT GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
This section describes Amador County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek’s
future housing plan, including housing goals, policies, and implementation programs to achieve
those goals. The section begins with joint goals, policies and programs followed by individual
programs for each of the jurisdictions.
The goals of the Housing Element provide a framework for compliance with California
Government Code Section 65583, which requires the Housing Element contain a “statement of the
community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the maintenance, improvement, and
development of housing.”
GOAL H-1:       Provide adequate sites to encourage provision of affordable housing.
        Policy H‐1.1: Ensure sufficient sites are appropriately zoned to accommodate each
                       jurisdiction’s share of regional housing needs.
            Program H-1.1:      To ensure that there is a sufficient supply of multi-family and single-
                                family zoned land to meet the regional housing needs allocation
                                (RHNA), the County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and
                                Sutter Creek will annually review their land inventory. Each
                                jurisdiction will consider single-family-zoned, vacant infill lots for
                                potential reuse and additional development of affordable second
                                units, multi-family dwellings, and special needs housing.
                                Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                                Time Frame:             Annually
                                Funding Source(s):      General Fund
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                   14

 POLICY DOCUMENT
       Policy H-1.2: Make use of state and federal programs to support housing provision,
                     including funding programs. Work with non-profit and for-profit developers
                     to make use of those programs for which the developer must be the
                     applicant.
           Program H-1.2:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek will consider jointly pursuing funding through various state
                             and federal programs or apply individually. The jurisdictions will
                             consider jointly pursing funding on an annual basis or pursue funding
                             individual by submitting grant applications depending on the
                             availability of funding. Local, state, and federal programs include:
                                BEGIN (federal)
                                CalHome Program (federal)
                                Community Development Block Grant (federal)
                                Multifamily Housing Program (federal)
                                Section 8 (federal)
                                State Homeownership Program (state)
                                Residential Energy Conservation (state)
                                Community Reinvestment Act (federal)
                                Mortgage Credit Certificate
                                Non-Profit Housing Development Corporation
                             Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction,
                                                      Grants Coordinators
                             Time Frame:              Annually, and as NOFAs are released
                             Funding Source(s):       General Fund, Program           Administration
                                                      Funds (Housing Authority)
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                15

                                                             POLICY DOCUMENT
      Policy H-1.3: Promote the development of second units.
          Program H-1.3:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                            Creek should promote the development of second unit dwellings by
                            publicizing information in the Amador County Administration
                            Building and the City Halls, and posting information on the each
                            jurisdiction’s website. The agencies should provide information
                            regarding permit requirements, changes in State law, and benefits of
                            second unit dwellings to property owners and the community.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                            Funding:                General Fund
                            Time Frame:             Review and update annually
      Policy H-1.4: Assist in the development of housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-
                    and low-income households through financial and/or technical assistance.
          Program H-1.4:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                            Creek shall consider applying jointly or individually to use CDBG
                            funding for the First-time Homebuyer Program in the City.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                            Funding Source:         General Fund
                            Time Frame:             Apply annually
      Policy H-1.5: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek will
                    consider establishing a countywide or individual Affordable Housing Trust
                    Fund(s).
February 2015                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                              City of Plymouth
                                              16

 POLICY DOCUMENT
           Program H-1.5:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek will consider developing an Affordable Housing Trust Fund
                             with funds that could be acquired from housing developers and or
                             employers throughout the County. Once funds start being collected,
                             the newly established Countywide Housing Committee comprised of
                             a representative from each jurisdiction would develop a priority list
                             for the use of these funds.
                             The jurisdictions would apply for matching funds from the Local
                             Housing Trust Fund Matching Grant Program though the State
                             Housing and Community Development Department (HCD).
                             Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, County Planning,
                                                       Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors
                                                       and City Council.
                             Funding Source:           General Fund
                             Time Frame:               Consider developing a trust fund by June
                                                       2016.
Goal H-2:      Provide support for affordable and special-needs housing in Amador County.
       Policy H-2.1: Provide for a variety of housing types to meet the housing needs of special
                      population groups.
           Program H-2.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek will consider working together or individually with nonprofits
                             and for-profit housing development corporations specializing in
                             housing for various special needs groups including farmworkers,
                             seniors, those with disabilities, and others, to accommodate housing
                             that meets the needs of these groups.
                             Each jurisdiction will work with nonprofit housing corporations to
                             educate its citizens regarding the necessity of providing the affordable
                             housing needed to support the job growth occurring throughout the
                             County. Specifically, this information will focus on the need to
                             provide affordable housing close to jobs in an effort to reduce the
                             traffic and air quality impacts that result from long commutes.
                             Programs will target community opposition to affordable housing
                             projects in an effort to establish positive perceptions. Education will
                             occur through public meetings, presentations to the community, and
                             articles published in the local newspaper.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                17
                                                          POLICY DOCUMENT
                        Should the County and the cities successfully receive funding either
                        jointly or individually, each jurisdiction will promote and publicize
                        the availability of funding for loans and grants (when additional
                        CDBG/HOME funds are acquired) through the local media,
                        mailings to property owners in targeted areas, and mailings to local
                        contractors and developers.
                        Responsible Agencies: City Council, Board of Supervisors, City
                                                 Administrator, Planning, Engineering, and
                                                 Finance Departments
                        Time Frame:              Annually
                        Funding Source(s):       State and Federal Grants
         Program H-2.2: Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 requires the quantification and analysis of
                        existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
                        households. To facilitate housing for extremely low-income persons,
                        the County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                        Creek will prioritize funding and/or offer financial incentives or
                        regulatory concessions to encourage the development or
                        rehabilitation of single-room occupancy units and/or other units
                        affordable to the extremely low-income, such as supportive and
                        multi-family units.
                        Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                        Time Frame:              December 2015
                        Funding Source(s):       General Fund
         Program H-2.3: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                        Creek shall consider working together or individually with the
                        Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency (A-TCAA) to find
                        suitable sites for transitional, supportive, and female heads of
                        households housing. The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson,
                        Plymouth and Sutter Creek shall consider working together to host
                        an annual meeting with A-TCAA to insure that opportunities for
                        transitional and special needs housing are implemented to the
                        greatest extent possible.
                        Responsibility:          Building Inspector, County Planning, City
                                                 Planners, and City Managers
                        Timeframe:               Ongoing with annual meetings
                        Funding:                 General Fund
February 2015                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                           City of Plymouth
                                          18
 POLICY DOCUMENT
           Program H-2.4:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek offer incentives to encourage the production of housing to
                             meet the needs of special needs populations, such as the elderly,
                             farmworkers, and persons with physical and developmental
                             disabilities. These include density bonuses and modification of
                             development standards.
                             The agencies will pursue grants used in incentivizing development of
                             special needs housing of all types. In addition, the agencies will work
                             with the Valley Mountain Regional Center to implement an outreach
                             program that informs families in Amador County on housing and
                             services specifically available for persons with developmental
                             disabilities. The program could include the development of an
                             informational brochure, including information on services on the
                             agencies’ websites, and providing housing-related training for
                             individuals/families through workshops.
                             Responsibility:          County Planning and City Planners
                             Timeframe:               Identify funding opportunities       annually;
                                                      incentives ongoing
                             Funding:                 Federal Housing Opportunities for Persons
                                                      with AIDS, California Child Care Facilities
                                                      Finance Program, and other state and federal
                                                      programs designated specifically for special
                                                      needs groups.
Goal H-3: Support the conservation and rehabilitation of the existing housing stock and
            promote the reduction of energy use and the conservation of natural resources in
            the development of housing.
       Policy H-3.1: Pursue a combination of public and private actions to rehabilitate and
                      maintain the existing stock of housing.
           Program H-3.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek shall consider surveying the conditions of housing stock jointly
                             or individually to determine the number of housing units in need of
                             rehabilitation and replacement.
                             The jurisdictions should consider utilizing the survey results to
                             pursue available funding sources to develop a countywide
                             rehabilitation program (or continue with individual programs). The
                             County and the Cities shall keep in contact with Department of
                             Housing and Community Development for changes which will
                             improve the chances of obtaining funding, including the availability
                             of new programs.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                19

                                                               POLICY DOCUMENT
                            Responsible Agencies: Building Departments, Planning Departments
                            Funding:                 CDBG, HOME, USDA Rural Housing
                                                     Services funds
                            Time Frame:              June 2016
      Policy H-3.2: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek shall
                    promote energy and water conservation designs and features in residential
                    developments.
          Program H-3.2:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                            Creek will enforce the State of California’s Title 24 energy
                            requirements. Title 24 energy requirements define construction
                            standards that promote energy conservation. In addition, each
                            jurisdiction will consider partnering with Amador-Tuolumne
                            Community Action Agency and ACES, Inc. (formerly Amador
                            County Environmental Services) to promote energy conservation.
                            Some measures the County and the cities could undertake jointly or
                            individually to assist in the implementation of the ATCAA program
                            include providing brochures at public counters, providing brochures
                            to senior centers, or applying for funds either jointly or individually
                            to assist homeowners in undertaking weatherization projects in
                            conjunction with government-assisted rehabilitation projects.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning,       Building,   and     Engineering
                                                     Departments
                            Time Frame:              Ongoing
                            Funding Source(s):       None required
      Policy H-3.3: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek
                    should consider working together with local utility companies to implement
                    energy awareness programs.
          Program H-3.3:    The cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek shall continue
                            to support the County's weatherization program as an important
                            means of lowering housing costs and preserving housing
                            affordability.
February 2015                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                               20

 POLICY DOCUMENT
           Program H-3.4:     The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                              Creek will consider partnering with Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E)
                              to promote energy saving programs by notifying home builders of
                              the design tools offered by PG&E and by posting a link on each
                              jurisdictions website to notify ratepayers of the variety of programs.
                              The County and cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek
                              will also consider partnering with the California Alternate Rates for
                              Energy (CARE), the Relief for Energy Assistance through
                              Community Help (REACH) and the Family Electric Rate Assistance
                              (FERA).
                              Responsible Agencies: Planning,         Building,     and    Engineering
                                                       Departments
                              Time Frame:              Ongoing
                              Funding Source(s):       None required
Goal 4: To provide decent housing and quality living environment for Amador County
         residents, regardless of age, race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national
         origin, color, disability, or economic level..
       Policy 4-1     The jurisdictions shall promote housing opportunities for persons regardless
                      of age, race, religion, sex, marital status, national origin, color, disability, or
                      economic level.
           Program H-4.1:     The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                              Creek shall obtain information on fair housing laws from the
                              Department of Housing and Community Development and have
                              copies of the information available for the public on the each
                              jurisdictions website, at City Halls, and the local library.
                              Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                              Funding:                 General Fund
                              Time Frame:              2014
           Program H-4.2:     The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                              Creek shall refer housing discrimination complaints to the Amador-
                              Tuolumne Community Action Agency and the fair housing authority
                              for Amador County.
                              Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                              Funding:                 General Fund
                              Time Frame:              2014-2019
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 21
                                                               POLICY DOCUMENT
Goal 5: To reduce public and private constraints to housing production while providing an
        appropriate level of environmental review, as well as maintaining design and
        construction quality and fiscal responsibility.
       Policy H-5.1: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek shall
                     enforce its land use policies that allow residential growth for a variety of
                     housing types.
           Program H-5.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                             Creek will ensure that residential development projects are consistent
                             with the goals and policies of their General Plans and that there is
                             internal consistency between the Housing Element and the rest of
                             the General Plan. Each jurisdiction will prepare an General Plan
                             Annual Progress Report in compliance with State direction and
                             provide it to the Planning Commission, City Council and Board of
                             Supervisors on progress toward meeting its goals, objectives, policies
                             and programs. Monitoring will include an evaluation of the Housing
                             Element objectives by the responsible agencies and departments,
                             meeting timing and funding commitments for implementing actions,
                             as well as the number of housing units provided or other measurable
                             indicators achieved for each measure that has been put into place.
                             The final reports will be submitted to OPR and HCD annually.
                             Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, Planning, Public Works,
                                                     Engineering, and Finance Departments,
                                                     Planning Commission, City Council and
                                                     Board of Supervisors
                             Time Frame:             Annually, 2015
                             Funding Source(s):      General Fund
       Policy H-5.2: The agencies shall continue efforts to fast-track residential applications in
                     order to promote the construction of housing.
February 2015                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                               22
 POLICY DOCUMENT
           Program H-5.2: Complex permit processing procedures can be an obstacle in housing
                          development, especially for affordable housing projects under tight
                          timelines imposed by state and federal funding programs. The
                          County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek
                          will minimize processing time for residential development permits,
                          especially affordable residential projects and those which conform to
                          City development requirements.
                          The County and the Cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                          Creek will monitor the development processing/review procedures
                          to minimize the time required for review. This reduction in time will
                          reduce the cost to developers and may increase the housing
                          production throughout the County. Each jurisdiction, on an annual
                          basis, will review and update as necessary its Framework for
                          Planning, Entitlement Review, and Development. This document is
                          a tool for staff, developers, and decision makers in understanding
                          how to effectively navigate through the development process.
                          Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planners and County
                                                  Planning
                          Funding Source:         General Fund
                          Schedule:               Annually
           Policy H-5.3:  Reestablish a countywide housing task force to implement this
                          housing element. Program 5.3: Pursue Formation of a County
                          Housing Task Force to consolidate countywide housing needs.
                          Build on contacts with city managers and city planners to reestablish
                          a housing task force. The purpose of the task force would be to
                          explore the joint county/cities housing element programs.
                          Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, Planning, Public Works,
                                                  Engineering, and Finance Departments,
                                                  Planning Commission, City Council and
                                                  Board of Supervisors
                          Time Frame:             Establish in 2015 and meet biannually or a
                                                  necessary.
                          Funding Source(s):      General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                   February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                             23
                                                           POLICY DOCUMENT
INDIVIDUAL PROGRAMS
Plymouth Individual Programs
           Program H-1: Zoning Code Review and Update.
                        To ensure that the Zoning Code works in conjunction with General
                        Plan policies to achieve housing and other City objectives, the City
                        will review and modify its Zoning Code on an ongoing basis.
                        Revisions will be made, as appropriate, to promote flexibility in
                        densities and uses, along with incentives for affordable housing
                        production.
                        Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, Planning and Engineering
                                                 Departments, Planning Commission, and City
                                                 Council
                        Time Frame:              Annually
                        Funding Source(s):       General Fund, Developer Fees
           Program H-2: Subdivision Ordinance Review and Update.
                        The City will undertake a review and update of the subdivision
                        ordinance. Along with updated subdivision standards, the review will
                        consider regulatory concessions that can help reduce the costs of
                        affordable housing development while balancing basic
                        environmental, health, and safety needs. While reducing allowable lot
                        sizes can contribute substantially to a reduction in total housing costs
                        (i.e., lower per-unit land and infrastructure improvement costs due to
                        higher densities), the vast majority of single-family residential lots are
                        already at a minimum size to allow single-family residential units. The
                        subdivision ordinance should be reviewed and revised, if necessary,
                        with regard to multi-family unit conversion from rentals to for-
                        purchase housing (i.e., condominiums).
                        Responsible Agencies: Planning, Engineering, Building, and Public
                                                 Works Departments, Planning Commission,
                                                 and City Council
                        Time Frame:              June 2015
                        Funding Source(s):       General Fund, Developer Fees
February 2015                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                             City of Plymouth
                                           24
 POLICY DOCUMENT
            Program H-3: Fee Structure.
                         The City will conduct an annual review and revision of City financing
                         mechanisms and fee structure to ensure that (1) adequate funding is
                         available for infrastructure and services needed to support growth,
                         and (2) fees and revenues are adequate without causing an undue
                         burden. If any constraints are identified, the City will establish
                         mitigating actions including concessions or incentives such as
                         deferring or reducing housing impact fees for developments that
                         include affordable units.
                         Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, Planning, Building, Public
                                                 Works,        Engineering,       and     Finance
                                                 Departments
                         Time Frame:             Annually, as projects are submitted by
                                                 developers and landowners
                         Funding Source(s):      Developer Fees
            Program H-4: Design Review.
                         The City will consider adopting design guidelines for development of
                         duplexes and small-scale multi-family units in addition to other
                         flexible housing designs. The guidelines will consider building
                         orientation, ceiling height, street layout, lot design, landscaping, and
                         street tree configuration in subdivision review for the purposes of
                         solar access and energy/water conservation.
                         The design review process, as a component of project review, will be
                         carried out either as ministerial or discretionary review, according to
                         project type. The process will encourage innovative housing types
                         and design, and allow mobile homes and factory-built housing with
                         permanent foundations that also meet all design review requirements
                         to be placed on residentially zoned parcels, pursuant to zoning and
                         design review requirements.
                         Finally, design reviews will be used to ensure that historic structures
                         are retained. The Planning Commission will create a historic district
                         so that the design review process can be applied to the identified
                         structures and to allow for the application of the State’s Historic
                         Building Code.
                         To ensure the design review guidelines do not pose a constraint on
                         the development of affordable housing the city will, during the
                         drafting of the guidelines reach out to non profit and other
                         developers as well as annually review and revise the process.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                    February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                            25

                                                           POLICY DOCUMENT
                        Responsible Agencies: Planning Department, Planning Commission,
                                                  City Council
                        Time Frame:               Consider adopting design guidelines by June
                                                  2015. Annually review as part of the City’s
                                                  APR.
                        Funding Source(s):        General Fund, Developer Fees
           Program H-5: Building Code.
                        The City will continue to adopt current updates and enforce the
                        Uniform Building Code to ensure that all new and rehabilitated
                        housing constructed in Plymouth complies with applicable health and
                        safety requirements, including energy conservation and handicapped
                        accessibility.
                        The update would incorporate the provisions of the State Historical
                        Building Code, a statute within the Health and Safety Code. The
                        California Historical Building Code consists of regulations adopted
                        pursuant to building standards law—Part 8 of Title 24 of California’s
                        Code of Regulations, and Chapter 34, Division II of the California
                        Building Code. Such standards and regulations will facilitate the
                        restoration or change of occupancy so as to preserve the buildings
                        original or restored elements and historical features, to encourage
                        energy conservation and a cost-effective approach to preservation,
                        and to provide for reasonable safety from fire or other hazards for
                        occupants and users of these buildings and to provide reasonable
                        availability and usability by the persons with disabilities.
                        Responsible Agencies: Planning and Building Departments
                        Time Frame:               Ongoing
                        Funding Source(s):        None required
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                              City of Plymouth
                                           26

 POLICY DOCUMENT
            Program H-6: Assisting “At-Risk: Units
                         The City currently contains no deed-restricted units and therefore
                         there are no “at-risk” units at this time. Should the City have any
                         affordable units in the future, the City will contact all state and
                         federal agencies that might provide affordable housing funds to
                         determine whether any funding is available for future preservation of
                         assisted housing developments. The City will work with not-for-
                         profit housing providers to apply for affordable housing subsidies
                         that may be available for this use, if necessary in the future.
                         Responsible Agencies: Planning Department
                         Time Frame:             As needed
                         Funding Source(s):      State and Federal Grants
            Program H-7: Parking Requirements
                         The City will amend the Zoning Code to require 1.5 parking spaces
                         for studio apartments and 1 bedroom units in multi-family housing
                         developments.
                         Responsible Agencies: Planning Department
                         Time Frame:             January 2015
                         Funding Source(s):      General Fund
            Program H-8: Single-Room Occupancy Units
                         Allow for single-room occupancy units with a Conditional Use
                         Permit in the Commercial (C ) zone.
                         Responsible Agencies: Planning Department
                         Time Frame:             January 2015
                         Funding Source(s):      General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                     February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                           27

                                                                                POLICY DOCUMENT
                  Program H-9:               Rezone to Meet the RHNA
                                             The City had a shortfall of land available to extremely low-, very low-,
                                             and low-income households during the 4th cycle. The City needs
                                             enough land to accommodate 26 units on a site or with a minimum
                                             allowed density of 16 units per acre. To address this shortfall, the
                                             City is planning to rezone and redesignate a parcel (APN 010-178-
                                             011-000) to the Urban Residential zoning district and Urban
                                             Residential (UR) General Plan designation by June 30, 2015. The site
                                             that will be redesignated and rezoned will allow exclusively residential
                                             uses by right on at least 50 percent of the site, (will not require a CUP
                                             or other discretionary approval) and a minimum of 16 units per acre.
                                             The site will have the capacity for at least 32 units and will be
                                             available for development within the planning period where water
                                             and sewer can be provided and not have any physical or
                                             environmental constraints on the site.
                                             Responsible Agencies: Planning Department
                                             Time Frame: June 30, 2015
                                             Funding Source(s): General Fund
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                                             TABLE HE-1
                                        SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                                                              Income Level
                      Task                            Extremely        Very                           Above
                                                                            Low     Moderate                         Total
                                                           Low          Low                         Moderate
 New Construction
 Fair Share Allocation1                                      0           1   1           1               1              4
 Residential Permits Issued 1/14-
                                                             0           0   0           0               0              0
 8/14
 New Construction Objectives                                 0           1   1           1               1              4
 Rehabilitation                                              0           1   0           0               0              1
 Preservation2                                               0           0   0           0               0              0
 Total                                                       0           2   1           1               1              5
Notes:
1 The Plymouth RHNA planning period for the Housing Element is January 1, 2014, through June 30, 2019. These numbers represent
the RHNA allocation for Plymouth.
2 There are no units at risk of converting to market rate in Plymouth.
February 2015                                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                                     28
  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment analyzes population and housing characteristics, identifies special
housing needs among certain population groups, evaluates housing conditions, and provides other
important information to support the goals, policies, and programs that will meet the needs of
current and future residents.
POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
According to the Census and shown in Table HE-2 below, the population of Amador County in
2010 was 35,009, with a population of 20,503 (59 percent) in unincorporated areas, and 14,506 (41
percent) in incorporated areas. In 2013, the population was 37,123. Amador County’s population has
increased substantially over the past 50 years from just 9,151 in 1950 to 35,100 in 2000. The rate of
growth increased during the 1980s and 1990s but slowed significantly thereafter. Population
numbers fluctuated differently across jurisdictions between 2000 and 2013. The unincorporated
county population, for instance, increased by nine percent, while Ione’s population only grew less
than one percent. Countywide, population grew by six percent.
                                        TABLE HE-2 POPULATION
                        Location                  Population                   Percent
                                                                              Change
                                           2000      2010        2013        2000-2013
               Amador County              35,100    35,009      37,123           6%
               Amador City                  201       196         182            -9%
               Ione                        7,214     7,129       7,259           1%
               Jackson                     4,467     3,898       4,600           3%
               Plymouth                     957       980         991            4%
               Sutter Creek                2,342     2,303       2,478           6%
               Unincorporated
                                          19,919    20,503      21,640           9%
               County
              Source: 2000-2010 DOF (E-8)
Population by Age. Although population growth strongly affects total demand for new housing,
housing needs are also influenced by age characteristics. Typically, different age groups have distinct
lifestyles, family characteristics, incomes, and housing preferences. As people move through each
stage of life, their housing needs and preferences also change. Age characteristics are therefore
important in planning for the changing housing needs of residents. The median age for Amador
County as a whole in 2012 was 48.4 years, significantly older than the California average (33.2). The
most populous age cohort across most of the jurisdictions was 50 to 59 year olds.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 A–1

                            APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
       Housing needs often differ by age group. For instance, most young adults (under 34) are single or
       starting families. Housing needs for younger adults are addressed through apartments or first-time
       homeownership opportunities. Middle-aged residents (34-64) may already be homeowners, are
       usually in the prime earning power of their careers, and thus tend to seek larger homes. Seniors
       often own a home but, due to limited income or disabilities, may need assistance to remain in their
       homes.
       Table HE-3 shows the ages of householders in the county and cities. As shown, Amador City has a
       much higher number of younger householders than the rest of the county, with 44 percent under
       age 25. Each of the remaining communities has a fairly large number of householders in the 45-54
       year range. Senior households (age 65+) represent at least 20 percent of households across all
       jurisdictions but are most common in Sutter Creek (29%) and the unincorporated county (22%) of
       households.
                            TABLE HE-3 AGE CHARACTERISTICS OF HOUSEHOLDERS
   Jurisdiction           Number of                     Percent of Householders by Age Group
                         Households
                                         Under 5-14    15-    25-     35-      45-54    54-      65-    75-      85
                                            5           24    34       44                64      74      84     and
                                                                                                               above
Amador County               14,283         4%   9%     11%    9%      12%       17%     18%     12%     6%      3%
Amador City                   73          13%  15%     16%   13%       6%       15%     16%      3%     3%      2%
Ione                        1,365          4%   8%     13%   13%      21%       20%     13%      5%     2%      1%
Jackson                     1,942          6%  10%     13%   14%      12%       11%     15%      7%     6%      6%
Plymouth                     428           8%  16%      9%   14%      11%       19%      9%      5%     6%      3%
Sutter Creek                1,192          3%   9%      9%    6%      10%       12%     22%     21%     6%      2%
Unincorporated              9,283          0%   9%     10%    8%      11%       18%     20%     13%     7%      2%
           Source: 2008- 2012 ACS (DP05)
       The generally modest rate of population growth throughout the county is also reflected in DOF
       population projections for 2020–2060. According to DOF estimates, the county’s population is
       expected to increase by 14.6 percent over its 2020 population to a little over 45,100. With this rate of
       anticipated population growth, the demand for new housing to accommodate these new residents
       will increase. Table HE-4 shows projected population growth for Amador County between the
       years 2020 and 2060. DOF projections do not provide splits for the incorporated and
       unincorporated portions of the county.
       February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                            City of Plymouth
                                                       A–2

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
             TABLE HE-4 PROJECTED POPULATION GROWTH, AMADOR COUNTY
                        Projected Population         Projected     Percent Change
                     Growth, Amador County           Population
                  2020                                  39,352              -
                  2030                                  42,036             7%
                  2040                                  44,200             5%
                  2050                                  44,829             1%
                  2060                                  45,116             1%
                 Source: 2013 DOF (P-1)
Income and Employment Characteristics
Income. Along with housing prices and rents, household income is the most important factor
affecting housing opportunities in Amador County. Housing choices such as tenure, housing type,
and location are dependent on household income. Tenure refers to whether a household owns or
rents its housing unit. On the other hand, household size and type often affect the proportion of
income that can be spent on housing. The median income countywide according to the 2008–2012
ACS is $53,462 as shown in Table HE-5. Ione had significantly higher median incomes than the
rest of the jurisdictions in the county. Jackson has the lowest median income at $44,386, which was
83% of the county’s as a whole. Income information is only available Countywide not broken out by
the unincorporated area.
                              TABLE HE-5 MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                 Jurisdiction         Median          % of
                                                    Household        County
                                                      Income
                           Amador County              $53,462         100%
                           Amador City                $46,094          86%
                           Ione                       $63,033         118%
                           Jackson                    $44,386          83%
                           Plymouth                   $45,625          85%
                           Sutter Creek               $46,859          88%
                           2008-2012 ACS (S01903)
Although median household income is a common benchmark for comparison, the distribution of
household income also provides a useful measure of housing needs in a community. In housing
analysis, households are typically grouped into categories, expressed relative to the area median
income (AMI) and adjusted for family size. Using State of California income thresholds, the income
groups analyzed were as follows:
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  A–3

                     APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
   Extremely low income: Up to 30% of AMI
   Very low income: 31–50% of AMI
   Low income: 51–80% of AMI
   Moderate income: 81–120% of AMI
   Upper income: Above 120% of AMI
Table HE-6 estimates the number of households within each income category for the county as a
whole, as reported in the HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) database.
Data is based on the 2010 Census. Countywide, 19 percent of households were in the extremely low-
and very low-income categories, and 37 percent were 80 percent or below of the AMI.
                          TABLE HE-6 HOUSEHOLD INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                    Income Distribution           Number of               Percent of
                          Overview               Households              Households
             Extremely Low (<30% of
                                                    1,235                      8%
             Area Median Income)
             Very Low (31-50% of AMI)               1,680                     11%
             Low (51-80% AMI)                       2,615                     18%
             Moderate (81-120% AMI)                 1,680                     11%
             Upper (>120% AMI)                      7,505                     51%
             Total                                 14,715                    100%
            Source: 2006-2010 CHAS
In 2006, state law was amended (AB 2634) to add the extremely low-income category to the required
analysis of household characteristics and housing growth needs. Due to their limited incomes, these
households have the greatest difficulty finding suitable housing at an affordable price. Further
discussion of housing costs and affordability, as well as housing growth needs by income category, is
provided later in this chapter.
Employment. Future housing needs depend, in part, on employment trends, as well as wages.
Changes in the types of jobs available, along with the associated pay levels in Amador County and
the surrounding region, will affect the type and cost of housing available to future residents.
As shown in Table HE-7, countywide employment increased by 5,280 jobs between 1990 and 2009
to 16,140 persons employed in the labor force. Unemployment rates were more than double that of
2000 in 2009, as Amador County, like much of the rest of the US, experienced the impacts of the
economic recession that began in 2008. Employment levels and the unemployment rate have begun
to recover, and in 2014 were 14,260 and 9.8 percent, respectively.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                A–4

          APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                            TABLE HE-7 LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS, 1990–2014
                    Year          Labor            Employment       Unemployment       Unemployment Rate
                                  Force
                   1990           11,460              10,860               600                 5.2
                   2000           15,300              14,500               800                 5.2
                   2009           18,430              16,140              2,280               12.4
                   2014           15,800              14,260              1,550                9.8
                  Source: 1990, 2000, 2009, and 2014, EDD
         The 2007–2011 ACS data provides employment by industry data. It reported that in 2011, Amador
         County had a resident civilian labor force of 13,260. The labor force includes those people ages of
         16 and over who are able to work. Table HE-8 shows employment by major industries in each of
         the jurisdictions. As shown, educational service and health care services along with recreation-
         related industries and retail trade have some of the highest employment numbers across
         jurisdictions. Public administration is also a significant industry of employment in the county as a
         whole.
                                    TABLE HE-8 EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY, 2011
 Employment            Amador           Amador            Ione         Jackson     Plymouth  Sutter Creek  Unincorporated
  by Industry          County              City
                      #         %       #       %      #        %     #        %    #     %     #      %     #        %
Civilian
employed           13,260     -        59     -      1,579    -     1,860    -    435   -    1,058   -    8,269    -
population
Agriculture
                   362        3%       0      0%     13       1%    40       2%   14    3%   6       1%   289      4%
and related
Construction       906        7%       5      9%     242      15%   48       3%   25    6%   117     11%  469      6%
Manufacturin
                   755        6%       0      0%     18       1%    150      8%   12    3%   32      3%   543      7%
g
Wholesale
                   240        2%       0      0%     0        0%    19       1%   19    4%   8       1%   194      2%
trade
Retail trade       1,640      12%      2      3%     109      7%    266      14%  79    18%  171     16%  1013     12%
Transportatio
                                              10
n and              808        6%       6             96       6%    70       4%   19    4%   20      2%   597      7%
                                              %
warehousing
Information        156        1%       0      0%     10       1%    8        1%   0     0%   9       1%   129      2%
Finance and                                     14
                     363        3%       8             27       2%    46       3%  13     3%   66      6%   203      3%
real estate                                     %
         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              February 2015
         City of Plymouth
                                                                  A–5

                            APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
 Employment           Amador        Amador       Ione       Jackson    Plymouth    Sutter Creek   Unincorporated
  by Industry          County          City
                      #       %     #       %  #      %     #     %     #     %      #       %       #      %
Professional,
scientific, and     1,308    10%    0      0% 90      6%   139    8%   36     8%    114     11%     929    11%
management
Educational
                                           51
services and        2,601    20%    30        310    20%   257   14%   63    15%    282     27%    1659    20%
                                            %
health care
Recreation
                    1,840    14%    0      0% 209    13%   431   23%   81    19%     96      9%    1023    12%
services
Other
                     540     4%     1      2% 48      3%   156    8%   29     7%     61      6%     245     3%
services,
Public                                     12
                    1,741    13%    7         407    26%   230   12%   45    10%     76      7%     976    12%
administration                              %
     Source: 2007-2011 ACS (DP-03)
         Major Employers. Major sources of employment in Amador County are a mix of public agencies,
         including the county sheriff and schools, hospitals, major grocery and other large warehouse
         retailers, and utilities. Table HE-9 shows the largest employers in the county according to the
         California Employment Development Department (EDD) in 2014. All of these employers have on
         record 10 or more employees on-site.
         February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                        City of Plymouth
                                                        A–6

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                TABLE HE-9 MAJOR EMPLOYERS
              Employer Name                  Location                    Industry
  Amador County Sheriff                   Jackson        Sheriff
  Beth Sogaard Catering                   Plymouth       Grocers-Retail
  Camanche Recreation Co                  Ione           Recreation Centers
  County Coroner                          Jackson        Government Offices-County
  Jackson Junior High School              Jackson        Schools
  Jackson Rancheria Casino and
                                          Jackson        Casino, Full Service Restaurant
  Restaurant
  Kit Carson Nursing & Rehab              Jackson        Hospitals
  Lake Camanche Marina & Grill            Ione           Marinas
  Lowe's Home Improvement                 Jackson        Home Centers
  Mule Creek State Prison                 Ione           State Govt-Correctional Institutions
                                          Jackson,
  Pacific Gas & Electric Co                              Electric Companies
                                          Pioneer
  Preston Youth Correctional              Ione           State Govt-Correctional Institutions
  Prospect Motors Inc                     Jackson        Automobile Dealers-New Cars
  Raley's                                 Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Safeway                                 Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Save Mart                               Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Sierra Pine Ltd                         Sutter Creek   Lumber-Manufacturers
  Sutter Amador Hospital and Lab          Jackson        Hospitals, Medical Laboratories
                                                         Radio/Internet/TV
  Volcano Public Telephones               Pine Grove
                                                         Broadcasting/Comm Equip
  Walmart                                 Jackson        Department Stores
 Source: EDD, 2014
EDD estimates future job growth in fast-growing occupations. Estimates for Amador County are
aggregated with those for Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne Counties into the “Mother Lode
Region,” as shown in Table HE-10. These occupations indicate areas of the economy that are
positioned for faster growth in Amador County and surrounding areas. A more rapid growth rate is
projected in the health care industry, for instance. This trend may be related to the growing
population of senior citizens in the Mother Lode Region.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                     February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                               A–7

                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
   TABLE HE-10 FAST-GROWING INDUSTRIES, MOTHER LODE REGION1 2010–2020
                   Occupational Title                                Annual Average                      2010–2020
                                                                        Employment                         Change
                                                                  2010                2020
                                                              Estimated            Projected
                                                              Employme            Employed
                                                                    nt
    Cost Estimators                                          110                160                 46%
    Home Health Aides                                        240                330                 38%
    Carpenters                                               440                590                 34%
    Medical Secretaries                                      340                430                 27%
    Hairdressers, Hairstylists, and
                                                             90                 110                 22%
    Cosmetologists
    Insurance Sales Agents                                   90                 110                 22%
    Emergency Medical Technicians and
                                                             150                180                 20%
    Paramedics
    Postal Service Mail Carriers                             100                120                 20%
    Operating Engineers and Other
                                                             160                190                 19%
    Construction Equipment Operators
    Dental Assistants                                        180                210                 17%
   Source: California Employment Development Department, October 2013
   1
     Estimates for Amador County are aggregated with those for Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne Counties into the “Mother Lode
   Region” by the EDD for analysis.
Jobs-Housing Balance. Commuting patterns in Amador County have an important implication for
housing needs. Larger employers in the county (e.g., County government, PG&E, Jackson
Rancheria, large retailers) generate a number of jobs. However, the workforce employed at these
institutions may live in other communities for a variety of reasons, including preferences, the
availability of suitable housing, or other reasons.
Table HE-11 summarizes commuting patterns of residents in Amador County. Data for the
unincorporated county is not separately calculated and so is not shown below. The majority of
individuals do not live and work in the jurisdictions but commute to other places for work.
Countywide, only 27 percent of residents lived and worked in the same community, and 59 percent
of workers in the county live elsewhere and commute in for work. The live-work ratio varies across
the cities. In Amador City, there is no overlap between those who work and live within the city. In
Ione, 10 percent of the employed population lives in the city. Countywide, 74 percent of residents
drive more than 10 miles to reach their place of work, and 43 percent drive more than 25 miles.
February 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                            A–8

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                TABLE HE-11 JOBS-HOUSING BALANCE
            Jurisdiction           Live in       Work in          Live and          Total
                                Jurisdiction   Jurisdiction        Work in     Employed in
                                    Only           Only         Jurisdiction    Jurisdiction
           Amador
                                   11,785          6,045            4,296         10,431
           County
           Amador City                88             23                0              23
           Ione                     1,998          1,810             161           1,971
           Jackson                  1,917          3,030             336           3,366
           Plymouth                  491            150                2             152
           Sutter Creek             1,161          1,006              31           1,037
          Source: US Census 2013 (LODES)
Commuting Patterns. Commuting patterns reflect that there is an imbalance between where
people live and work in Amador County. As shown in Table HE-12 roughly a quarter (26%) of
residents in Amador County drive for between 25 and 60 minutes to work each day and another 15
percent drive for more than an hour to work. Those in Amador City (26%) and Plymouth (22%) are
most likely to commute the longest, while Jackson residents are most likely to have the shortest
commute, with around 90 percent traveling less than 25 minutes. The median commute time for
residents countywide is 28.5 minutes. Commute time information is only available Countywide not
for the unincorporated area of the County only.
                                       TABLE HE-12 COMMUTE TIME
            Jurisdiction                                   Minutes
                                  Less than 10 10 to 24   25 to 44    45 to 59  More than 60
         Amador County                 20%       38%        19%          7%           15%
         Amador City                   18%       46%         0%          10%          26%
         Ione                          25%       36%        18%          10%          11%
         Jackson                       53%       37%         3%          4%            3%
         Plymouth                      21%       27%        24%          6%           22%
         Sutter Creek                  21%       58%         8%          4%            9%
       Source: ACS 2008–2012 (S0802)
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  A–9

                     APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Housing Overpayment. Generally, overpayment compares the total housing cost for a household
  to the ability of that household to pay for housing. Specifically, overpayment is defined as monthly
  housing costs in excess of 30 percent of a household’s income. Housing cost is defined as the
  monthly owner costs (mortgages, deed of trust, contracts to purchase or similar debts on the
  property and taxes, insurance on the property, and utilities) or the gross rent (contract rent plus the
  estimated average monthly cost of utilities).
  Housing overpayment is especially problematic for lower-income households that have limited
  resources for other living expenses. As shown in Table HE-13, a significant portion of lower-
  income households in each community overpaid for housing according to ACS 2007–2011 data.
                        TABLE HE-13 HOUSING OVERPAYMENT BY TENURE
     Household            Extremely    Very       Low    Moderate        Above         Total    Lower
                             Low        Low                             Moderate                income*
Amador County
Ownership
                            1,348      1,539     1,902      1,607         4,820       11,216       4,789
Households
Overpaying owner
                             909        827       691        588          1,333       4,348        2,427
households
Percentage of
                             67%        54%       36%        37%           28%         39%          51%
overpaying owners
Renter Households            698        471       663        433           503        2,798        1,832
Overpaying renter
                             554        444       362        104            28        1,492        1,360
households
Percentage of
                             79%        94%       55%        24%            6%         72%          74%
overpaying renters
Amador City
Ownership
                              14          1         3          7            17          42           18
Households
Overpaying owner
                              11          1         -          7             1          20           12
households
Percentage of
                             79%       100%        0%        97%            6%         48%          79%
overpaying owners
Renter Households              3          -        10          5            14          32           13
Overpaying renter
                               -          -         9          -             -           9            9
households
Percentage of
                              0%         0%       87%         0%            0%         28%           0%
overpaying renters
  February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                  A–10

    APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
     Household      Extremely   Very   Low    Moderate  Above   Total  Lower
                       Low      Low                    Moderate        income*
Ione
Ownership
                        77       82     106      174     619    1,058      265
Households
Overpaying owner
                        40       66      27       66     142     341       133
households
Percentage of
                       51%      81%    25%       38%     23%     32%       50%
overpaying owners
Renter Households       50        -      96       79      44     269       146
Overpaying renter
                        50        -      72       42       -     164       122
households
Percentage of
                      100%       0%    75%       53%      0%     61%       83%
overpaying renters
Jackson
Ownership
                       131      112     179      164     383     969       422
Households
Overpaying owner
                       116       18      13       60      81     288       147
households
Percentage of
                       89%      16%     7%       36%     21%     30%       35%
overpaying owners
Renter Households      254        -     223      125     153     755       477
Overpaying renter
                       130      125      50       13       -     318       305
households
Percentage of
                       51%       0%    22%       10%      0%     42%       64%
overpaying renters
Plymouth
Ownership
                        61       63      39       33      99     295       163
Households
Overpaying owner
                        32       12      8        23       6      81        52
households
Percentage of
                       52%      20%    21%       70%      6%     27%       32%
overpaying owners
Renter Households       20       60      35       10       8     133       115
Overpaying renter
                        20       52      18        -       -      90        90
households
Percentage of
                       98%      87%    52%        0%      0%     68%       78%
overpaying renters
   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                 February 2015
   City of Plymouth
                                       A–11

                          APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
      Household                  Extremely         Very       Low       Moderate              Above             Total        Lower
                                     Low            Low                                    Moderate                          income*
Sutter Creek
Ownership
                                     116            118       127            48                  244             653              361
Households
Overpaying owner
                                     106             52        80            44                   78             360              238
households
Percentage of
                                     91%            44%       63%           91%                 32%              55%             66%
overpaying owners
Renter Households                     96            109       124           127                   77             533              329
Overpaying renter
                                      79            109        83             8                    -             279              271
households
Percentage of
                                     82%           100%       67%            6%                  0%              52%             82%
overpaying renters
Unincorporated Amador County
Ownership
                                     948           1,164     1,449         1,180               3,459            8,200           3,561
Households
Overpaying owner
                                     605            677       563           388                1,025            3,258           1,845
households
Percentage of
                                     64%            58%       39%           33%                 30%              40%             52%
overpaying owners
Renter Households                    698            471       663           433                  503            2,798           1,832
Overpaying renter
                                     554            444       362           104                   28            1,492           1,360
households
Percentage of
                                     79%            94%       55%           24%                  6%              72%             74%
overpaying renters
  Source: 2007-2011 ACS B25106
  *Lower Income is the total of the Extremely Low, Very Low and Low-Income categories and is all households with incomes of 80 percent or
  lower of median income.
  However, the overpayment rate varied by tenure and income level. More than half of all very low-
  and extremely low-income households in all jurisdictions, in most cases both owners and renters,
  were reported to be overpaying. With the exceptions of Amador City and Jackson, over three-
  quarters of renters were overpaying in all jurisdictions. Ione had the highest percentage of renters
  overpaying (83%), while Amador City had the highest percentage of owners overpaying (79%).
  Sutter Creek had the most households overpaying overall; 74% of lower income households were
  overpaying and 54% of all households were overpaying. Overall, 57% of households in Amador
  County were overpaying in 2011.
  February 2015                                           2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                                              A–12

          APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
         HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
         A household refers to the people occupying a home, such as a family, a single person, or unrelated
         persons living together. Families often prefer single-family homes or condominiums to
         accommodate children, while single persons generally occupy smaller apartments or condominiums.
         Single-person households may include seniors living alone or young adults.
         According to the Census, shown in Table HE-14, there were 12,759 households in Amador County
         in 2000 which grew slightly to 14,569 households in 2010, a 14.2 percent increase. Jackson and Ione
         saw increases in households of more than 15 percent. The other incorporated cities addressed in
         this joint Housing Element saw more moderate growth rates under 10 percent in that decade.
         Household Tenure. Tenure is also represented in Table HE-14. As shown, most households
         (75%) are owner-occupied, although renter households are more common in the cities than
         unincorporated Amador County, especially in Jackson and Sutter Creek where 46 percent of units
         are renter-occupied.
                                   TABLE HE-14 HOUSEHOLD TRENDS – 2000-2010
      Existing                          2000                              2010                   10-year change
    Households
       Year                # Existing     Owner       Renter   # Existing   Owner Renter  # Existing   Owner    Renter
                          Households                          Households                 Households
Amador County               12,759         9,629      3,130     14,569     10,883 3,686    14.2%       13.0%    17.8%
Amador City                    85            56         29         85         54    31      0.0%        -3.6%    6.9%
Ione                         1,081          662        419       1,466      1,026  440     35.6%       55.0%     5.0%
Jackson                      1,746          983        763       2,065      1,122  943     18.3%       14.1%    23.6%
Plymouth                      392           253        139        403        259   144      2.8%         2.4%    3.6%
Sutter Creek                 1,025          603        422       1,168       626   542     14.0%         3.8%   28.4%
Unincorporated               8,430         7,072      1,358      9,382      7,796 1,586    11.3%       10.2%    16.8%
         Source: US Census 2000 (DP05); US Census 2010(DP-1)
         In addition to the population living in households, 4,430 people lived in group quarters in the
         county in 2010, the majority of which lived at Mule Creek State Prison, Preston Youth Correctional
         Facility, and the Pine Grove Youth Conservation Camp. With the exception of the prison
         population, the county’s population is overwhelmingly housed in households.
         Household Size. According the 2007–2011 ACS, the average household size for Amador County
         as a whole was 2.3 persons per household for owner-occupied units and 2.4 persons per household
         for renter-occupied units. Table HE-15 displays the percentage of each household size within each
         jurisdiction.
         Countywide, the proportion of single-person households was approximately 19 percent in owner-
         occupied units and six percent in rented units. However, the percentage of single-person households
         varied by location. The cities of Jackson (34%) and Sutter Creek (33%) had the highest percentage
         of single-person households, while Ione (20%) had the lowest.
         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       February 2015
         City of Plymouth
                                                             A–13

                             APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                      TABLE HE-15 HOUSEHOLD SIZE – 2011
                  Amador        Amador          Ione        Jackson   Plymouth   Sutter Creek    Unincorporated
                  County           City
                  #        %     #     %      #      %      #     %    #     %     #       %       #        %
Total:         14,283      -    73     -    1,365     -   1,942    - 428      -  1,192      -    9,283       -
Owner
               11,213    79%    41   56%    1,079   79%    969   50% 295    69%   653     55%    8,176     88%
occupied
1-person
                2,661    19%    14   19%     169    12%    317   16%  51    12%   195     16%    1,915     21%
household
2-4-person
                7,886    55%    27   37%     778    57%    606   31% 209    49%   445     37%    5,821     63%
household
5+ person
                 666      5%     0    0%     132    10%     46    2%  35     8%    13      1%     440       5%
household
Renter
                3,070    21%    32   44%     286    21%    973   50% 133    31%   539     45%    1,107     12%
occupied
1-person
                 876      6%     3    4%     104     8%    342   18%  48    11%   201     17%     178       2%
household
2-4-person
                1888     13%    18   25%     161    12%    553   28%  65    15%   301     25%     790       9%
household
5+ person
                 306     <1%    11   15%      21    <1%     78   <1%  20     5%    37    <1%      139      <1%
household
       Source: US Census 2007-2011 ACS Table B17010
       Overcrowded Households. Overcrowding is defined as a situation where there is more than one
       person per room in an occupied housing unit. Overcrowding can result from a low supply of
       affordable and adequate housing. Households that are unable to afford larger housing units may be
       forced to rent or purchase housing that is too small to meet their needs.
       The 2007–2011 ACS reported overcrowding is fairly rare throughout the county, accounting for less
       than one percent of all households. Overcrowding is slightly more common in Jackson and
       Plymouth, accounting for two percent and three percent of total households respectively. Of the 104
       overcrowded households countywide, 49 are severely overcrowded, representing 35 percent of all
       overcrowded units. As Table HE-16 shows, the level of overcrowding by tenure is higher in owner
       households, representing 83 percent of the overcrowded households in 2011. Overcrowding is not
       an issue in Amador County.
       February 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                        City of Plymouth
                                                          A–14

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                             TABLE HE-16 OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLDS
                      Amador     Amador   Ione    Jackson    Plymouth   Sutter   Unincorporated
                      County        City                                Creek
  Total
                       14,283        73  1,365     1,942        428      1,192         9283
  Households
  Overcrowded Households (1.01 or more/rm)
  Owner
                        116           0    17        29          13        0            57
  Occupied
  Renter
                         24           0     0        10           0        6             8
  occupied
  Total                 140           0    17        39          13        6            65
  Severely Overcrowded Households (1.5 or more/rm)
  Owner
                         39           0     0        29           0        0            10
  Occupied
  Renter
                         10           0     0        10           0        0             0
  occupied
  Total                  49           0     0        39           0        0            10
     Source: ACS 2007-2011 (B25014)
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
This section describes the housing characteristics and conditions that affect housing needs in
Amador County. Important housing stock characteristics include housing type, tenure, vacancy rates,
age, condition, cost and affordability.
Housing Type. The DOF provides annual estimates of the number of housing units by type for
each jurisdiction based on reported building and demolition permits. The DOF estimated that
Amador County had a total of 18,174 housing units in 2013, representing a growth of 142 new units
(less than one percent growth) countywide since 2010 and five percent growth since 2000, as shown
in Table HE-17. As is typical in small towns and rural areas, the majority of housing stock in all
jurisdictions comprises single-family detached houses. However, the dominance of such detached
units varied a great deal, from under 60 percent of units in Plymouth and Sutter Creek to nearly 90
percent in Ione and the unincorporated areas (see Table HE-18).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                     February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                              A–15

                        APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                    TABLE HE-17 HOUSING STOCK, AMADOR COUNTY 1990–2013
                Location             1990       2000       2010       2013   % Change         % Change
                                                                             1990-2000        2000-2013
      Amador County                 12,814     15,113     18,032     18,174      18%              20%
      Amador City                      87         94         108       108        8%              15%
      Ione                            910       1,168      1,635      1,744      28%              49%
      Jackson                        1,618      1,816      2,309      2,312      12%              27%
      Plymouth                        359        372         493       492        4%              32%
      Sutter Creek                    952       1,084      1,367      1,373      14%              27%
      Unincorporated Areas           8,888     10,579     12,120     12,145      19%              15%
     Source: DOF 2009, 2013
   Multi-family units, including smaller complexes (2-4 units) and larger complexes (5+), were more
   popular in Jackson and Sutter Creek, but accounted for less than six percent of units in all other
   jurisdictions, as shown in Table HE-18. Notably, more than a quarter of units in Plymouth are
   mobile homes.
                                   TABLE HE-18 HOUSING UNITS BY TYPE
  County / City           Single        Single        Two to      Five Plus    Mobile        Total
                        Detached      Attached          Four                   Homes
Amador City              90     83%    12   11%       6     6%     0     0%   0       0%      108     100%
Ione                   1,556    89%    31    2%       0     0%   104     6%   53      3%     1,744    100%
Jackson                1,430    62%   134    6%     288    12%   252    11%  208      9%     2,312    100%
Plymouth                275     56%    30    6%      23     5%    25     5%  139     28%      492     100%
Sutter Creek            802     58%    82    6%     136    10%   243    18%  110      8%     1,373    100%
Unincorporated        10,742    88%   270    2%     159     1%    66     1%  908      7%    12,145    100%
Amador
                      14,895    82%   559    3%     612     3%   690     4% 1,418     8%    18,174    100%
County
      Source: 2011-2013 DOF, (E-5)
   Age of Housing Stock. Housing element law requires an estimate of substandard housing in the
   community. Housing over 30 years old is more likely to be in need of repair and rehabilitation.
   According to 2012 ACS data, the majority of housing (53%) in Amador County was built over 30
   years ago, before 1980. The largest percentage of the county’s housing stock, 43 percent, was built
   between 1970 and 1989 (see Table HE-19). Amador City has the oldest overall housing stock, with
   over 70 percent of units built before 1980 while Ione has the newest, with only 36 percent built
   before 1980.
   February 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                         City of Plymouth
                                                       A–16

     APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                         TABLE HE-19 AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                 2010      2000-     1990-      1980-      1970-      1960-      1950-       1940-      1939             Total
                                   or      2009       1999      1989       -1979       1969       1959        1949        or          housing
                                 later                                                                                 earlier          units*
 Amador                  #        42       2,410     2,566      3,581       4,151     1,615        657        895       2,100           18,017
 County
                         %        0%        13%       14%        20%         23%        9%          4%         5%        12%             100%
 Amador City             #         0         3          8         20          3          0           7          8         56              105
                         %        0%        3%         8%        19%         3%         0%          7%         8%        53%             100%
 Ione                    #        14        414        286       211          68       122          27        121        172             1,435
                         %        1%        29%       20%        15%         5%         9%          2%         8%        12%             100%
 Jackson                 #         0        336        288       442         330       151         157        184        477             2,365
                         %        0%        14%       12%        19%         14%        6%          7%         8%        20%             100%
 Plymouth                #         0         83        23        168         126        23          57         16         77              573
                         %        0%        15%        4%        29%         22%        4%         10%         3%        13%             100%
 Sutter Creek            #         0        151        173       219         142       133          48         53        431             1,350
                         %        0%        11%       13%        16%         11%       10%          4%         4%        32%             100%
 Unincorporated          #        28       1,423     1,788      2,521       3,482     1,186        361        513        887            12,189
 County
                         %        0%        12%       15%        21%         29%       10%          3%         4%         7%             100%
Source:2008-2012 ACS (DP04)
   *Due to the small size of the sample taken in Amador County, the estimates reported by the ACS have large margins of error. Where ACS
   data is used, the numbers should not be interpreted as absolute fact, but rather as a tool to illustrate general proportion or scale. Therefore
   numbers for the same type of data may vary when based on the ACS versus another data source.
   CONDITION OF THE HOUSING STOCK.
   IONE
   As a part of the 2005 Housing Element update process, the condition of the City of Ione’s housing
   stock was ascertained through a Housing Condition Survey. The survey of 1,106 residential housing
   units in Ione was performed by Mercy Housing California in the summer and fall of 2003. Mobile
   homes were included and apartment buildings were counted as a single unit. The survey rated all
   housing units within the city limits based on the methodology developed from the HCD program
   survey format.
   As classified by HCD, a housing unit is deemed in need of rehabilitation if it is classified as minor,
   moderate, or substantial. Housing units classified as dilapidated are not considered as eligible for
   rehabilitation because it is assumed that the cost of rehabilitation exceeds the cost to replace the
   existing structure.
   Each structure was rated according to criteria established by HCD, which establishes five structure
   categories: foundation, roofing, siding, windows, and doors. Within each category, the housing unit
   is rated from “no repairs needed” to “replacement needed.” Points are added together for each unit
   and a designation made as follows:
   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                          February 2015
   City of Plymouth
                                                                   A–17

                        APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                9 points or less: New or well maintained. Structurally intact
 Sound                                          and undamaged – straight roof lines – no signs of deferred
                                                maintenance.
                                                10 to 15 points: Shows signs of deferred maintenance – only
 Minor repair
                                                one component needs replacement.
                                                16 to 39 points: Repairs needed for one or more major
 Moderate rehabilitation                        component and other repairs – i.e., roof replacement,
                                                painting, and window repairs.
                                                40 to 55 points: Replacement needed for several major
                                                systems and possibly other repairs – i.e., complete
 Substantial rehabilitation
                                                foundation work and roof replacement, along with painting
                                                and windows.
                                                56 or more points: Structurally unsound – not fit for human
 Dilapidated                                    habitation – major rehabilitation needed –demolition
                                                suggested.
Source: City of Ione Housing Condition Survey, November 2003, Mercy Housing California
In general, the purpose of the study is to determine the eligibility of areas in need of community
development activities. The results of the Housing Condition Survey may be used as a basis for an
application to the state Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, Home
Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) program, Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate
Income Housing Fund (LMIHF), or other programs that support the City’s Housing Rehabilitation
Program.
The survey evaluated a total of 1,106 housing units (1,030 single-family, 21 duplexes, 46 mobile
homes, and 9 multifamily (considered one unit)). Of these units, 14 percent (152 units) needed
minor repairs, 11 percent (121 units) needed moderate repairs, one percent (15 units) needed
substantial rehabilitation, and 0.4 percent (4 units) were dilapidated and required replacement.
Approximately 27 percent of Ione’s housing stock is considered substandard and in need of
rehabilitation or demolition (see Table HE-20 below).
February 2015                                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                              City of Plymouth
                                                            A–18

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                                                         -
                                      TABLE HE-20 HOUSING CONDITIONS
      I                                          I
                                                                            Surveyed Units
                                                                                                                 -,
                       Condition                  ~
                                                                                                              -
                                                             Number                I           Percentage
      I
                                                                                                               -
         Sound                                     814                               74%
      '-----                                                                                                     -
      .  Minor                                     152                               14%
                                                                                                              -
      . Moderate                                   121                               11%
                                                                                                               -
         Substantial                               15                                1%
      I
                                                                                                                -
      .  Dilapidated                               4                                 0.4%
                                                                                                                 -
      L  Total_ _                                  1,106                             100.0%            ___J
        Source: City of Ione Housing Condition Survey, November 2003, Mercy Housing California
After conversations with City staff in 2008, it is estimated that approximately 20 percent of the
housing stock was in need of rehabilitation in 2008.
JACKSON
The following are definitions of housing condition types as listed in CDBG’s Grant Manual:
SOUND - A unit that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact. The foundation should
appear structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof lines. Siding, windows and doors
should be in good repair with good exterior paint condition. Minor problems such as small areas of
peeling paint and/or other maintenance items are allowable under this category.
MINOR - A unit that shows signs of deferred maintenance or which needs only one major
component such as a roof.
MODERATE - A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components and other repairs,
such as roof replacement, painting and window repairs.
SUBSTANTIAL - A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and possibly other
repairs (e.g., complete foundation work, roof structure replacement and re-roofing, as well as
painting and window replacement).
DILAPIDATED - A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building appears structurally
unsound and maintenance is non-existent, not fit for human habitation in its current condition, may
be considered for demolition or, at minimum, major rehabilitation will be required.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                            A–19

                      APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                      TABLE HE-21
                      HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY RESULTS CITY OF JACKSON
      Sound                Minor             Moderate                Substantial      Dilapidated        Total
 1,067               133                  123                    33                 5                1,361
 78.4%               9.8%                 9.0%                   2.4%               0.4%             100%
Source: Mercy Housing California Housing Condition Survey of Jackson. November 2003
Because nearly 90% of Housing types were either Sound or needed Minor repair, a breakdown
by Housing type was not done.
The 2003 Housing Condition prepared by Mercy Housing California was updated in 2011 by a visual
survey of the City by the Senior Building Inspector and the City Planner. The revised information is
displayed in Table HE-22.
                                                      TABLE HE-22
              UPDATED HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY RESULTS CITY OF JACKSON
      Sound                Minor             Moderate                Substantial      Dilapidated        Total
 1678                107                  91                     11                 10               1901
 88.3%               5.6%                 4.8%                   0.6%               0.5%             100%
The updated survey demonstrates that the overall housing condition has improved for the City of
Jackson; however there are more dilapidated units in need of abatement. The 2011 results are still
representative of the City’s housing stock in 2014.
PLYMOUTH
There are four housing units in Plymouth in need of major rehabilitation. They are all currently
unoccupied.
SUTTER CREEK
There are currently no houses in the City of Sutter Creek that have noticed code violations. The
number of houses in need of minor to major rehabilitation is 6% and the percent of houses in need
of replacement is .004%.
In June 2014, a building permit was issued for a complete interior remodel of an older, creek side
home that was in need of repair. The issuance of building permits is common in Sutter Creek with
commercial and residential properties.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
State and federal law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on
the area (i.e., County) median income (AMI): extremely low (30% or less of AMI), very low (31-50%
of AMI), low (51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of
February 2015                                           2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                 City of Plymouth
                                                             A–20

   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
 AMI). Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing
 expenses.
 According to HCD and the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), housing
 is considered “affordable” if the monthly housing cost is no more than 30 percent of a household’s
 gross income. Table HE-23 shows current (2014) affordable rent levels and estimated affordable
 purchase and rental prices for jurisdictions in Amador County by income category for a family of
 four.
 Based on state-adopted standards, the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely low-income
 households in Amador County is $543, while the maximum affordable rent for very low-income
 households is $904.
 Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest
 rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association
 fees, property insurance rates, etc. However, home affordability was calculated assuming that a
 household of four can purchase a home with a 30-year fixed-interest mortgage and a 10% down
 payment, a 30% expense-to-income ratio, and 5.25 percent interest rate. With these assumptions, a
 four-person household in the extremely low-income category could, at maximum, afford a sales
 price of $104,255 for a home, while a very low-income household could afford a home costing
 $161,235. Table HE-23 shows affordable prices for all income levels.
                                         TABLE HE-23 HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
   Income                    HCD Income Limits                         Monthly Housing Costs             Maximum Affordable
     Group                                                                                                           Price
                           Max.                Affordable           Utilities1         Taxes and      Ownership2           Monthly
                          Annual            Total Monthly                           Insurance (for                          Rental3
                         Income                 Payment                             homeowners)
 Extremely
                        $ 21,700                   $ 543               $ 150             $ 61           $ 104,255            $ 393
 Low
 Very Low               $ 36,150                   $ 904               $ 150             $ 116          $ 161,235            $ 754
 Low                    $ 57,850                  $ 1,446              $ 150             $ 218          $ 182,045           $ 1,296
 Moderate               $ 86,750                  $ 2,169              $ 150             $ 397          $ 191,388           $ 2,019
Notes:
Assumes a four-person household.
1. Monthly utility costs are assumed as $75/person and $25 for each additional person.
2.Total affordable mortgage based a 10 percent down payment, an annual 5.25 percent interest rate, 30 year mortgage, and monthly payment
equal to 30 percent of income (after utilities, taxes, and insurance).
3. Monthly affordable rent based on 30 percent of income less estimated utilities costs.
Source: 2014 HCD income limits; http://www.realtor.com/home-finance/financial-calculators/
 Rental Prices. According to current data available on online rental listing websites including
 realtor.com, padmapper.com, and trulia.com, the current (2014) actual listings across jurisdictions
 ranged from $495 to $1,635 for a one-bedroom unit. Few (7) rentals were listed as of March 2014.
 The median rental price in Amador County according to realtor.com over the last year is $887.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                     February 2015
 City of Plymouth
                                                                      A–21

                    APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Based on this price, an extremely low-income household could not afford the average unit, but very
low-, low-, and moderate-income households could.
Home Sales Prices. The residential real estate market in Amador County jurisdictions has
experienced fairly steady home sales year over year in the last two years. Sales prices have also
proved fairly stable, as shown in Table HE-24. The California Association of Realtors (CAR)
publishes median monthly homes sales prices for each county in the state. According to the
association, the 2014 median home sales price in Amador County in February 2014 was $206,250,
eight percent lower than February 2013, but that the March 2014 average sales price was $214,280,
seven percent higher than the previous year.
Another source, DataQuick News, breaks down sales between resale homes and new homes, which
reveals that the median sales price for new homes dropped by as much as 18.4 percent over the last
year since March 2013, but that resale prices have increased by 26.2 percent. The fact that CAR data
combines new and resale transactions could be one reason for the monthly variations and lack of
clear trends in median home sales price in the CAR data.
With current sales prices, only above moderate-income households could afford to purchase an
existing market rate home in Amador County.
For a fuller picture, Table HE-25 also displays median sales prices of listed homes by jurisdiction
recorded by Trulia.com. Since it is only one listing source, this table only displays a segment of the
market. However, this table indicates that, among listings of homes over the last year, market-rate
homes in certain zip codes in unincorporated Amador County could be affordable to extremely low-
income households. Market-rate homes would also be affordable to low-income group households
in the cities of Plymouth and Ione.
                            TABLE HE-24 MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICE
                          Median Sales
                                                         2013            2014   Change
                                Price
                      February                      $225,000          $206,250 -8%
                      March                         $200,000          $214,280 7%
                     Source: California Association of Realtors 2014,
                     (Home Sales and Price Report, http://www.car.org/)
February 2015                                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                         A–22

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                   TABLE HE-25 LISTED MEDIAN SALES PRICES BY COUNTY
                  Jurisdiction                   Median Sales Price         Number of
                                              (March 2013–March 2014)         Listings
               Amador City                            $250,000                   11
               Ione                                   $179,500                    5
               Jackson                                $200,000                    1
               Plymouth                               $179,500                    7
               Sutter Creek                           $235,500                    3
               Unincorporated                         $146,000                   43
               Countywide                             $179,500                   66
              Source: Trulia.com, February 2014
Housing Vacancy. Vacancy trends in housing are analyzed using a “vacancy rate” which
establishes the relationship between housing supply and demand. For example, if the demand for
housing is greater than the supply, then the vacancy rate is probably low and the price of housing
will most likely increase. A vacancy rate of five percent suggests that there is a balance between the
demand and supply of housing. Generally, when the vacancy rate drops below five percent, the
demand for housing exceeds the supply of housing. Subsequently, prospective buyers and renters
may experience an increase in housing costs.
According to the DOF, in 2010 the total vacancy rate for Amador County was 19.2 percent, which
includes all types of housing in the county. However, more than half of these vacant units were
seasonal or recreation in nature. The county is tourism-oriented and thus is expected to have a high
number of seasonal units. Vacancy rates for the county, including only homeowner and rental units,
are 3% and 9% respectively. Thus, the County’s vacancy rate excluding seasonal use unit is
considered appropriate for stable housing prices. Table HE-26 shows the vacancy rates for each
jurisdiction by type of housing in Amador County.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                     A–23

                              APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                TABLE HE-26 HOUSING STOCK BY TYPE OF VACANCY
    Geography              Vacant      For   Rented,   For sale    Sold, not     Seasonal/        All     Vacancy
                            units     rent     not       only     occupied     recreational     other        rate
                                            occupied                                           vacant
 Amador
                            3,463      373     24        355          51           2,052         608        19.2%
 County
 Amador City                  23         3      0          4           0             11            5        21.3%
 Ione                        169        49      4         45           9             22           40        10.3%
 Jackson                     244        58      2         58           2             39           85        10.6%
 Plymouth                     90        20      2         11           2             30           25        18.3%
 Sutter Creek                199        93      1         17           1             45           42        14.6%
 Unincorporated             2,738      150     15        220          37           1,905         411        22.6%
Source: 2010 U.S. Census; (DP-1) ; DOF 2010
        SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
        Certain groups have greater difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to special
        circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one’s income, family characteristics, and
        disability status, among others. In Amador County, persons and households with special needs
        include seniors, families with children (large households and female-headed households with
        children) agricultural employees, persons with disabilities including developmental disabilities, and
        the homeless. This section analyzes these special needs groups and identifies resources and
        programs designed to address these needs.
        Senior Population and Households. Senior citizens are considered those individuals 65 or older
        in age. Seniors generally have special housing needs primarily resulting from physical disabilities and
        limitations, income, and health care costs. Additionally, senior households also have other needs to
        preserve their independence including supportive services to maintain their health and safety, in-
        home support services to perform activities of daily living, conservators to assist with personal care
        and financial affairs, public administration assistance to manage and resolve estate issues, and
        networks of care to provide a wide variety of services and daily assistance. In 2012, 21 percent of
        residents were senior citizens and roughly a third of households were headed by senior citizens, as
        shown in Table HE-27.
        February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           City of Plymouth
                                                       A–24

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                   TABLE HE-27 SENIOR HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS, 2012
               Location             Senior Citizens         Senior           Percent of Seniors with
                                                         Households                 Disability
     Amador County                 21%                33%                 30%
     Amador City                   7%                 12%                 45%
     Ione                          7%                 22%                 32%
     Jackson                       19%                27%                 50%
     Plymouth                      14%                32%                 44%
     Sutter Creek                  29%                36%                 20%
     Unincorporated                22%                35%                 24%
     County
    Source: 2008-2012 ACS (B25007, S0101)
As shown in Table HE-28, the large majority of seniors own rather than rent their home in
Amador County. This is true across all jurisdictions, although seniors are much more likely to rent in
Plymouth (26%) and Sutter Creek (25%) than in the rest of the county.
                         TABLE HE-28 SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                              Own                   Rent                   Total
                Location
                                       Number       Percent   Number     Percent    Number     Percent
    Amador County                    4,191          89%       509        11%        4,700      100%
    Amador City                      9              100%      0          0%         9          100%
    Ione                             280            92%       26         8%         306        100%
    Jackson                          437            82%       97         18%        534        100%
    Plymouth                         102            74%       36         26%        138        100%
    Sutter Creek                     321            75%       107        25%        428        100%
    Unincorporated County            3,042          93%       243        7%         3285       100%
    Source: 2007-2011 ACS (B25007)
Disabled Persons. According to the California Government Code, a “disability” includes, but is
not limited to, any physical or mental disability as defined in Section 12926. A “mental disability”
involves having any mental or psychological disorder or condition, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, or specific learning disabilities that limits a
major life activity. A “physical disability” involves having any physiological disease, disorder,
condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss that affects body systems including
neurological, immunological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory, speech organs,
cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine. In
addition, a mental or physical disability limits a major life activity by making the achievement of
major life activities difficult including physical, mental, and social activities and working.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                   A–25

                   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities could prevent a person from working, restrict a
person’s mobility, or make caring for oneself difficult. Therefore, disabled persons often require
special housing needs related to potential limited earning capacity, the lack of accessible and
affordable housing, and higher health costs associated with disabilities. Additionally, people with
disabilities require a wide range of different housing, depending on the type and severity of their
disability. Housing needs can range from institutional care facilities to facilities that support partial
or full independence (i.e., group care homes). Supportive services such as daily living skills and
employment assistance need to be integrated in the housing situation. The disabled person with a
mobility limitation requires housing that is physically accessible. Examples of accessibility in housing
include widened doorways and hallways, ramps, bathroom modifications (e.g., lowered countertops,
grab bars, adjustable shower heads), and special sensory devices including smoke alarms and flashing
lights.
Since there are no DOF, 2010 US Census, or reliable ACS data, 2000 US Census information is used
for this analysis.
According to the 2000 Census, an estimated 33 percent of Amador County residents (11,504
persons) had one or more disabilities. Of the county’s population aged 65 and older, approximately
39 percent had a disability (see Table HE-29). The distribution of residents with disabilities is
similar between the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county. According to HUD
CHAS data, nearly 34 percent of all households which include a person with a disability, experience
some kind of housing problem, including inadequate facilities, overcrowding, or paying more than
30 percent of their monthly income for housing.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                      City of Plymouth
                                               A–26

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
       TABLE HE-29 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BY AGE AND EMPLOYMENT STATUS
    Location                        Disabled Population                   Employment Characteristics
                          Total             Total           Total         Age 16–64,       Age 16–64,
                       Disabilities      Disabilities   Disabilities for   Employed      Not Employed
                                       for Ages 5-64     Ages 65 and     Persons with a  Persons with a
                                                            Over            Disability      Disability
Amador           #          74                52              22                24              12
City             %           -               70%             30%                 -               -
                 #        1060               744             316               236             154
Ione
                 %           -               70%             30%                 -               -
                 #        2124              1197             927               432             306
Jackson
                 %           -               56%             44%                 -               -
                 #         363               258             105               136              47
Plymouth
                 %           -               71%             29%                 -               -
Sutter           #         687               383             304               134              86
Creek            %           -               56%             44%                 -               -
Unincorpo        #        7,196             43,39           2,857             1,392           1,028
rated            %           -               60%             40%                 -               -
Amador           #       11,504             6,973           4,531             2,354           1,633
County
Total            %           -               61%             39%                 -               -
Source: US Census 2000
PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
SB 812 requires cities and counties to include the needs of individuals with a developmental
disability within the community in the special housing needs analysis. According to Section 4512 of
the Welfare and Institutions Code, a “developmental disability” means a disability that originates
before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which can include mental retardation, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently in a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where
supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally
disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
independence as an adult.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                      A–27

                    APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based
  services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through
  a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based
  facilities. The Valley Mountain Regional Center is one of 21 regional centers in California that
  provides point of entry to services for people with developmental disabilities. The center is a private,
  nonprofit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to
  individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. Table HE-30 provides information
  about Amador County’s population of developmentally disabled persons displayed by zip code.
          TABLE HE-30 DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY LIVING SITUATION BY ZIP CODE
   Jurisdiction        Zip      Community         Home       ICF    Independent        Other      SNF      Total
                      Code         Care          Parent/                Living
                                                Guardian
Amador City         95601             0              1        0            0             0         0          1
Ione                95640             6             31        0           20             0         0         57
Jackson             95642             2             30        0           19             0         2         53
Plymouth            95669             6              6        0            1             0         0         13
Sutter Creek        95685             1             20        0           10             0         0         31
Unincorporated      95629,
Amador County       95665,
                    95666,            5             38        0            3             0         0         46
                    95675,
                    95685
Amador County       -
                                     20            126        0           53             0         2        200
Total
Source: DDS 2014
  There are seven residential care facilities located in Amador County that provide assistance to
  persons with disabilities. The facilities have a combined capacity of 209 and are located in Ione,
  Jackson, and Sutter Creek (see Table HE-31).
  February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                 A–28

   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                              TABLE HE-31 SERVICES FOR THE DISABLED
         Location                             Name                                         Type           Capacity
1400 Marlette St.,           Beone Home Of Compassion                         Senior Residential Care     4
#66 Ione
155 Placer Drive,            Amador Residential Care Facility                 Assisted Living Residential 49
Jackson                                                                       Care
185 Placer Drive,            Jackson Gardens                                  Senior Residential Care     30
Jackson
223 New York Ranch           Oak Manor           Senior     Retirement        Assisted Living Residential 70
, Jackson                    Home                                             Care
15 Bryson Drive,             Gold Quartz Inn Retirement Home                  Assisted Living Residential 47
Sutter Creek                                                                  Care
280 Ursula, Sutter           Harrold Hospitality                              Senior Residential Care     6
Creek
210 Patricia Lane,           Patricia Gardens Assisted Living                 Assisted Living Residential 3
Sutter Creek                 Co., Llc                                         Care
18483 Davis Street,          Schwabe Residential Home                         Assisted Living Residential 4
Plymouth                                                                      Care
 Source: http://www.seniorcareauthority.com, accessed March 2014; and City of Plymouth 2014.
 Female-Headed Households. Female-headed households, especially those households with
 children under the age of 18 at home, generally have a higher ratio between their income and their
 living expenses (that is, living expenses take up a larger share of income than is generally the case in
 two-parent households). Therefore, finding affordable, decent, and safe housing is often more
 difficult for single-parent and female-headed households. Additionally, female-headed households
 have special needs involving access to day care or child care, health care, and other supportive
 services.
 According to 2011 ACS data, 15 percent (1,362 households) of all households in Amador County
 are female-headed households. Approximately half of those households have children under the age
 of 18. Additionally, there are 27 single-parent households in the County that are headed by a male
 with no female present and having related children under the age of 18 present in the home. Nearly
 a third of households in Jackson were female-headed, the highest percentage of the jurisdictions in
 the County. Table HE-32 shows breakdowns of female-headed households for all jurisdictions.
 A high proportion of female-headed and single-parent households have incomes below the poverty
 line. About three percent of female-headed households are also living below the poverty level in the
 county. Jackson has the highest percent of female-headed households in the county, 12 percent of all
 households, while the other cities and the unincorporated county have five percent of households
 under the poverty line.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                     February 2015
 City of Plymouth
                                                        A–29

                     APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                           TABLE HE-32 FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
              Location            With      Without             Total                 Under
                                Children    Children                                 Poverty
                                                                                      Level
                                                        Percent of                 Percent of
                                   Percent of all
                                                            all       Number            all
                                    Households
                                                       Households                 Households
         Amador
                                   8%          8%          15%         1,362            3%
         County
         Amador City               0%          0%           0%            0             0%
         Ione                     15%          5%          20%          200             4%
         Jackson                  20%          9%          29%          313            12%
         Plymouth                  5%          13%         18%           51             5%
         Sutter Creek             13%          2%          15%          108             4%
         Unincorporated            4%          7%          11%          690             3%
         Source: 2007-2011 ACS B17010)
Large Family Households. Large family households are defined as households of five or more
persons. Large family households are considered a special needs group because there is a limited
supply of adequately sized housing to accommodate their needs. The more persons in a household,
the more rooms are needed to accommodate that household. Specifically, a five-person household
would require three or four bedrooms, a six-person household would require four bedrooms, and a
seven-person household would require four to six bedrooms. Rental units, usually in multi-family
apartment style units, especially are rarely built with enough rooms to accommodate large families.
Since renting is often the most affordable option for low income families, this can become an issue
for larger low-income families.
Data from the 2007–2011 ACS indicates that 972 households in Amador County have five or more
persons (six percent) (see Table HE-15 above). There were 666 large owner households, compared
with 306 renter households.
Large households are defined by HCD to have five or more members. Large households may have
special housing needs, requiring units with more rooms than might typically be available in order to
avoid overcrowded conditions. Large households make up a very small number (less than six
percent) of households in most of the county), but this varies significantly by jurisdiction. Ione and
Plymouth each have large households that make up more than 10 percent of all households in their
jurisdiction.
Agricultural Workers. Agricultural workers earn their primary income through permanent or
seasonal agricultural labor. The 2007 Agricultural Census indicates that there were 616 farmworkers
in Amador County, as shown in Table HE-33.
February 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                  A–30

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Farmworker labor need is frequently seasonal in nature. Therefore, housing needs vary drastically
based on the time of year. As shown in Table HE-34, 60 farms are operational most of the year in
Amador County, but another 87 only operate less than 150 days out of the year.
The county has approved permits for farm labor quarters in unincorporated areas of the county.
However, considering the number of laborers employed in this occupation, it is believed that
additional specialized housing is needed for this group in the incorporated and unincorporated areas
of Amador County.
                        TABLE HE-33 HIRED FARM LABOR, FARMWORKERS
          I==_±==-=~~ Farms
                        120
                                                        Workers
                                                          616
           Source: 2007 USDA Agricultural Census http://www.usda.gov/fundinglapse.htm
                                                                                          _I
                                                                                        $1,000 payroll
                                                                                            3,854
                   TABLE HE-34 SEASONAL FARMWORKERS BY DAYS WORKED
                                                150 Days or More
                              Farms                                                  60
                             Workers                                                N/A
                                       Farms with 10 or More Workers
                              Farms                                                  3
                             Workers                                                 47
                                              Fewer than 150 Days
                              Farms                                                  87
                             Workers                                                N/A
           Source: 2007 USDA Agricultural Census http://www.usda.gov/fundinglapse.htm
Homeless Persons. Homeless individuals and families have some of the most immediate housing
need of any group. They also have one of the most difficult sets of housing needs to meet, due to
both the diversity and complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness and due to community
opposition to the siting of facilities that serve homeless clients. California law requires that housing
elements estimate the need for emergency shelter for homeless people.
Point-in-time homelessness surveys were conducted in 2011 and 2012 for 3526 Continuum of Care of
which Amador County is a participating member. The survey resulted in a combined homeless
count for Tuolumne, Calaveras, and Amador Counties. The survey found that there were 204
homeless individuals in 2012, an increase from the 181 counted in 2011, as shown in Table HE-35.
Of these, 62 percent were found in unsheltered locations, and 45 percent were considered to be
chronically homeless. The surveys did not collect Plymouth specific information however, according
to City staff there are no homeless persons in Plymouth as of Fall 2014.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                       A–31

                         APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  TABLE HE-35 HOMELESS NEEDS: TUOLUMNE, CALAVERAS, AND AMADOR COUNTIES
                                      Individual              Persons in Families                   2011              2012
                                   2011         2012           2011           2012
    Total Homeless                  181          204            217            175
    Total Sheltered                 28            43            109             67
    Total
                                    161          161            108            108
   Unsheltered
                                                     Total Chronically Homeless                       85                78
                                                     Total Chronically Sheltered                      13                 6
                                                   Total Chronically Unsheltered                      72                72
  Note: Numbers are provided for the 3526 Continuum of Care for which Amador is a participating member. Numbers represent homeless
  needs for the total Continuum of Care area.
  Source: Continuum of Care, August 2012 Point in Time Homelessness Count
There are currently 204 facilities in the combined Continuum of Care region that provide programs
or shelters to provide support for the homeless (see Table HE-36). Senior Citizens Services-
Community Action is a homeless shelter located in Jackson. The following also provide services for
the homeless population in Amador County:
    Ione Family Learning Center
    The Resource Connection
    Amador County Alcohol and Drug Services
    Amador County Administrators Office
    Senior Citizens Services - Community Action: Amador County Homeless Shelter
      TABLE HE-36 HOMELESS FACILITIES IN TUOLUMNE, CALAVERAS, AND AMADOR
                                                        COUNTIES
                                                    Population                                           Current
                       Facility Type                                   Permanent/Seasonal
                                                      Served                                              Bed #
                                                                            Year round/0
                   Emergency Shelter                    102                                                102
                                                                                seasonal
                  Transitional Housing                   84                   Permanent                     84
                    Rapid Re-housing                      6                   Permanent                      6
                Permanent Supportive
                                                         13                   Permanent                     13
                          Housing
           Source: Continuum of Care or HUD; www.hudhre.info https://www.onecpd.info/reports/CoC_HIC_State_CA_2012.pdf
February 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                         City of Plymouth
                                                          A–32

          APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
        3.0 HOUSING RESOURCES AND INCENTIVES
        Affordable Housing Projects in Amador County. The County has several designated affordable
        apartment complexes (see Table HE-37) receiving funding through the USDA Rural Development
        Program, HUD Section 8 or Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC).
                                   TABLE HE-37 ASSISTED MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
                                                                     Low
                                               Expiration                          Total                    Funding
        Name               Location                               Income                        Type
                                                  Date                             Units                Agency/Program
                                                                    Units
                                                                                                        LIHTC, USDA rural
  Jose's Place          154 N. Arroyo
                                               3/17/2040              44            44         Seniors development rental
  Apartments              Seco, Ione
                                                                                                              assist
  Jackson                                                                                               LIHTC, USDA rural
                        1029 N. Main                                                             non-
  Cornerstone                                  2/25/2034              62            64                 development rental
                       Street, Jackson                                                        targeted
  Apartments                                                                                                  assist
  Kennedy               701 New York
                                                                                                Large
  Meadows               Ranch Road,            8/17/2020              55            56                        LIHTC
                                                                                               Family
  Apartments               Jackson
                        300 New York
  Jackson Hills                                                                                  non-
                        Ranch Road,            7/31/2031              85            86                 HUD Section 8, LIHTC
  Apartments                                                                                  targeted
                           Jackson
                          401 Clinton
  The Meadows                                  6/30/2016              27            30         Seniors  HUD Preservation
                       Road, Jackson
                                                                                                           USDA rural
  Meadows II           900 Broadway,                                                             non-
                                               9/14/2024              32            34                 development rental
  Apartments               Jackson                                                            targeted
                                                                                                              assist
                        451 Sutter Hills                                                                LIHTC, USDA rural
  Sutter Hill                                                                                    non-
                         Road, Sutter           6/1/2036              43            44                 development rental
  Place                                                                                       targeted
                            Creek                                                                             assist
Source: CHPC http://www.chpc.net/preservation/MappingWidget.html, compiled by PMC, April 2014
        At-Risk Housing. The Housing Element law in the California Government Code (Section 65583)
        requires all jurisdictions to include a study of all low-income housing units which may at some future
        time be lost to the affordable inventory by the expiration of affordability restrictions. There are three
        general cases that create the opportunity for the conversion of affordable units:
        1)      Prepayment of HUD mortgages Section 221(d)(3), Section 202, and Section 236.
        2)      Opt-outs and expirations of project-based Section 8 contracts.
        3)      Other cases.
        A prepayment of HUD mortgages Section 221(d)(3) involves a privately held project with HUD
        providing either below-market interest rate loans or market-rate loans with subsidy to the tenants. In
        a Section 236 complex, HUD provides assistance to the owner to reduce the costs for tenants by
        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                  February 2015
        City of Plymouth
                                                               A–33

                   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
paying most of the interest on a market-rate mortgage. Additional rental subsidy may be provided to
the tenant. In a Section 202, HUD provides a direct loan to nonprofit organizations for project
development and rent subsidy for low-income tenants. All Section 202 handicapped units (Section
202 H.C.) are designed for physically handicapped, mentally disabled, and chronically mentally ill
residents.
In a Section 8 contract for new construction or substantial rehabilitation, HUD provides a subsidy
to the owner for the difference between the tenant’s ability to pay and the contract rent. The
likelihood for opt-outs increases as the market rents exceed the contract rents.
Other cases that create the opportunity for the conversion of affordable housing includes the
expiration of low-income use periods of various financing sources, such as LIHTC, bond financing,
density bonuses, California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) and CDBG and HOME funds, and
redevelopment funds.
There are two affordable housing complexes in Amador County at risk of losing affordability
restrictions during the 10 years starting from the beginning of the 5th cycle Housing Element
planning period: the Kennedy Meadows Apartments and The Meadows, with a total of 82
affordable units. Both are located in Jackson. Below is a cost analysis of preserving the “at-risk”
units.
Preservation and Replacement Options
Overview
To maintain the existing affordable housing stock, the City of Jackson can either preserve the
existing assisted units or facilitate the development of new units. Depending on the circumstances of
at-risk projects, different options may be used to preserve or replace the units. Preservation options
typically include (1) transfer of project to nonprofit ownership; (2) provision of rental assistance to
tenants using non-federal funding sources; and (3) purchase of affordability covenants. In terms of
replacement, the most direct option is the development of new assisted multi-family housing units.
These options are described below.
Transfer of Ownership
Transferring ownership of an at-risk project to a nonprofit housing provider is generally one of the
least costly ways to ensure that at-risk units remain affordable for the long term. By transferring
property ownership to a nonprofit organization, low-income restrictions can be secured indefinitely
and the project would become potentially eligible for a greater range of governmental assistance.
Both the at-risk complexes could potentially be acquired by nonprofit agencies to maintain the
affordability of units.
February 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                 A–34

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The current market value of the project was estimated using information from multi-family sales
listings in Amador County as of April 2014. The average cost to purchase a multi-family
development was $86,250 per unit. There are 82 units at risk of converting to market rate between
the two complexes within 10 years. Therefore, if all of these were purchased, the estimated cost of
acquiring these would be $7,072,500.
Rental Assistance
Rental subsidies using non-federal (state, local, or other) funding sources can be used to maintain
affordability of the 82 at-risk affordable units. These rent subsidies can be structured to mirror the
federal Section 8 program. Under Section 8, HUD pays the difference between what tenants can pay
(defined as 30 percent of household income) and what HUD estimates as the fair market rent on the
unit. In Amador County, the 2014 fair market rent is determined to be $775 for a one-bedroom unit,
$1,048 for a two-bedroom unit, and $1,391 for a three-bedroom unit (The Meadows offers one-,
two-, and three-bedroom units while the Kennedy Meadows offers two- and three-bedroom units).
The feasibility of this alternative is highly dependent on the availability of other funding sources
necessary to make rent subsidies available and the willingness of property owners to accept rental
vouchers if they can be provided. As indicated in Table HE-38, the total cost of subsidizing the
rents for all 82 at-risk units is estimated at $35,016 per month or $420,192 annually.
                        TABLE HE-38 ESTIMATED RENTAL SUBSIDIES REQUIRED
                                 Fair                             Very Low             Affordable          Monthly        Total
    Unit          Total                        Household
                              Market                               Income                Cost –             per Unit    Monthly
    Size          Units                           Size
                                Rent1                            (50% AMI) 2            Utilities3          Subsidy     Subsidy
  1 br              7           $775                1              $25,350                 $559              $216        $1,512
  2 br             67         $1,048                2              $28,950                 $624              $424       $28,408
  3 br              8         $1,391                4              $36,150                 $754              $637        $5,096
  Total            82                                                                                                   $35,016
1. Fair market rent is determined by HUD for different jurisdictions/areas across the United States on an annual basis.
2. 2014 Household Income limits based on 2014 Income Limits from HCD. In Amador County, the median family income in 2014 was
calculated to be $72,300 for a family of four.
3. Affordable cost = 30% of household monthly income minus estimated utility allowance of $100 for a one-bedroom unit, $150 for a two-
bedroom unit, and $200 for a three-bedroom unit.
Source: Data compiled by PMC(2014)
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                A–35

                   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Purchase of Affordability Covenants
Another option to preserve the affordability of at-risk projects is to provide an incentive package to
the owners to maintain the projects as affordable housing. Incentives could include writing down
the interest rate on the remaining loan balance and/or supplementing the Section 8 subsidy received
to market levels. The feasibility of this option depends on whether the complex is too highly
leveraged. By providing lump sum financial incentives or ongoing subsidies in the form of rents or
reduced mortgage interest rates to the owner, the City of Jackson can ensure that some or all of the
units remain affordable.
Construction of Replacement Units
The construction of new affordable housing units is a means of replacing the at-risk units should
they be converted to market-rate units. The cost of developing housing depends on a variety of
factors, including density, size of the units (i.e., square footage and number of bedrooms), location,
land costs, and type of construction. Assuming an average construction cost of $132,200 per unit, it
would cost over $10.8 million to construct 82 new assisted units.1 Including land costs, the total
costs to develop replacement units will be significantly higher.
Cost Comparisons
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at-risk units under various
options. The cost of acquiring The Meadows and Kennedy Meadows Apartments projects and
transferring ownership to another nonprofit organization is high ($2.6 million). In comparison, the
annual costs of providing rental subsidies required to preserve the 56 assisted units are relatively low
($205,176). However, long-term affordability of the units cannot be ensured in this manner. The
option of constructing 82 replacement units is very high ($10.8 million, including land costs) and
constrained by a variety of factors, including land costs and potential community opposition. The
best option to preserve the at-risk units appears to be the purchase of affordability covenants.
Resources for Preserving Assisted Rental Housing
Organizations and Resources
The preservation of affordable rental housing at risk of conversion to market-rate housing can be
assisted by nonprofit organizations with the capacity and interest in acquiring, managing, and
permanently preserving such housing. HCD maintains a list of such interested nonprofit
organizations. Several have expressed an interest in preserving affordable rental housing in Amador
County. These organizations are shown in Table HE 39 below. Following the table is a list of
resources and mechanisms for affordable housing that Amador County jurisdictions may want to
pursue or implement.
1
  Average construction cost based on costs described in Appendix B: Constraints
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                  A–36

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
     TABLE HE-39 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS INTERESTED IN ACQUIRING AT-RISK
                                              HOUSING
  Christian Church Homes of Northern                 303 Hegenberger Road,
                                                                                     Oakland
  California, Inc.                                   Suite 201
  Community Housing Improvement Program,
                                                     1001 Willow Street              Chico
  Inc.
                                                     3120 Freeboard Drive, Suite     West
  Mercy Housing Corporation
                                                     202                             Sacramento
  Regional Housing Authority of Sutter &
                                                     448 Garden Highway              Yuba City
  Nevada Counties
   Resources and Incentives for Affordable Housing. Efforts by the County to assist in the
    development, rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing would utilize organizational
    and financial types of resources. The following programs include local, state, and federal housing
    programs that are valuable resources in assisting in the development of affordable housing,
    preserving at-risk housing, and for housing rehabilitation.
   Density Bonus Ordinances: Jurisdictions in Amador County provide for density bonuses
    consistent with state law (most have density bonuses codified in an ordinance). While the exact
    qualifications of the bonus vary, housing density bonuses are offered for lower- and very low-
    income and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 and 65917.
    Cities are required to grant a density bonus of at least 25 percent above the base zoning density
    and one additional concession or incentive. The provisions of the density bonus apply to all new
    residential developments in the county.
   HOME Program: The Home Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) was created under
    the Cranston Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act enacted in November 1990. HOME
    funds are awarded annually as formula grants to participating jurisdictions. HUD establishes
    Home Investment Trust Funds for each grantee, providing a line of credit that the jurisdiction
    may draw upon as needed. The program’s flexibility allows states and local governments to use
    HOME funds for grants, direct loans, loan guarantees or other forms of credit enhancement, or
    rental assistance or security deposits.
         The HOME Investment Partnership Act is another HUD program that is designed to
         improve and increase the supply of affordable housing. Local jurisdictions are eligible for at
         least $500,000 under the formula. Local jurisdictions can also apply to the state for a portion
         of the state’s formula allocation. Each of the five jurisdictions applies for state allocation
         funds through to HCD and the grants are awarded on a competitive basis. HOME funds
         may be used for housing rehabilitation, new construction, and acquisition and rehabilitation
         for both single-family and multifamily projects.
   Public Housing Authority (PHA): Amador County does not have a local PHA; the nearest
    PHA is in neighboring El Dorado County. Therefore, the Stanislaus County Housing Authority
    administers the Section 8 program through the Housing Assistance Program for Amador
    County and six surrounding counties.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                A–37

                  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): HUD awards CDBG funds annually to
   entitlement jurisdictions and states for general housing and community development activities,
   including housing construction, housing rehabilitation, public services, and economic
   development activities. HUD also offers various other programs that can be utilized by the cities
   and nonprofit and for-profit agencies for the preservation of low-income housing units such as
   Section 202 and Section 108 loan guarantees.
  Community Reinvestment Act (CRA): The CRA, enacted by Congress in 1977, is intended to
   encourage depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of the communities in which
   they operate, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safe and
   sound banking operations. The CRA requires that each insured depository institution’s record in
   helping meet the credit needs of its entire community be evaluated periodically. That record is
   taken into account in considering an institution’s application for deposit facilities, including
   mergers and acquisitions.
       The CRA has come to play an increasingly important role in improving access to credit in
       communities, both rural and urban. Under the impetus of the CRA, many banks and thrifts
       opened new branches, provided expanded services, and made substantial commitments to
       increase lending to all segments of society. By evaluating a financial institution’s lending
       practices, any practices that are considered discriminating because of race, sex, or income
       can be removed and thus improve access to loans for all persons in Amador County.
  Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program (LIHTC): In 1986, Congress created the federal
   low-income housing tax credit to encourage private investment in the acquisition, rehabilitation,
   and construction of low-income rental housing.
       Because high housing costs in California make it difficult, even with federal credits, to
       produce affordable rental housing, the California legislature created a state low-income
       housing tax credit program to supplement the federal credit.
       The state credit is essentially identical to the federal credit. State credits are only available to
       projects receiving federal credits. Twenty percent of federal credits are reserved for rural
       areas and 10 percent for nonprofit sponsors. To compete for the credit, rental housing
       developments have to reserve units at affordable rents to households at or below 46 percent
       of AMI. The assisted units must be reserved for the target population for 55 years.
       The federal tax credit provides a subsidy over 10 years toward the cost of producing a unit.
       Developers sell these tax benefits to investors for their present market value to provide
       upfront capital to build the units.
       Credits can be used to fund the hard and soft costs (excluding land costs) of the acquisition,
       rehabilitation, or new construction of rental housing. Projects not receiving other federal
       subsidy receive a federal credit of nine percent per year for 10 years and a state credit of 30
       percent over four years (high cost areas and qualified census tracts get increased federal
       credits). Projects with a federal subsidy receive a four percent federal credit each year for 10
       years and a 13 percent state credit over four years.
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                 A–38

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
  California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA): CHFA offers permanent financing for
   acquisition and rehabilitation to for-profit, nonprofit, and public agency developers seeking to
   preserve at-risk housing units. In addition, CHFA offers low interest predevelopment loans to
   nonprofit sponsors through its acquisition/rehabilitation program.
  Federal Home Loan Bank System: The federal Home Loan Bank System facilitates
   Affordable Housing Programs (AHP), which subsidize the interest rates for affordable housing.
   The San Francisco Federal Home Loan Bank District provides local service within California.
   Interest rate subsidies under the AHP can be used to finance the purchase, construction, and/or
   rehabilitation of rental housing. Very low-income households must occupy at least 20 percent of
   the units for the useful life of the housing or the mortgage term.
  California Department of Housing and Community Development: HCD conducts the
   Urban Predevelopment Loan Program, which provides funds to pay the initial costs of
   preserving existing affordable housing developments for their existing tenants. Priority is given
   to applications with matching financing from local redevelopment agencies or federal programs.
       HCD also conducts the acquisition and rehabilitation component of the Multifamily
       Housing Program to acquire and rehabilitate existing affordable rental housing. Priority is
       given to projects currently subject to regulatory restrictions that may be terminated.
       Assistance is provided through low interest construction and permanent loans. Eligible
       applicants include local government agencies, private nonprofit organizations, and for-profit
       organizations.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                A–39

                  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                         A–40

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Various interrelated factors can constrain the ability of the private and public sectors to provide
adequate housing and meet the housing needs for all economic segments of the community. These
factors can be divided into two categories: (1) non-governmental and (2) governmental. Non-
governmental constraints consist of land availability, the environment, vacancy rates, land cost,
construction costs, and availability of financing. Governmental constraints consist of land use
controls, development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code enforcement, site
improvement costs, development permit and approval processing, and provision for a variety of
housing.
In general, non-governmental constraints are consistent across the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth,
Sutter Creek, and the unincorporated area of Amador County. Therefore, unless otherwise stated,
the non-governmental constraints section applies to all the jurisdictions covered by this analysis.
Governmental constraints are specific to each jurisdiction and therefore are completed in their
entirety for each participating jurisdiction.
JOINT NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
LAND COSTS
The cost of raw, developable land creates a direct impact on the cost for a new home and is
considered a possible constraint. A higher cost of land raises the price of a new home. Therefore,
developers sometimes seek to obtain approvals for the largest number of lots allowable on a parcel
of land. Residential land costs in Amador County as of April 2014 are shown in Table HE-40
Residentially zoned land ranged from just under $4,000 per acre to over $100,000 per acre,
depending on lot location and improvements needed for development. Some parcels include utility
services and roads while others would need to develop this type of infrastructure in order to support
residential development. The average price of land was just over $25,000 per acre.
                                                       TABLE HE-40
                                    AMADOR COUNTY VACANT LAND COSTS
           Parcel Size (Acres)1                                          Price                      Price per Acre
  277                                                                                   $3,000,000             $10,830
  69                                                                                      $330,000              $4,783
  63                                                                                    $1,400,000             $22,222
  40                                                                                      $150,000              $3,750
  30.36                                                                                 $3,313,000            $109,124
  14.65                                                                                   $200,000             $13,652
  11.05                                                                                     $55,000             $4,977
  10.6                                                                                    $125,000             $11,792
  3.65                                                                                    $185,000             $50,685
Source: www.loopnet.com, April 2014, Note: 1Each row in this table represents a single parcel
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                              B–1

 :~                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
CONSTRUCTION AND LABOR COSTS
Factors that affect the cost of building a house include the type of construction, materials, site
conditions, finishing details, amenities, and structural configuration. An Internet source of
construction cost data (www.building-cost.net), provided by the Craftsman Book Company,
estimates the cost of a single-story four-cornered home in Amador County to be approximately $136
per square foot. This cost estimate is based on a 1,600-square-foot house of good quality
construction including a two-car garage and central heating and air conditioning. The total
construction costs excluding land costs are estimated at approximately $211,258. Based on analysis
in the Stanislaus County Housing Element and a typical multi-family 900-square-foot apartment
based on analysis provided by Amador County, a typical cost of construction for multi-family is
$133 per square foot resulting in a construction cost of $119,700.
If labor or material costs increased substantially, the cost of construction in Amador County could
rise to a level that impacts the price of new construction and rehabilitation. Therefore, increased
construction costs have the potential to constrain new housing construction and rehabilitation of
existing housing, but are not a constraint at this time.
AVAILABILITY OF FINANCING
The cost of borrowing money to finance the construction of housing or to purchase a house affects
the amount of affordably priced housing in Amador County. Fluctuating interest rates can eliminate
many potential homebuyers from the housing market or render a housing project that could have
been developed at lower interest rates infeasible. When interest rates decline, sales increase. The
reverse is true when interest rates increase. Over the past decade, there was dramatic growth in
alternative mortgage products, including graduated mortgages and variable rate mortgages. These
types of loans allow homeowners to take advantage of lower initial interest rates and to qualify for
larger home loans. However, variable rate mortgages are not ideal for low- and moderate-income
households that live on tight budgets. In addition, the availability of variable rate mortgages has
declined in the last few years due to greater regulation of housing lending markets. Variable rate
mortgages may allow lower-income households to enter into homeownership, but there is a definite
risk of monthly housing costs rising above the financial means of that household. Therefore, the
fixed interest rate mortgage remains the preferred type of loan, especially during periods of low,
stable interest rates. Table HE-41 illustrates interest rates as of April 2014. The table presents both
the interest rate and annual percentage rate (APR) for different types of home loans. The interest
rate is the percentage of an amount of money which is paid for its use for a specified time, and the
APR is the yearly percentage rate that expresses the total finance charge on a loan over its entire
term. The APR includes the interest rate, fees, points, and mortgage insurance and is therefore a
more complete measure of a loan's cost than the interest rate alone. However, the loan's interest
rate, not its APR, is used to calculate the monthly principal and interest payment.
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                  B–2

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                       TABLE HE-41
                                        CONFORMING LOAN INTEREST RATES
                           Term                                          Interest             APR
  30-year fixed                                                          4.375%             4.460%
  15-year fixed                                                          3.625%             3.772%
  5-year adjustable rate                                                 3.250%             3.001%
Source: www.wellsfargo.com, April 2014
Notes: Conforming loan is for no more than $417,000. A jumbo loan is greater than $417,000.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Hazards
Flooding
According to the Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan, portions of Amador County have
always been at risk to flooding because of its high annual percentage of rainfall, the number of
watercourses that traverse the county, and the location of development adjacent to flood-prone
areas. Flooding events generally occur countywide, and have caused significant damage in the
western portion of the county near population centers, especially in the incorporated areas
surrounding the cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek. Flooding has occurred, both within the
100-year floodplain and in other localized areas. Many waterways converge in this area of the county
increasing the flood risk. In Plymouth and the surrounding area, flooding is associated with Big
Indian Creek and Little Indian Creek. Figure 1 displays the most flood-prone areas of Amador
County.
The 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan identifies how flooding hazards are documented in Amador
County through a number of efforts, including:
         Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Plain Mapping: FEMA established
          standards for floodplain mapping studies as part of the National Flood Insurance Program
          (NFIP). The NFIP makes flood insurance available to property owners in participating
          communities adopting FEMA-approved local floodplain studies, maps, and regulations.
          Floodplain studies that may be approved by FEMA include federally funded studies; studies
          developed by state, city, and regional public agencies; and technical studies generated by
          private interests as part of property annexation and land development efforts. Such studies
          may include entire stream reaches or limited stream sections depending on the nature and
          scope of a study. These studies lead to Flood Insurance Rate Maps for floodplain
          management, which delineates 100- and 500-year floodplains, floodways, and the locations
          of selected cross sections used in the hydraulic analysis and local floodplain regulations.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                             B–3

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Department of Water Resources (DWR) Best Available Maps: The Best Available Maps were
developed pursuant to Senate Bill (SB) 5 which requires DWR to develop preliminary maps for the
100- and 200-year floodplains located within the Sacramento-San Joaquin Valley watershed. These
maps were developed by DWR to better reflect the most accurate information about the flooding
potential in a community and were designed to provide a better understanding of the true risk of
flooding to public safety and property. The new maps, compiled using information from state, local
and federal agencies, have no regulatory status for floodplain development and are for information
only. They do not replace existing FEMA regulatory floodplain maps
The flood maps from these efforts are used to determine parcel by parcel development potential in
Appendix C Land Inventory. For more information on flood hazards in Amador County and its
incorporated cities, see the Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan.
Faults
The Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan notes that Amador County is located in less
seismically active areas compared to other more seismically active areas in California. Amador
County itself is traversed by the Foothills fault system, a complex series of northwest-trending faults
that are related to the Sierra Nevada uplift, and whose activity is little understood, running from
about Oroville in the north to east of Fresno in the south. This system contains the closest and most
potentially significant faults in the area, and includes the potentially active or active Bear Mountains
fault, Melones fault, and Cleveland Hills fault, among others. The California Division of Mines and
Geology Open File Report 84-52 (1994) reports that special seismic zoning is not recommended for
the fault system as the individual faults of the system are either poorly defined at the surface or lack
evidence of Holocene (recent) faulting.
The 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan also notes that western Amador County may experience ground
shaking from distant major to great earthquakes on faults to the west and east. For example, to the
west, both the San Andreas fault (source of the 8.0 estimated Richter magnitude San Francisco
earthquake that caused damage in Sacramento in 1906) and the closer Hayward fault have the
potential for experiencing major to great events (i.e., >6.7). In 2004 the US Geological Survey
estimated that there is a 62 percent probability of at least one 6.7 or greater magnitude earthquake
occurring that could cause widespread damage in the greater San Francisco Bay area before 2032.
Local and state building codes provide minimum standards for buildings to mitigate seismically
induced damage. Specific parcels are analyzed for seismic-related constraints in Appendix C Land
Inventory. For more Amador County seismic hazard information, see the Amador County 2013 Hazard
Mitigation Plan.
February 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                  B–4

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                         FIGURE 1 FEMA FLOOD ZONES
     ...0
     z
     w
     :.
     <
     "'
     "'<
     "'
                                                                    legend
                                                          CALAVERAS D   Amador County
                                                                    C   Other County
                                                                    FEMA Flood Zone Type
                                                                        100 Year Flood Zone
                                                                    -   500 Year Flood Zone
                                                                              Amador County
                                                                                         -
                                                                           FEMA Flood Zones
          MiLES
                                                                                      PM C
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                   B–5

:~                                         APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
This page intentionally left blank
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                   B–6

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Adequate Infrastructure
This section provides general and jurisdiction-specific assessments of domestic water and
wastewater capacity. To comply with SB 1087, the participating jurisdictions will immediately
forward this adopted Housing Element to their respective water and wastewater providers so they
can grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include units affordable to
lower-income households.
Domestic Water Service
Nearly all of the domestic water in Amador County is supplied by the Amador Water Agency
(AWA). The AWA has the legal jurisdiction to serve water throughout Amador County and provides
retail water connections (water sold directly to local consumers) and wholesale water connections
(water sold to a third party which distributes purchased water to its own local customers). In 2011,
the AWA prepared the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP); the assessment in this
section is taken from the UWMP. The primary source of water is the Mokelumne River watershed
which supplies the AWA’s main water systems: the Amador Water System (AWS) and the Central
Amador Water Project (CAWP). Lake Camanche Village and La Mel Heights are served primarily
through groundwater. There are a total of 7,465 water service connections in the AWA’s service
area, not including wholesale entity customers. The AWA has four general service areas: the Amador
Water System, the Central Amador Water Project System, La Mel Heights, and Lake Camanche
Village.
The AWS was formerly owned and operated by Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) and currently
serves the areas of Jackson, Martell, Sutter Creek, Sutter Hill, Ione, Amador City, Plymouth and
Drytown. The AWA has two water treatment plants at Sutter Hill and Ione, but also serves raw
(untreated) water from the Amador Canal to customers between Lake Tabeaud and Sutter Hill, and
Sutter Hill and Ione.
The CAWP system provides wholesale water to the communities of First Mace Meadows Water
Association, Pine Grove Community Services District (CSD), and Rabb Park CSD. The CAWP
system is also used to provide retail water to Mace Meadows Unit #1 (CSA #2), Sunset Heights,
Jackson Pines, C.Y.A. Pine Grove Camp, Pine Acres, Ranch House, Pioneer, Ridgeway Pines, Silver
Lake Pines, Sierra Highlands, Buckhorn, Red Coral, River View, Pine Park East, Gayla Manor, and
Toma Lane.
The Lake Camanche Village is a major subdivision consisting of several units (subdivisions) in
western Amador County. The AWA supplies both water and wastewater services to this area, with
water supplies coming from groundwater rather than the Mokelumne River (as with the other two
service areas).
The UWMP forecasts year 2020 water supply and demand (2020 is the closest year to the end of this
Housing Element’s planning period in the UWMP), which is presented in Table HE-42. The water
estimates provided below are presented in the UWMP for normal, single-dry, and multiple dry years.
The UWMP shows that at the county level, substantial water exists beyond the demand and
therefore there is no supply constraint to housing development. However, there are specific issues
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                B–7

                                                         APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
with water treatment that affect each jurisdiction’s ability to provide water and could potentially
constrain residential development. These issues are identified below.
         TABLE HE-42               AMADOR WATER AGENCY WATER SUPPLY AND DEMAND
                                                             2020 Water Totals (Acre Feet per Year)
 Supply Totals (AFY)                                                        17,469
 Demand Totals (AFY)                                                        10,498
 Difference (AFY)                                                            6,971
Source: Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan 2011
Amador County
The AWA provides treated water directly to customers within its service area, and provides
wholesale treated water to the City of Jackson through the AWS. The sites inventoried in this
Housing Element lie within the service areas of both AWS and the City of Jackson, but AWS is the
wholesale supplier for the City of Jackson, and regardless of the retail provider of water to the sites,
AWS would be the ultimate water source.
Although adequate amounts of raw water are available, the availability of new water service
connections in both the AWA service area and the City of Jackson is restricted by limited capacity at
the Tanner Water Treatment Plant (WTP) in Sutter Creek. According to Amador County staff
(2014), the current capacity of the Tanner Treatment Plant is 6.0 million gallons per day (MGD); the
current usage is approximately 5.6 MGD with “will serve” commitments already issued for the
remaining capacity. Based on the “will serve” commitments that the AWA has already made, all of
the existing capacity of the Tanner Treatment Plant has been allocated. Amador County staff noted
that CSDs will need to be created to fund plant expansions.
City of Ione
The domestic water system for the City of Ione is owned and operated by the AWA and serves the
city and surrounding area from a 2.5 MGD treatment plant. The State of California has reserved
1.33 MGD of treatment plant capacity for its facilities (Mule Creek Prison, Preston School of
Industry, and CALFIRE); the remaining 1.2 MGD is for residential, industrial, public, and
commercial use. This facility is nearing capacity, although recent improvements to the facility and
completion of a new water storage tank have provided near-term capacity improvements.
The AWA is in the process of developing a plan for increasing the availability of domestic water to
the Ione area. A multitude of options are being investigated, including a new regional treatment
facility at Tanner (which would replace the Ione WTP), improvements to the local treatment facility,
or some combination of the two. The AWA is in the beginning stages of an analysis to determine
the interim improvements that can be constructed at the Ione WTP and the associated costs per
equivalent development unit (by specific interim improvement). The AWA is also considering
creation of a community facilities district to pay for construction of the new Tanner WTP.
February 2015                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                      City of Plymouth
                                                       B–8

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City will continue to work collaboratively with the AWA to identify both short- and long-term
viable and cost-effective solutions to maintaining potable water availability in the City (Action H-
2.2.3).
City of Jackson
The AWA provides treated water directly to customers within its service area, and provides
wholesale treated water to the City of Jackson through the AWS. As mentioned above, limited
treatment capacity at the Tanner WTP has the potential to constrain development and the AWA is
taking steps to increase capacity and lift those constraints.
City of Plymouth
The City’s primary water supply is the Plymouth Pipeline from AWA in Sutter Creek. This facility
was placed into service in the spring of 2010. The pipeline’s capacity is 1.331 MGD, slightly more
than double the City’s current demand. The City’s wells and treatment plant are being maintained as
a backup source for emergencies and possible peak demands. Significant improvements to the
treatment facility, as well as an amendment to the City’s 2010 Water System Permit, would be
required to make the facility and wells a regular water source. The 2010 permit also removed a state-
imposed moratorium on new water connections that was in place for many years.
The City’s agreement with the AWA requires that properties requiring new connections (or increases
in meter size) first go through the “will serve” process with the AWA. The process includes payment
of capital facility fees and is dependent on the AWA having treatment capacity at the Tanner WTP
in Sutter Creek. This facility is currently at or near capacity but the City does not see this as a
constraint for the 2014–2019 planning period because the regional housing needs allocation
(RHNA) of 16 units has already been taken into account when determining capacity issues.
The City also has a potential water source from the Arroyo Ditch, which originates from the middle
fork of the Cosumnes River and runs approximately 18 miles southwest to Plymouth. The Arroyo
Ditch can deliver water from the river to the City’s water treatment facility. Efforts by the City to
maintain and repair the Arroyo Ditch are being made; however, continual upkeep of the ditch is
problematic. Dense underbrush, private property access, and lack of resources provide obstacles to
adequate maintenance and repair. Piping of the entire ditch to solve this problem is cost-prohibitive.
Thus the ditch has not been considered a reliable water supply for the City, although it could
provide supplemental water for potable use (if treated at an improved facility) or for irrigation use.
City of Sutter Creek
The AWA provides potable and raw water to the City of Sutter Creek via the Tanner WTP; housing
sites in the city have adequate access to water services. New development is required to construct all
internal water distribution system improvements associated with their projects.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  B–9

                                                         APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Wastewater Service
The AWA currently owns, operates, and maintains 10 geographically separate wastewater treatment
plants (WWTP) throughout Amador County. Eight of the 10 systems are community leachfield
systems, while the other two systems treat wastewater to a secondary level that is then applied to
land for disposal. In addition to the wastewater systems owned, operated, and maintained by the
AWA, there are numerous other wastewater purveyors within the AWA service area. Table HE-43
displays the wastewater systems relevant to the jurisdictions in this combined Housing Element.
Jurisdiction-specific analysis of wastewater system availability is provided below.
                                                 TABLE HE-43
                          WASTEWATER SYSTEMS (NOT OPERATED BY AWA)
  Wastewater System               Collection Type            Treatment Type         Disposal Method
          Name
City of Amador City           Conventional, gravity               Primary                  N/A
City of Ione                  Conventional, gravity               Tertiary             Reclaimed
City of Jackson               Conventional, gravity             Secondary                 NPDES
City of Plymouth              Conventional, gravity             Secondary                 Spray
City of Sutter Creek          Conventional, gravity             Secondary             Trickling Filter
Source: Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan 2011
Amador County
Residential parcels in the unincorporated county lie within the service area of both the City of
Jackson and the AWA. The City of Jackson collects wastewater for treatment at the Jackson
Wastewater Treatment Plan (WWTP). As of 2014 the Jackson WWTP NPDES permits a daily
maximum of 0.71 MG. As of 2014, it’s estimated that the Jackson WWTP has approximately
250,000 gallons per day of remaining capacity, adequate to serve an additional 833 connections.
The AWA collects wastewater from the Martell area for treatment at the Sutter Creek WWTP. The
Sutter Creek WWTP is currently operating at capacity due to elevated pollutant loads; no additional
treatment capacity at the Sutter Creek WWTP is currently available.
Based on preliminary discussions with the AWA, there are several potential paths to providing
wastewater service for this area. One option would be for the AWA to seek a contract with the City
of Jackson (which has existing, available capacity and a conveyance system that is adjacent the
parcels) for wastewater service for the sites. Another option is expansion of the existing Sutter Creek
WWTP. Although the AWA worked with the City of Sutter Creek to obtain additional wastewater
treatment capacity through expansion of the Sutter Creek WWTP, no permits have been issued for
an increase in wastewater capacity. A study is under way, and this expansion could include either
interim improvements, or construction of a new plant on a site already purchased and planned for
the expansion.
February 2015                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                      B–10

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS                                                                 :~
Because of the limitations on the availability of water and sewer on the inventory sites, the County
proposes to implement Program H-1.2. This program states that the County will work with AWA to
identify a specific, detailed strategy for providing water and wastewater service to the inventory sites,
including defined actions and progress landmarks to reach this goal, and a timeline for these actions
to make water and wastewater available during the current planning period (2014-2019).
In the other parts of the county, areas served by wells and septic systems are suitable for moderate
and above moderate units, so availability of public water and sewer service was not evaluated for
these sites.
Areas without Infrastructure
Parcels in TC, RM, and RSC land use designations would need to be connected to water and
wastewater infrastructure in order to be considered appropriate for high (or higher) density
residential development. For parcels in areas without existing infrastructure, appropriate
infrastructure would need to be put in place to serve new development. The extension of
infrastructure can be very expensive, particularly in isolated areas located far from existing
infrastructure. Furthermore, many areas of the county, including upcountry areas such as Pine
Grove and Buckhorn, are subject to limited capacity for both water and sewer expansion. Expenses
related to extension of infrastructure, and difficulties in obtaining infrastructure at all, represent an
additional constraint to providing affordable housing.
Parcels in RR and AT land use designations (suitable for moderate and above moderate units) could
rely on private wells and septic systems. As described in the governmental constraints section of this
element, land and permit costs in Amador County would permit construction of housing affordable
to moderate-income households on parcels of one acre or more in these areas.
Availability of water and sewer service represents a constraint on the development of housing
affordable to all income levels in the county. The Central Amador Water Project area (which
includes upcountry areas such as Pine Grove) is nearing the maximum water use permitted under
existing water rights, and many of the small, local sewer systems in the county do not permit or
greatly restrict new connections based on lack of capacity. Because of these water and sewer
limitations, construction of housing at densities which would permit affordable units is difficult in
large portions of the county. The land inventory for lower-income households includes those parcels
to which water and wastewater service can most likely be provided during the current planning
period (2014-2019). Program H-1.2 defines the actions that the County will take to work with AWA
to provide water and wastewater service to land inventory parcels. Through implementation of
Programs H-1.3 and H-1.4, the County will maintain lists of parcels with available water and or
sewer service, and work with utilities (including AWA and ARSA) to improve and expand
infrastructure capacity in Amador County.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  B–11

                                                  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
City of Ione
The City provides for stormwater and wastewater collection as well as the treatment system for the
wastewater. A secondary treatment plant processes the wastewater for users in the city. The existing
WWTP has a capacity of 0.41 MGD. As of 2006, the plant was operating at 0.388 MGD and is
currently operating very near capacity. The City also has a tertiary treatment plant that was brought
on line in the early 1990s and is designed to process up to 0.8 MGD of secondary effluent received
from another agency. According to Ione staff, while there is a processing limit to the current
wastewater treatment facility, the biggest constraint to operations is treated effluent disposal. The
City is currently completing a series of improvements that provide for land application of treated
effluent on adjoining land. The City is working through the Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Control Board to complete these improvements. When completed, these improvements will provide
adequate capacity to address the issue. The City is also considering updating its 2009 Wastewater
Master Plan and intends to reach .55 MGD processing and disposal capacity by 2020.
City of Jackson
The City owns and operates the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for services within the
city. The Jackson WWTP is a tertiary system located on the western boundary of the city. Currently,
the WWTP has a remaining discharge capacity of approximately 1,112 dwelling units. The 2013
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit provides how much treated
wastewater can be discharged into Jackson Creek (maximum of 0.71 million gallons per day during
the dry months) and also spells out the significant improvements that will be required to continue
discharging into Jackson Creek. Though the cost is less than treating the effluent and discharging to
land, it will still generate some significant improvements costs to meet the water quality
requirements.
City of Plymouth
In 2009, the City was awarded a grant ($2.85 million) from the State of California using American
Reinvestment and Recovery (ARRA) funds. This grant was for improvements to the sewage
collection system to reduce infiltration and inflow and for improvements to the treatment facility. In
2010 the City completed a sewer upgrade using the grant funds. The project included bursting and
relining a significant amount of the collection system in the core area of the city. Additionally
improvements were made to the sewer treatment facilities including new aeration motors, new
pumps and headworks facilities.
Plymouth operates its wastewater system under the terms of the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board (RWQCB Order (#R5-2011-0092) issued to the City in 2011. A previous cease and
desist order was rescinded in February 2012.
The new order includes a specified WWTP capacity of 185,000 gallons per day (average daily dry
weather flow). In 2013 the City completed a Wastewater Collection System Master Plan (KASL
Consulting Engineers, Inc.) which included an analysis of wastewater flows. The plan included the
following conclusions:
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                B–12

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
   There are 668 sewer “equivalents” (EDUs) served by the City’s existing sewer collection system.
   With an existing Average Dry Weather Flow (ADWF) of 120,000 gallons per day (gpd), and
    Average Wet Weather Flow (AWWF) of 210,000 gpd and a Peak Wet Weather Flow (PWWF) of
    550,000 gpd, current flow rates per EDU are:
       200 gpd / EDU ADWF
       325 gpd / EDU AWWF
       850 gpd / EDU PWWF
   The existing PWWF can be adequately conveyed to the City WWTP without unacceptable
    surcharge of the existing wastewater collection system. Sewer EDUs estimated for 10-year, 20-
    year and General Plan buildout conditions are:
       1,560 Sewer EDUs; 10-year Horizon
       2,697 Sewer EDUs; 20-year Horizon
       4,056 Sewer EDUs; General Plan Buildout
The City has also completed an analysis of costs to expand the wastewater treatment facility to
accommodate additional growth (KASL 2014). Any new development in the city is required to
connect to the City sewer system and will be required to pay impact fees to cover its fair share cost
of improvements. Using the updated costs, the City is in the process of updating its fees.
City of Sutter Creek
The City of Sutter Creek owns and operates a sewage treatment plant. Sutter Creek treats wastewater
from Amador City, Sutter Creek, and County Service Area 4 (in the Martell area). The plant is
permitted to process approximately 480,000 gpd. In 2013 the plant was operating at about 300,000
gpd. Available wastewater treatment capacity is 180,000 gpd. This capacity is adequate to serve
pending tentative maps and infill developments for 166 units, but cannot accept additional projects
without capacity expansion. Sewage is treated to a secondary level by means of a trickling filter. In
addition, a pending project (Gold Rush Ranch and Golf Resort Project) will be increasing the sewer
capacity with construction of a new facility (thereby benefiting neighboring parcels) which would
temporarily eliminate the sewer capacity problems in the area. The Gold Rush Ranch and Golf
Resort development agreement requires modifying the treatment plant from secondary to tertiary
treatment. As of May 2014, the Gold Rush Ranch tentative map has not been processed as a final
map (pending litigation settlement) and no construction has occurred. The project has not yet
funded capacity increases in the sewer system.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                               B–13

                 -
 I
    I  I" j
 I
           ;itr=1
            I I
                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The AWA is currently evaluating a regional wastewater treatment plant concept and may become the
primary agency for wastewater treatment for the region, including Sutter Creek. The AWA has
prepared a draft regional wastewater study (AWA 2004) that suggests the long-term regional
wastewater treatment solution is the construction of a regional treatment facility in the Martell area
(southwest portion of the city of Sutter Creek). The feasibility and timing of the regional treatment
facility is presently uncertain, but initial expectations are that the plant will be operational in 5-10
years.
New residential developments proposed for annexation into the city are required to provide for
sewer facilities including lift stations and pipes to meet their demands and/or pay an impact fee
based on their demand and use of existing system facilities. New developments are required to
construct all internal sewer distribution system improvements associated with their projects. New
development will be required to fund eventual wastewater treatment facilities expansion since the
WWTP will ultimately have to be expanded.
February 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                 B–14

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
CITY OF PLYMOUTH
Plymouth General Plan
In August 2009 the City of Plymouth completed a General Plan update which establishes policies
that guide new development including residential development. These policies, along with zoning
regulations, control the amount and distribution of land allocated for different land uses in the city.
The land use designations established in the General Plan that allow single-family and multi-family
residential developments are:
                                                  TABLE HE-44
         CITY OF PLYMOUTH GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
  Designation                                               Description
                       This designation is intended for those areas within the SOI that are under
                       Williamson Act contract, those beyond the 20‐year growth area, and those for
                       which there are not available and adequate facilities and services within the
 Agriculture
                       horizon of this plan. There are residential development options to allow
                       septic/well and septic/rural water developments at very low densities,
                       consistent with the intended agricultural character.
 Suburban
                       This designation is for larger lot and fringe area development.
 Residential
 Auto-Urban
                       This designation is for single-family and planned development types.
 Residential
                       The purpose of this district is to reinforce the urban character of downtown
 Urban
                       and to provide living opportunities within downtown, thereby helping to meet
 Residential
                       community housing objectives.
 Urban                 This district is for the historic downtown to reinforce the urban character of
 Commercial            development.
 Auto-Urban            This district is for larger, automobile-oriented commercial development
 Commercial            adjacent to corridors and major intersections
 Source: City of Plymouth 2009 General Plan
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                       B–15

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Table HE-45 provides a summary of allowed residential density for relevant General Plan Land
Use categories.
                                            TABLE HE-45
     CITY OF PLYMOUTH ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BY LAND USE CATEGORY
            Land Use Category                 Minimum Residential             Maximum Residential
                                                 Density (du/ac)                 Density (du/ac)
Agriculture                                             0.1                            0.25
Suburban Residential                                    .07                            0.28
Auto-Urban Residential                                 3.58                            4.80
Urban Residential                                        --                             16
Urban Commercial                                         --                             16
Auto-Urban Commercial                                    --                             7.5
Source: City of Plymouth 2009 General Plan
Plymouth Zoning
The City of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance designates land uses, height, bulk, density, and parking
standards throughout the city. The current Zoning Ordinance provides a variety of residential use
designations with maximum densities ranging from 0.05 to 16 dwelling units per acre. The Zoning
Ordinance was comprehensively updated in March 2014.
As noted in Table HE-46, the current Zoning Ordinance includes eight zoning districts that allow
for residential uses. In addition to these standard zoning districts, the City’s Zoning Ordinance also
includes the Planned Development (PD) zoning district. The PD is intended for the City to consider
pre-planned and well-designed developments, which may combine different land uses but are
primarily intended for single-family homes. This zoning district allows developers to vary from
requirements of other zoning districts in order to provide a better arrangement for the development
of land than might otherwise occur. The PD zoning district also allows the City to pre-select areas
where the planned development approach to development is best due to environmental
considerations or concerns for scale, timing, or feasibility of development. Lands may be designated
PD in anticipation that their eventual use will be a planned unit development governed by an
approved development plan and development agreement. PD zoning may be applied to lands in the
City by following the procedures for a zoning amendment.
Development Standards for Zones Allowing Residential Uses
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development, primarily through
its Zoning Ordinance. Zoning regulations are designed to protect and promote the health, safety,
and general welfare of residents as well as implement the policies of the Plymouth General Plan. The
Zoning Ordinance also helps preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. Table
HE-46 summarizes the current residential standards for both single-family and multi-family
development.
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                 B–16

        APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                 TABLE HE-46
                CITY OF PLYMOUTH DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ZONES WHERE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IS ALLOWED
  Development             Agriculture      Rural      Standard       Village     Village    Suburban     Highway      Industrial/B
     Standard                  (A)     Residential   Residential   Residential Commercial  Commercial  Commercial/    usiness Park
                                           (RR)          (SR)         (VR)        (VC)        (SC)     Commercial        (I/BP)
                                                                                                          (HC/C)
 Allowable                2 du/40 ac
                                      0.60 du/ac to 4.0 du/ac to  8.0 du/ac to
 Density                   to 0.3 du/                                           Not listed  Not listed  Not listed    None listed
                                       2.28 du/ac    4.8 du/ac     16.0 du/ac
 (du/acre)                     ac
 Min. Lot Size
                            40 acres      12,000        2,000         2,000       None        6,000        9,000         12,000
 (sq. ft.)
 Setbacks (Min.)
   Front Yard
                                50          20            14             5           0           5           25            25
 (ft.)
   Side Yard (ft.)              25          10             5             5           0          --           --             --
 Side Yard-
                                --          --            --             --          0           0            0             0
 Interior Lot (ft.)
 Side Yard-
                                --          --            --             --          0          10           10            25
 Street (ft.)
   Rear Yard
                                50          20             5             5          10          10           25            25
 (ft.)
 Max. Lot
                              n/a          25%           50%           75%         80%         75%          50%           75%
 Coverage
 Max. Bldg
                                35          35            35            35          35          35           35            35
 Height (ft.)
Source: City of Plymouth 2014
     .
     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                              February 2015
     City of Plymouth
                                                                    B–17

                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Table HE-47 provides a description of parking standards for residential uses.
                                            TABLE HE-47
                                       PARKING STANDARDS
                          Land Uses                              Required Parking Spaces
Boarding and rooming houses and group               One (1) space per each two occupants for
dwellings                                           which sleeping facilities are provided
Dwelling, single-family                             Two (2) fully enclosed spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, second family – excluding duplex          One (1) fully enclosed space per dwelling unit
Dwelling, multiple family                           One (1) enclosed space per dwelling unit, one
                                                    (1) uncovered space per dwelling unit, plus
                                                    one (1) additional space for every three units
Dwelling, duplexes                                  One (1) enclosed parking space and one (1)
                                                    uncovered space per dwelling unit
Dwelling, senior units                              One (1) space per dwelling unit
Mobile home park                                    Two (2) spaces per home site
Source: City of Plymouth 2014
How Residential Uses are Allowed
Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made available
through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the development of various
types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This includes single-family housing,
multi-family housing, manufactured housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters, transitional
housing, and farmworker housing, among others. Table HE-48 identifies the housing types
permitted in the various zoning districts in Plymouth.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                B–18

                                                                                   -
                                                                    I
                                                                        I I.
 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                    I
                                                                             I I
                                        TABLE HE-48
             CITY OF PLYMOUTH HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT
           Housing                 A RR     SR      VR VC     SC      HC/C     I/BP
Artisan, Live/Work                 P  P      P       P  N      N       N         N
Boarding House                     A A       A       P  N      N       N         N
Convalescent Facility              N N       N      N   N      P       A         N
Convalescent/Hospice
                                   A A       P       P  N      N       N         N
Facility
Dwellings, Single-
Family Attached
                                   P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
(townhouse, duplex,
fourplex)
Dwelling, Single-Family
                                   P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
second unit attached
Dwellings, Single-
Family second unit                 P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
detached
Dwellings, Multi-Family            P  P      A       P  C     C        C         C
Dwellings, Above
                                   N N       N      N   A      A       A         N
Commercial
Emergency Shelter                  N N       N      N   N      P       P         P
Employee Housing                   P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
Group Home – 6 or
                                   P  P      P       P  N      N       N         N
fewer residents
Group Home – more
                                   A C       C      C   N      N       N         N
than 6 residents
Home Occupations                   P  P      P       P  N      N       N         N
Mobile Homes                       C A       A      N   N      N       N         N
Supportive Housing                 P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
Transitional Housing               P  P      P       P  C     C        C         C
Source: Plymouth Zoning Code, 2014
P= permitted by right
A=administrative use permit
C = conditional use permit
N = not permitted
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                           B–19

                                                  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Plymouth Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Multi-Family Housing
Currently, the VR district is the primary multi-family district with a maximum density of 16 units per
acre.
Second Dwelling Units
A second unit is an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons. It includes permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel that the single-family dwelling is situated.
AB 1866, also known as the “second unit law,” amended California Government Code to facilitate
the development of second units. This amendment required localities to allow second units
ministerially without discretionary review or hearings. To be considered a ministerial review, the
process used to approve second units must “apply predictable, objective, fixed, quantifiable and
clear standards.” Applications for second units should not be subject to onerous conditions of
approval or public hearing process or public comment.
To ensure consistency with state law, the City allows second units without discretionary review in all
residential districts.
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Manufactured and factory-built housing can be integral parts of the solution for addressing housing
needs. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.3, the siting and permit process for
manufactured housing should be regulated in the same manner as a conventional or stick-built
structure. Specifically, Government Code Section 65852.3(a) requires that with the exception of
architectural requirements, a local government, including charter cities, shall only subject
manufactured homes (mobile homes) to the same development standards to which a conventional
single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject, including but not limited to
building setback standards, side and rear yard requirements, standards for enclosures, access, and
vehicle parking, aesthetic requirements, and minimum square footage requirements. The City has
included Program H-4 to allow mobile homes by right in the Rural Residential and Standard
Residential zoning districts.
Farmworker Housing
Farmworker or employee housing is property used temporarily or seasonally for the residential use
unrelated persons or families employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor. The
accommodations may consist of any living quarters, dwelling, boardinghouse, tent, bunkhouse,
mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing
accommodations maintained in one or more buildings, or one or more sites, and the premises upon
which they are situated, including area set aside for parking of mobile homes or camping of five or
more employees by the employer. State law (Section 17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code)
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                               B–20

                                                                                                        -
                                                                                         I
                                                                                         I ,- 1•
 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                  I J
requires that farmworker housing consisting of 36 beds or 12 units or spaces be designed for use by
a single family or household. No conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance
shall be required of this employee housing that is not required of any other agricultural activity in the
same zone. The City currently allows employee housing in all residential zoning districts and the
agricultural district (A, AR, RR, SR, and VR).
In addition to the above provisions, zoning is available for housing for farmworkers through the
variety of other housing types encouraged in the Zoning Ordinance including multi-family, single-
room occupancy, manufactured housing, and second units.
Transitional and Supportive
Transitional housing is defined in Section 65582(h) of the Government Code as buildings
configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require
the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the
beginning of the assistance.
Supportive housing is defined by Section 56682(f) of the Government Code as housing with no limit
on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on-site or off-site
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her
health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
Target population is defined in Government Code Section 56682(g) as persons with low incomes
who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman
Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the
Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated
minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system,
individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
Pursuant to SB 2, transitional and supportive housing types are required to be treated as residential
uses and subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the
same zone. In 2014, the City adopted a comprehensive zoning ordinance update, which included
allowing transitional and supportive housing in the same way other residential uses are allowed in all
zones allowing residential uses.
Emergency Shelters
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter as “housing with
minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less
by a homeless person. No individual or households may be denied emergency shelter because of an
inability to pay.”
SB 2 requires jurisdictions to allow emergency shelters without a conditional use permit in at least
one zone. The City’s Zoning Ordinance allows emergency shelters by right in all of the residential
zoning districts.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 B–21

                                                  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City has amended the Zoning Code to allow for emergency shelters by right in most of the
commercial zones and in the industrial zone which are all relatively close to services (grocery) and
transit stops along Highway 49. Within these zones, the City has identified .7 acres on 1 parcel in the
Commercial (C ) zone, 16 acres on 6 parcels in the Highway Commercial (HC) zone, and 19 acres
on 6 parcels in the Suburban Commercial (SC) zone that will allow adequate capacity for the
provision of an emergency shelter.
Extremely Low-Income Households
Extremely low-income households have special housing needs because they are unlikely to find
market-rate housing that is affordable at any price. Also, many of the extremely low-income
households will fall within a special needs category (disabled, seniors, large families or female-headed
households) and require supportive housing services. AB 2634 (Lieber, 2006) requires the
quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
households. Housing elements must also identify zoning to encourage and facilitate supportive
housing and SRO units.
The City has included Program H-9, which states that the City will update its Zoning Ordinance to
allow for SRO units with a conditional use permit in the Commercial (C) zone having an Urban
Commercial General Plan designation. In addition, Program H-2.2 states that the City will prioritize
funding and/or offer financial incentives or regulatory concessions to encourage the development or
rehabilitation of SRO units and/or other units affordable to extremely low-income households, such
as supportive and multi-family units.
Plymouth Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires a housing element to make adequate provision for the housing needs of all
economic segments of the community, to include, among other things, an analysis of the special
housing needs of the handicapped and a program to address, remove constraints to, and promote
housing to accommodate the disabled. The following is a discussion that supplements the
governmental constraints section above.
Siting and Concentration Requirements
As discussed above, the City has analyzed its land use, zoning, and building code provisions and
processes to determine what accommodations and constraints exist to housing production for
persons with disabilities (including developmental disabilities). Individuals in this special needs group
may reside in residential units in any zoning district that allows residential, commercial, or
institutional uses. Some individuals may choose to reside in a residential facility or a group home
designed for occupancy by or with supportive services for persons with disabilities. The Zoning
Ordinance does not differentiate between related and unrelated persons in the occupancy of
residential units. The Zoning Ordinance allows group homes of six or fewer persons by right in all
zoning districts that permit single-family residences. The City’s Zoning Ordinance allows licensed
residential group homes for more than six persons in residential zones with an Administrative Use
Permit in the A zone, and with a Conditional Use Permit in the RR, SR, and VR zones. There is no
restriction as to minimum distances between residential care facilities.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                B–22

                                                                                                       -
                                                                                        I
                                                                                        I  ,- 1•
 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                  I J
Permit Approval Process
Residential group homes accommodating more than six persons within the RR, SR and VR zones
are required to go through the Conditional Use Permit process. These facilities in the A zone require
an Administrative Use Permit. The Administrative Use Permit process is not seen as a constraint to
allowing this type of use. The requirement for a Conditional Use Permit for large group homes in
the single-family and multi-family zones would be the same process as any other single- or multi-
family Conditional Use Permit and is therefore not a constraint. The Conditional Use Permit
process is necessary as the City would still need to be able to make appropriate findings. As
mentioned previously, a Conditional Use Permit requires a noticed public hearing of the Planning
Commission and is subject to conditions that the Planning Commission may find necessary to
ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. The time frame for a Conditional Use Permit is
approximately three to four months.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance currently defines family as: “One or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group living in a boarding house, hotel, motel, or
group or institutional living quarters such as a group home, day care home, or convalescent home.”
Special Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities
The City recognizes that access to a residence can require special accommodations for persons with
physical disabilities that limit their mobility, particularly when the access features are retrofitted to
existing units. Zoning Ordinance Section 19.10.060 details the City’s reasonable accommodation
procedure which provides a process for granting exceptions to zoning standards to provide access
for those with disabilities.
Americans with Disabilities Act Requirements
The City has adopted and enforces the current California Building Code, including Chapter 11A
(Housing Accessibility). This chapter incorporates provisions from the ADA and specifies that a
number of the residential units in new multi-family construction of three and more apartments or
four and more condominiums must be accessible or adaptable. Special training courses for staff that
implement the codes have created an increased awareness of and sensitivity to the needs and
challenges faced by physically disabled persons. This training has enabled staff to work more
effectively with California Building Code accessibility retrofit plans when submitted.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 B–23

                                                     APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Development Standards and Building Codes
The City enforces the development standards and building codes, which are minimum standards for
health and safety and therefore should not be relaxed. City Planning Department staff work with
members of the public to find ways to address their special needs within the provisions of these
codes. Specifically, staff’s review (and recommendations) of projects that are proposed to meet
special housing needs (e.g., seniors, large families, persons with disabilities) also consider zoning and
permit procedures, as well as the appropriateness of applicable site development standards. If
needed and determined not to be detrimental to the public health and safety, permit procedures and
standards may be relaxed (e.g., parking requirements) to facilitate development. Staff typically
consults with the property owner and developer to identify issues during the initial stages of the
application process.
Plymouth Density Bonus
A density bonus is the allocation of development rights that allows a parcel to accommodate
additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the parcel is
zoned. The City’s density bonus ordinance is in compliance with state law (Government Code
Section 65915 et seq.).
Plymouth Building Codes and Code Enforcement
The latest edition of the Uniform Building Code is enforced by the contract Building Inspector for
Plymouth. The Building Inspector ensures that new residences, additions, and auxiliary structures
meet all of the latest construction and safety standards. Building permits are required for any
construction work. Plymouth has no local building or construction code restrictions beyond those
prescribed by the Uniform Building Code.
Code Enforcement
Code enforcement, as a governmental constraint, has a negligible effect on housing production in
Plymouth. Plymouth does have a Code Enforcement Officer assigned to enforcing state and local
regulations governing maintenance of buildings and property. Building codes are enforced on a
complaint basis. Complaints may be handled by the City Manager, Public Works staff, or the City
Building Inspector. Complaints average less than one per month and are primarily related to
property maintenance and building code issues. Most of the complaints affecting housing are related
to the City’s older housing stock.
State Historical Building Code
Since Plymouth has numerous historical residences (i.e., structures more than 50 years old), the City
may adopt an historic district and use the California Historical Building Code to provide standards
for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration (including related reconstruction), or relocation as
applicable to all historical buildings, structures, and properties deemed of importance to the history,
architecture, or culture of Plymouth. Such standards and regulations are designed to facilitate the
restoration or change of occupancy so as to preserve the buildings’ original or restored elements and
February 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Plymouth
                                                  B–24

                                                                                                            -
                                                                                             I
                                                                                               I I.
 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                             I
                                                                                                     I I
features, to encourage energy conservation and a cost-effective approach to preservation, and to
provide for reasonable safety from fire or other hazards for occupants and users of these buildings
and to provide reasonable availability and usability by the persons with disabilities.
Plymouth On/Off-site Improvements
Site improvement standards are an important component of new development to ensure that water,
sewer, roadways, and other infrastructure are provided to serve new development. Large projects are
encouraged to use performance standards established through the subdivision ordinance, a
development agreement, and/or the Planned Development (PD) procedure as discussed earlier in
this section. Pre-development meetings are also encouraged to provide an opportunity for City staff
to discuss with the developer what site improvements would be needed and to what extent the City
can provide flexibility in development standards.
The following are subdivision standards contained in the City’s subdivision ordinance that apply to
residential development:
   Minimum lot width shall be at least 60 feet along front property line, except on cul-de-sac
    turnaround, where front property line may be reduced to not less than 35 feet.
   Satisfactory access to be provided to each lot at the grade of the abutting road, at a point not less
    than 18 feet from the centerline of the road.
   Interior lots having frontage on more than one street shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet,
    except where the physical condition of the land makes a lesser depth necessary.
   Blocks shall not be longer than 1,000 feet between intersection street lines, except on arterial
    streets and thoroughfares where longer blocks may be allowed.
   Not less than 7.5-foot-wide easements shall be dedicated on side and rear lot lines for wires,
    conduits, drainage, sewer, gas and water mains, or other utilities.
Presently, the City Engineer determines the site improvement standards required for design of any
streets, curb and gutter, water, wastewater and drainage, and all improvements are installed under
the supervision of and to the approval of the City Engineer. All subdivision improvements are to be
constructed in accordance with standard engineering practices. Since Plymouth has not adopted any
standards, the City defers to the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.
These standard specifications are commonly referred to as the Greenbook.
Plymouth Fees
The City of Plymouth collects development fees to process permits and provide services and
infrastructure related to new development. Plymouth also requires fees for off-site extension of the
water, sewer, and storm drain systems. It requires the developer to construct all internal streets, curb,
and gutter, affected portions of off-street arterials, and other standard conditions.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 B–25

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Development processing and permit fees and exactions can add to housing construction costs. In
general, permit fees are typically high in rapidly growing communities, as supporting infrastructure is
not in place and must be provided by new development. Other than impact fees, planning and
building fees and facility fees assessed by Plymouth are generally lower than in comparable
jurisdictions. Table HE-49 identifies the development fees and Table HE-50 provides impact fees
by land use category for the City of Plymouth.
Plymouth’s application fees are generally at or below those of other jurisdictions (excepting those
established by state regulations for the California Department of Fish and Wildlife) and are not
considered to be a deterrent to the development of affordable housing. The requirement for paying
the state-mandated fees for the California Department of Fish and Wildlife does not include a
provision for waiving or reducing these fees for affordable housing projects.
                                             TABLE HE-49
                            CITY OF PLYMOUTH DEVELOPMENT FEES
                            Planning                                  Fee Amount (Initial Fee)1
  Building Permit Pre-clearance                                                 $25.00
  Temporary Sign Permit                                                         $50.00
  Sign Permit                                                                   $50.00
  Master Sign Program                                                          $200.00
  Creative Sign Permit                                                         $200.00
  Temporary Use Permit                                                          $50.00
  Administrative Use Permit                                                     $50.00
  Conditional Use Permit                                                       $200.00
  Minor Design Review                                                           $50.00
  Major Design Review                                                          $200.00
  Adjustment                                                                    $50.00
  Variance                                                                     $200.00
  General Plan Amendment/Zoning Amendment                                      $200.00
  Tentative Parcel Map/Subdivision Map                                         $200.00
  Final Parcel Map/Subdivision Map Checking                                    $100.00
  Planned Development                                                          $400.00
  Development Agreement                                                        $200.00
  Final Parcel Map/Subdivision Map Checking                                    $100.00
  Boundary Line Adjustment                                                     $200.00
  Certificate of Compliance                                                    $200.00
  Reversion to Acreage                                                         $200.00
  Annexation                                                                   $200.00
  Appeal                                                                       $100.00
  Mine Permit                                                                  $750.00
  Reclamation Plan Review                                                      $750.00
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                 B–26

    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                                --                I  -I
I                                                                                         I                                                 -1
     Grading Permit
.,.___                                                                                                       $200.00
                                                                                                                                   -
     P.U.E. Abandonment                                                                                      $100.00
                                                                                                                                             -
     Merger of Unbuildable Lots                                                                              $200.00
 -                                                                                                                                        -
 - Lot Line Adjustments                                                                                      $100.00
                                                                                                                                     -
                                      Engineering                                                        Fee Amount
                                                                                                                                            -
    Boundary Line Adjustment                                                                                 $500.00
                                                                                                                                             -
    Certificate of Compliance                                                                                $500.00
 -                                                                                                                                     -
    Parcel Map Check                                                                                         $800.00
                                                                                                                                           -
    Subdivision Map Check                                                                                   $1,500.00
                                                                                                                                           -
    Tentative Maps                                                                                           $500.00
 -                                                                                                                                       -
l Encroachment Permit                                                                     I                  $400.00                         J
  Source: City of Plymouth, June 2014
  1
   Initial fee then has time and materials added.
                                                            TABLE HE-50
                                   CITY OF PLYMOUTH RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES
                     Fee Purpose                                                      Land Use Category
                                                            Single-Family (per               Duplex (per               Multi-Family
                                                                       unit)                       unit)                 (per unit)
  Streets                                                            $4,694                      $4,694                    $3,360
  Law Enforcement                                                      $268                       $268                       $214
  Drainage                                                           $9,831                    $8,193.50                   $6,737
  Wastewater Treatment & Collection                                  $9,831                    $8,193.50                   $6,7371
  Water                                                             $10,3972                   $5,198.502               $1,732.832
  Park & Recreation                                                  $5,176                      $5,176                    $5,176
  Administrative Facilities                                            $242                       $242                     $1,962
  Fire                                                               $2,440                      $2,440                    $1,952
  Library                                                              $785                       $785                       $628
  Museum                                                               $242                       $242                       $194
  Corporation Yard                                                   $1,029                      $1,029                      $823
  Fee Update Program                                                   $308                       $308                       $247
  Total                                                             $17,5132                    $28,5762                  $14,8552
  Source: City of Plymouth, 2014
  1
    Cost based on a 6-unit building. The actual cost will vary based upon the number of units in the project. Wastewater fees are as follows
  $9,831 for first unit, $6,556 for next four units and $4,367 for every additional unit.
  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                    February 2015
  City of Plymouth
                                                                  B–27

                                                                     APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
2 Cost based on a ¾” meter. The actual cost will vary based upon the meter size required for the
project. Water fees are as follows: ¾”= $10,397; 1”= $17,364; 1 ½” =$34,623; 2”= $55,417; 4”=
$173,321; 6”=$346,538.
The City’s residential impact fees are comparable to other jurisdictions in the region. The City’s fees
for a typical 1,600-square-foot single-family dwelling are approximately $17,513. According to
Buildingcost.net, a housing construction cost resource that calculates the total estimated cost of
building a new home (land costs not included), single-family home construction costs in 2014 were
estimated at approximately $132 per square foot for average quality construction, or $211,200 for an
average 1,600-square-foot home. The estimated total development cost, which includes construction
and land costs, of a 1,600-square-foot home with four walls, an attached garage, central heating and
air, and average building materials was $217,508.
The City’s impact fees for a typical 900-square-foot multi-family dwelling in an apartment building
are approximately $14,855. Costs for a recent multi-family project were not available in any of the
County jurisdictions. In order to estimate multi-family costs, another area Housing Element analysis
was used. Based on the Stanislaus County Housing Element, typical multi-family construction costs
are $133 per square foot, or $119,700 for a 900-square-foot unit. The estimated total development
cost of a 900-square-foot apartment, including construction and land, was $132,200.
As illustrated in Table HE-51, this typical impact fee total is approximately eight percent of the
average new house development cost and 11 percent of the average new multi-family unit
development cost. While these costs will likely be passed on to the ultimate product consumer, thus
impacting housing prices, these requirements are deemed necessary to maintain the quality of life
desired by city residents.
                                                           TABLE HE-51
    CITY OF PLYMOUTH TOTAL FEES FOR TYPICAL SINGLE- AND MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
        Housing Type                          Total Fees                  Estimated       Estimated Proportion of
                                                                      Development Cost     Fees to Development
                                                                      per Unit (land and       Costs per Unit
                                                                      construction costs)
Single-Family Unit1                             $17,513                    $217,508                  8%
Multi-Family Unit2                              $14,855                    $132,200                 11%
Source: www.building-cost.net 2014, City of Plymouth, June 2010
Notes: 1. Typical single-family unit estimated at 1,600 square feet.
2. Typical multi-family unit of 900 square feet.
Plymouth Development Review and Permit Processing
No residential subdivisions have been approved in Plymouth during the past five years. The City
does not have comprehensive design guidelines. Building architecture is reviewed in accordance with
the design guidelines in the City’s historic district (Historic Downtown Overlay District) as part of
February 2015                                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                 City of Plymouth
                                                                 B–28

                                                                                                    -
                                                                                         I
                                                                                           I I.
  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                         I
                                                                                                I I
the design review process. Additional design guidelines are being created for the Scenic Corridor
Overlay District (Program H-4).
Individual single-family homes are reviewed by the Building Inspector prior to issuance of a building
permit; the City’s Planning Commission reviews all developments requiring discretionary approval.
Currently projects up to 16 units an acre in the VR zone are permitted by right.
The City can encourage the construction, maintenance, and improvement of housing by also
decreasing, to the extent possible, the time and uncertainty involved in obtaining permit approval.
Based on the Permit Streamlining Act, governmental delays can be reduced in two key ways: (1)
limiting the processing time for development, in most cases to one year; and (2) requiring public
agencies to specify the required information to complete an acceptable application.
The permitting and review process for all project types in Plymouth includes:
   An optional pre-application review meeting (to identify issues early on, thereby expediting
    application processing).
   Submittal of the application.
   Review for completeness by the Planning Clerk and Planning Director.
   A letter to the applicant specifying in detail what additional information is needed to complete
    the application—this would include information about the project and environmental
    background reports, if applicable (traffic and noise studies, soils reports, etc.).
   Internal review of all application materials, site plan, maps, and design by Planning staff, City
    Engineer, and Building Inspector.
   Additional meetings (phone and/or in person) with the applicant, if necessary.
   If necessary due to type of permit required public hearing by the Planning Commission for
    review and approval and, if necessary, by the City Council.
Table HE-51 identifies the approximate time necessary to process residential development
applications and Table HE-52 provides the breakdown of permits and processing procedures
required for single-family and multi-family developments and subdivisions. As the City has not
implemented any of the following development permits or processes, these are anticipated time
frames. In general, it is expected that small developments would be processed in three to four weeks.
Larger development applications may take between two and four months to process.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                B–29

                                                         APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                    TABLE HE-51
  CITY OF PLYMOUTH DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TIMES FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
        Development Permit/Review Process                                   Time Frame
 Major Design Review                                                        90-120 days
 Minor Design Review                                                         30-90 days
 Conditional Use Permit                                                     90–120 days
 Administrative Use Permit                                                   60-90 days
 Zone Change and GP Amendment                                               3–6 months
 Environmental Review                                                    1 month to 1 year
 Planning Commission Approval                                                30–90 days
 City Council Approval (if necessary)                                       60–120 days
Source: City of Plymouth, June 2014
                                                    TABLE HE-52
                  CITY OF PLYMOUTH PROCESSING PROCEDURES BY PROJECT TYPE
                               Single-Family Unit            Subdivision               Multi-Family
                           Conditional Use Permit if                               Administrative Use
                                  located in a                                      Permit if located in
                             nonresidential district                                the Standard
                                                        Map processing, Design      Residential district
                                                         Review, CEQA, and         Conditional Use
List Typical               Design review if located       Zoning Clearance          Permit if located in a
Approval                   in Historic Downtown or                                  nonresidential district
Requirements               Scenic Corridor Overlay                --               Design review in all
                              Districts and/or in a                                 locations
                             nonresidential district
                                                                                  Zoning Clearance in all
                                                                                         locations
                                 Building Permit                  --                  Building Permit
Source: City of Plymouth, July 2010
February 2015                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                        City of Plymouth
                                                       B–30

                                                                                                      -
                                                                                         I
                                                                                           I I.
  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                         I
                                                                                                 I I
Review of residential projects typically involves the determination of conformance with the City’s
General Plan, site improvement standards, development standards and design guidelines, and
environmental compliance in accordance with CEQA and CEQA Guidelines. The time frames for
these processes are largely dictated by state planning law and CEQA; the time period necessary for
environmental review may vary substantially depending on whether an environmental impact report,
negative declaration, or categorical exemption is required. The project is also reviewed to determine
if the type and amount of residential development is consistent with the zoning for the site;
otherwise a zone change would be required.
The development agreement and planned unit development process could be used to establish
administrative review for projects where more specific design criteria would be required. This one-
stop review minimizes procedural requirements and processing time.
Plymouth Design Review
All multiple-family planning applications and single-family planning applications pertaining to sites
in the Historic Downtown and Scenic Corridor Overlay Districts and the nonresidential districts are
subject to design review. Applications are processed on a first-come, first-serve basis, and may be
processed concurrently with other entitlement applications.
In most instances, including new construction, Major Design Review applies. This entitlement is
discretionary; the Planning Commission makes a determination on the application following the
conclusion of a noticed public hearing. Like the City’s other discretionary entitlements, the Major
Design Review process takes approximately 3-4 months to complete. The remainder of applications
requiring design review are subject to Minor Design Review. This entitlement is ministerial; the
Planning Director makes a determination on the application. The process typically takes
approximately 1-3 months to complete. The City does not see its design review processes as a
constraint to the development of housing in the community.
The City adopted design guidelines for the Historic Downtown Overlay District in 2012. The
document addresses the preservation of several historic structures along Main Street and the
perpetuation of the corridor’s historic character through new infill projects, building renovations and
site designs. The City is currently in the process of drafting design guidelines for the Scenic
Corridor Overlay District. While the documents do not specifically address residential development,
they do provide guidelines that will facilitate the enhancement of residential projects.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  B–31

                                          APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
This page is intentionally left blank.
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                         B–32

                                                                                               ai~
                                                                                          I
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES                                                                    '- ~I
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for
anticipated growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction
for the five-year period from January 2014 through June 2019. Communities then determine how
they will address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General
Plans.
The intent of the RHNA is to ensure that local jurisdictions address their fair share of the housing
needs for the entire region. Additionally, a major goal of the RHNA is to ensure that every
community provides an opportunity for a mix of affordable housing to all economic segments of its
population. The RHNA jurisdictional allocations are made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning
are provided to address existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and
that market forces are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs for all facets of a particular
community.
PLYMOUTH 2007-2014 REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
Because the City of Plymouth did not implement Program H-25 from the previous Housing
Element which called for rezoning of land to accommodate the remaining lower income RHNA
from the 4th cycle, the City must identify adequate sites to meet the current and previous RHNA
allocations. The City is proposing Program H-9 to rezone a property to accommodate the 26 units
remaining from the 4th cycle. The property will be zoned Urban Residential which allows up to 16
units per acre and allows only residential uses on at least 50 percent of the site without discretionary
review. It will also be redesignated to the Urban Residential General Plan designation. A minimum
density of 16 units per acre will be placed on the parcel per Government Code Sections 65583(c)(1)
(A), and 65583(c)(1) (B), Chapter 724. With environmental constraints taken into account, the 12.2
acre site (APN 101-187-011-000) can accommodate up to 32 units. Once the rezoning and
redesignation occurs, the six extra units from this site when the 26 units from the 4th cycle are
subtracted can also count towards the 5th cycle lower income RHNA.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 C–1

                                                              APPENDIX C: RESOURCES
Table HE-53 provides the RHNA target for the planning period of 2014 to 2019.
                                                    TABLE HE-53
                      REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS 2014–2019
         Jurisdiction                 Extremely          Very     Low      Moderate           Above          Total2
                                         Low1            Low                                Moderate
Amador County Total                       11              10       17           19              43             100
RHNA                                     11%             10%      17%          19%             43%            100%
                                           0               1        1            0               0               2
Amador City
                                          0%              1%       1%           0%              0%             2%
                                           1               2        3            3               7              16
Ione
                                          1%              2%       3%           3%              7%            16%
                                           2               2        3            4               8              19
Jackson
                                          2%              2%       3%           4%              8%            19%
                                           0               1        1            1               1               4
Plymouth
                                          0%              1%       1%           1%              1%             4%
                                           1               1        2            2               4              10
Sutter Creek
                                          1%              1%       2%           2%              4%            10%
                                           5               5        7            9              23              49
Unincorporated county
                                          5%              5%       7%           9%             23%            49%
1 Approximately 50% of VL units are assumed to be extremely-low per state law.
2 The allocation of 100 reflects the county's projected minimum need (rounded). This column represents the minimum
housing need that the county's RHNA Plan must address in total.
Source: HCD 2012
A RHNA is mandated by the State of California (Government Code Section 65584) for regions to
address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the area. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) allocates to cities and the
unincorporated counties their “fair share” or RHNA of the regions’ projected housing needs.
RHNAs are typically prepared by a representative Council of Governments (COG). Amador County
is not currently represented by a COG as the result of the dissolution of the Central Sierra Planning
Council in June 2011. Consequently the regional housing need determination was made directly by
HCD. However, HCD shared its proposed methodology, assumptions, and draft figures with local
government representatives to review and comment before the final RHNA determination was
completed. Table HE-54 shows the County and cities’ progress toward achieving the fourth round
RHNA through their plans.
February 2015                                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                                           C-2

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES                                                                       '_lat~
                                                                                             I
As of August 2014, there have been eleven housing units affordable to above moderate-income
households approved or constructed in the four cities and unincorporated county. The County and
cities currently have the vacant land capacity to accommodate all of their 2014-2019 RHNA need.
See Table HE-57a and HE-57b for a complete list of available sites to meet the City’s 2014–2019
RHNA.
                                             TABLE HE-54
             REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION PROGRESS (2014–2019)
     Jurisdiction                      New Units by Affordability Category                       Total
                       Extremely        Very Low            Low         Moderate     Above-
                          Low                                                       Moderate
  Ione                      0                0                0             0             0        0
  Jackson                   0                0                0             0             0        0
  Plymouth                  0                0                0             0             0        0
  Sutter Creek              0                0                0             0            11        11
  Unincorporated
                          tbd               tbd             tbd            tbd          tbd       tbd
  County
  Total                    tbd              tbd             tbd            tbd          tbd       tbd
Source: HCD 2012; Cities of Ione, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Jackson and Amador County, 2014
                                             TABLE HE-55
                    REMAINING REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS (2014–2019)
     Jurisdiction                      New Units by Affordability Category                       Total
                       Extremely        Very Low            Low         Moderate     Above-
                          Low                                                       Moderate
  Ione                      1                2                3             3             7        16
  Jackson                   2                2                3             4             8        19
  Plymouth                  1                0                1             1             1        4
  Sutter Creek              1                1                2             2             0        6
  Unincorporated
                            5                5                7             9            23        49
  County
Source: HCD 2012; Cities of Ione, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Jackson and Amador County, 2014
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                    C–3

                                                      APPENDIX C: RESOURCES
INVENTORY OF SITES
PLYMOUTH SITES INVENTORY ANALYSIS
This section provides the inventory of vacant land that is available in the City of Plymouth for both
multifamily and single-family residential development. Table HE-57a and HE-57b provides the
number of acres, zoning, unit potential, and availability of infrastructure for all vacant acreage not
earmarked for a pending project in Plymouth.
Realistic Capacity
In determining the realistic capacity of each site, the City took into account zoning regulations,
applicable development standards, and the characteristics of each site. Once these aspects were
reviewed, it was determined that an 80 percent holding capacity was appropriate for residential sites
in the City of Plymouth. For mixed-use sites (zoned Village Commercial), a more conservative
capacity was assumed at a 50 percent holding capacity.
Based on an analysis of vacant land zoned for residential development in the city, the city has
sufficient vacant land to accommodate its RHNA allocation (see Table HE-56).
                                           TABLE HE-56
                      LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY – CITY OF PLYMOUTH
                                   Potential Units by Affordability Category                Total
                                  Lower             Moderate            Above-
                                                                       Moderate
 Remaining RHNA                      2                   1                 1                  4
 Summary of Sites                   21                            150                        171
 Net Remaining RHNA                  0                             0                          0
 Surplus (Shortfall)                19                            148                        167
Source: Amador County Transportation Commission 2014
ENERGY CONSERVATION
State law (Government Code Section 65583[a][7]) requires housing elements to contain an analysis
of opportunities for residential energy conservation. The energy conservation section of a housing
element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to encourage the incorporation of energy-
saving features, energy-saving materials, and energy-efficient systems and design for residential
development. Housing element policies and programs should address the environmental significance
and operational benefits of employing energy conservation in the building and retrofitting of
housing.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                                  C-4

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
According to the US Department of Energy, residential energy use accounts for about 21 percent of
all energy use nationwide. Greater energy efficiency in these three residential components would
greatly contribute to an overall reduction in energy use.
Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all levels: individual dwelling units,
residential projects, neighborhoods, communities, and regions. Conservation can be achieved
through a variety of approaches, including reducing the use of energy-consuming appliances and
features in a home, physical modification of existing structures or land uses, and reducing the
reliance on automobiles by encouraging more mixed-use and infill development and providing
pedestrian access to commercial and recreational facilities.
The County’s goals and policies related to energy conservation are shaped by several other state,
regional, and local initiatives and programs, including:
    Title 24, California’s building standards for energy efficiency that apply to all new buildings in
     Amador County.
    The state’s climate change strategies focused on reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, as
     required by Assembly Bill (AB) 32, the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006.
    Federal and utility programs and funds promoted through each jurisdiction’s policies and
     administrative offices.
    The general plans of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Amador County,
Additional information describing each of these programs is provided in the following sections.
State Energy Efficiency Requirements for New Construction
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations contains California’s building standards for energy
efficiency. Each city and county must enforce these standards as part of its review of building plans
and issuance of building permits. The standards, prepared by the California Energy Commission
(CEC), were established in 1978 in response to a state legislative mandate to reduce California’s
energy consumption. The standards are updated periodically to consider and incorporate new
energy-efficiency technologies and methods. New 2013 Building Code standards went into effect on
July 1, 2014, with higher efficiency requirements across all building types. According to the CEC
estimates, Californians can expect energy savings of 25 percent for homes, and 14 percent for low-
rise multifamily buildings under the new standards. Under the new standards, homeowners are
expected to save approximately $6,200 over the life of a 30-year mortgage compared to the previous
code standards. The CEC estimates that California’s building efficiency standards (along with those
for energy-efficient appliances) saved more than $66 billion in electricity and natural gas costs from
1978 to 2013.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
The California legislature adopted the California Global Warming Solutions Act in 2006 (AB 32) and
declared that “global warming poses a serious threat to the economic well-being, public health,
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  C–5

                                                     APPENDIX C RESOURCES
natural resources, and the environment of California.” In adopting the act, the legislature found that
human activity is one of the leading contributors to an increase in carbon dioxide, methane, and
other greenhouse gases (GHGs). The state has declared these gases are leading to an increase in
average global temperatures and contributing to changes in climate throughout the world. The
purpose of AB 32 is to reduce GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 (25 percent reduction over
current levels). Executive Order S-03-05 requires further reduction of GHGs to 80 percent below
1990 levels by 2050.
AB 32 is being implemented by the California Air Resources Board (CARB) and local air pollution
control districts guided by a Scoping Plan developed by CARB in 2008, to be updated every five
years. The plan was most recently updated in 2014. The Scoping Plan encourages local jurisdictions
to adopt emissions reductions measures to help the state meet its emissions reductions goals. The
California Air Pollution Control Officers Association (CAPCOA), which represents local air
districts, has released reports describing ways to measure and reduce GHGs at the local level, and
model policies that local jurisdictions can include in their general plans to reduce GHGs and
contribute to achieving the important goals of AB 32. Many of the recommendations are relevant
for residential energy conservation. Among the suggestions are:
   Promote walkability through a highly connected street system with small blocks.
   Promote mixed-use neighborhood centers and transit-oriented development.
   Reduce the amount of water used for landscaping and encourage the use of recycled water for
    landscaping.
   Promote the use of fuel-efficient heating and cooling equipment and other appliances.
   Encourage green building designs in both new construction and building renovation.
   Encourage building orientations and landscaping that enhance natural lighting and sun exposure.
   Encourage the expansion of neighborhood-level products and services and public transit
    opportunities throughout the area to reduce automobile use.
   Promote energy-efficient design features, including appropriate site orientation, and use of light
    color roofing and building materials.
   Encourage the development of affordable housing throughout the community, as well as
    development of housing for elderly and low- and moderate-income households near public
    transportation services.
   Ensure that a portion of future residential development is affordable to low- and very low-
    income households.
February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                 C-6

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
UTILITY PROGRAMS AND FUNDING
The County and cities actively promote energy conservation programs offered through local service
and utility providers.
PG&E serves the electrical and gas needs in the county. PG&E offers energy assistance programs
for lower-income households to help lower-income households conserve energy and control utility
costs. These programs include the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE), the Relief for
Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH), and the Family Electric Rate Assistance
(FERA) programs.
The CARE program provides a 20 percent monthly discount on gas and electric rates to households
with qualified incomes, certain nonprofit organizations, homeless shelters, hospices, and other
qualified nonprofit group living facilities.
The REACH program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have no other way to
pay their energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income households, particularly the
elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed, who experience hardships and are unable
to pay for their necessary energy needs.
The FERA program provides a rate reduction for large households of three or more people with
low to middle income.
In addition, the California Department of Health and Human Services funds the Home Energy
Assistance Program (HEAP). HEAP provides financial assistance to eligible low-income persons to
offset the costs of heating and/or cooling their housing unit.
PG&E offers a number of energy reduction tips and information available, including home
weatherization, energy-saving tips, and a residential energy guide.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                     February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                 C–7

                                              APPENDIX C RESOURCES
This page is intentionally left blank.
February 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                          C-8
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                    TABLES HE-57A LAND INVENTORY TABLE
            Map ID     Jurisdiction        APN           Address Info Zone   Combining Designation    General Plan Land Use  Use Status Acreage Max Allowed Density Max Unit Capacity* Realistic Unit Capacity
              1      Plymouth         010150024000                     VC                              Urban Commercial       Vacant      1.43          16                  22                    11
              2      Plymouth         010032014000                     VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.29          16                   4                     2
              3      Plymouth         010031014000 9431 MAIN ST        VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.27          16                   4                     2
              4      Plymouth         010032017000                     VC                              Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.22          16                   3                     1
              5      Plymouth         010031013000 9435 MAIN ST        VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.20          16                   3                     1
              6      Plymouth         010053002000 9344 MAIN ST        VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.15          16                   2                     1
              7      Plymouth         010023012000                     VC                              Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.13          16                   2                     1
              8      Plymouth         010023006000 9369 MAIN ST        VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.08          16                   1                     1
              9      Plymouth         010032015000                     VC  Historic Downtown Overlay   Urban Commercial       Vacant      0.05          16                   1                     1
           Lower and Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                             2.81                                                    21
              10     Plymouth         010144002000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.63          4.8                  3                     2
              11     Plymouth         010160001000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.63          4.8                  3                     2
              12     Plymouth         010143001000 18190 SUTTER ST     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.61          4.8                  2                     1
              13     Plymouth         010111001000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.42          4.8                  2                     1
              14     Plymouth         010141005000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.35          4.8                  1                     1
              15     Plymouth         010083027000 18505 DAVIS ST      SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.26          4.8                  1                     1
              16     Plymouth         010132009000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.25          4.8                  1                     1
              17     Plymouth         010053010000 18615 POPLAR ST     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.23          4.8                  1                     1
              18     Plymouth         010142009000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.14          4.8                  1                     1
              19     Plymouth         010081007000 18451 SHERWOOD ST   SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.12          4.8                  1                     1
              20     Plymouth         010171018000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant     23.67          4.8                113                    90
              22     Plymouth         010011047000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      6.26          4.8                 30                    24
              23     Plymouth         010178008000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      1.85          4.8                  8                     6
              24     Plymouth         010021022000 9389 LANDRUM ST     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      1.01          4.8                  4                     3
              25     Plymouth         010011045000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.84          4.8                  4                     3
              26     Plymouth         010011046000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.82          4.8                  3                     2
              27     Plymouth         010011042000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.50          4.8                  2                     1
              28     Plymouth         010177029000 18840 GOLDEN WAY    SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.17          4.8                  1                     1
              29     Plymouth         010022003000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.17          4.8                  1                     1
              30     Plymouth         010172013000 19040 GOLDEN WAY    SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.17          4.8                  1                     1
              31     Plymouth         010176009000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.16          4.8                  1                     1
              32     Plymouth         010176008000 18930 NUGGET WAY    SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.16          4.8                  1                     1
              33     Plymouth         010175018000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.16          4.8                  1                     1
              34     Plymouth         010054006000 18673 MINERAL ST    SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.14          4.8                  1                     1
              35     Plymouth         010054013000 18664 POPLAR ST     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.08          4.8                  1                     1
              36     Plymouth         010061003000                     SR                             Auto Urban Residential  Vacant      0.03          4.8                  1                     1
           Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                                39.82                                                   150
           Plymouth Totals                                                                                                               42.63                                                   171
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                                                     C–9

I ~
1~ 1 ~                                              APPENDIX C RESOURCES
This page is intentionally left blank.
February 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                          City of Plymouth
                                       C-10
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                      TABLE HE-57B LAND INVENTORY TABLE
      Jurisdiction           APN        Zone      Combining Designation      General Plan Land Use Use Status   Acreage
  Plymouth               010150024000    VC                                    Urban Commercial     Vacant        1.43
  Plymouth               010032014000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.29
  Plymouth               010031014000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.27
  Plymouth               010032017000    VC                                    Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.22
  Plymouth               010031013000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.20
  Plymouth               010053002000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.15
  Plymouth               010023012000    VC                                    Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.13
  Plymouth               010023006000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.08
  Plymouth               010032015000    VC     Historic Downtown Overlay      Urban Commercial     Vacant        0.05
  Lower and Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                              2.81
  Plymouth               010144002000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.63
  Plymouth               010160001000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.63
  Plymouth               010143001000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.61
  Plymouth               010111001000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.42
  Plymouth               010141005000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.35
  Plymouth               010083027000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.26
  Plymouth               010132009000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.25
  Plymouth               010053010000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.23
  Plymouth               010142009000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.14
  Plymouth               010081007000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        0.12
  Plymouth               010171018000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant       23.67
  Plymouth               010178011000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        5.00
  Plymouth               010011047000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        6.26
  Plymouth               010178008000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        1.85
  Plymouth               010021022000    SR                    Auto Urban Residential               Vacant        1.01
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                               February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                       C–11

                                                                     APPENDIX C RESOURCES
      Jurisdiction          APN     Zone Combining Designation    General Plan Land Use Use Status    Acreage
  Plymouth             010011045000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.84
  Plymouth             010011046000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.82
  Plymouth             010011042000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.50
  Plymouth             010177029000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.17
  Plymouth             010022003000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.17
  Plymouth             010172013000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.17
  Plymouth             010176009000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.16
  Plymouth             010176008000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.16
  Plymouth             010175018000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.16
  Plymouth             010054006000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.14
  Plymouth             010054013000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.08
  Plymouth             010061003000  SR             Auto Urban Residential               Vacant          0.03
  Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                        44.82
  Plymouth Totals                                                                                       47.63
February 2015                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                            C-12
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
      ~r::====c:======:::----..,.i-------------~d --------,
      i    Legend                                                                      j
      ~
      i
          c::J        Plymouth City Limit                                                           ··-··-··-··-··3;------- ~
      j    Vacant Lan d Zoni ng
      I    D          Standard Residential (SR)                                                                                   21    \
      f -            Village Commercial (VC)                                                             ..                               \;
      I
      ~
                                                                                         20
                                                                                                         u
                                                                                                          . ~
                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                          :s
                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                           0                ,..~.
                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                             "'\.oOP
                                                                                                             tm      '2-ID
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                       -0
         ~\0 ~d
                                                                                                    ttav st
                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                       7
        ...............
                                                                                                              ;;;
                                                                                                              1!
           Mapm
                3
                             AP1'
                      010 150024000 VC
                      0 10l320 14<XJO vc
                      0 100310 11000 vc
                                          ·-   ~~~ l°:::1u:s'
                                                S uburl:en Conunercial
                                                S u bur ba.n Corwnercutl
                                                   U 1·l:e.n Col.llme r aal
                                                                             Aaeace
                                                                               '-"-"
                                                                               0.29
                                                                               0.27
                                                                                                              ii
                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                              w
                      0 10032017000 vc          S u burl:en Conu nerc.Ud       0 .22
                      010031013000 vc              Urban Conunc rcial          0.20
                6     0 10053002000 vc             Urlxtn Comwe rCU:1.l        0. 15
                      OI00'>-30 12000 vc           U ruan Co rn1ner C&A        0 . 13
                8     0 I 0023006000 vc            Urlnn Corwne rCl.8 1        0.08
                9     0 100320 15000 vc         Sul,urban Conunc rc aa l       0 .05
          Lower and Moderate lncome Subtot·al                                  2 . 81
               10     0 lO 144002000 SR        Aulo UrbRn Res ide ntial        0 .63
               II     010 16000 1000 SR        Auto Ur OO.n Res ide ntial      0.63
               12     0 10 14300 1000 SR       Aulo Urben Rcs idc nt.iel       0.6 1
               13     010 11 1001000 SR        hulo UrbA n Rce idc ntifll      0.42
               14     OIOM IOOSOOO SR          Auto Urbrul Reeide ntiAI        0.35
               15     0 1008.1027000 SR        Amo U r brul Re11ide ntil!l.1   0 .26
               16     0 IO J320090Cl0 SR       Auto Ur \Je n Res ide ntial     0.25
               17
               18
                      0 100530 10000 SR
                      Ol 0 1420090Cl0 SR
                                               Autt> U rl»t..n Rcs idc ntiA1
                                               Auto Urbll.n Res ide ntifll
                                                                               0 .23
                                                                               0. 14
                                                                                                                       ;;; ~
               19     0 10081007000 SR         Auto Ur ban Re1mle 11t1AI       0 . 1'2
                                                                                                                           12
               20
               21
                      0 10 1710 l8CXX> SR
                      0 10 1780 II OCIO SR
                                               Au to Urbm Re• ide ntial
                                               Auto Urbirn ReB ide ntial
                                                                              '23.67
                                                                               5.00                                   .,
               l2     OIOO l 1017000 SR        Auto Urbe.n Res ide ntial       6.26
               23     0 10 178008000 SR        Aulo Urb!i.n Rc•1de ntial       1.85
               24     0 100'21022000 SR        ,\uto Urban Re• idc ntia )      1.01                                       Bush S1
               25     0 10011015000 SR         Auto Ur brut Res ide ntial      0.84
               26     0 I 00 I I 046(Xl() SR   Auto Urban Rei. ide n ti&J      0 .82
               27     OIOO l 1042CXJO SR       Au lo Urban Re• icle 11Lial     0 .50
                                                                                                       ,I ......................... ....................
               28     0 10 177029000 SR        hu lo Ur ban Res ide ntial      0. 17
               29     0 1002200Xl00 SR         Auto Ur ban Res ide ntial       0 . 17
               30     010 I 720 l 30Cl0 SR     Auto Urbnn Re111dc ntlAI        0. 17
               31     010 176009000 SR         hulo UrbRn Ru ide ntial         0 . 16                                                "
               32     0 10 176008CXJ0 SR       Au to Urban Res ide ntial       0. 16
               33     0l0 1750 18000 SR        Auto Urblm Res ide ntial        0. 16
               3'     0 I OOG4000000 SR        Auto Ur ban Re• ide ntill.J     0 . 1'1
               35     0 ICXl540 130Cl0 SR      Aulo Ur ban Re• ide ntLBI       0 .08
               36     0 I 006100.1CXX) SR      .-.uto Urbsn Rcs ide ntiaJ      o.oo         Sourcts: Esri, HERE , Delorme , USGS , lntermap, increment P Corp .,
          Ab(lllve.Modenh Income Subtota.J                                    44.8 2:       NRC,$ , Esri Japan , METI, Esri China (Hong Kong) , Esri (Thailand),
          Pl       thTot.UI                                                   47.86
                                                                                            Tom! 6m , Mapmylndia , © OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS
         Source: ESRI ; Crty of Plymouth, 2014                                              Usef." Community
                                                                                                                                                       Figure 1
          6N
                     0                    500
                                          Feet
                                                              1,000
                                                                                                                                     Vacant Land Map
                                                                                                                                                   PMC '
                                                                                                                                                        -------
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                    February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                                         C–13

                                             APPENDIX C RESOURCES
This page is intentionally left bank.
February 2015                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                         C-14
                                                                                                                           - -
                                                                                                                I  -
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                I   I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                     - , I~
CITY OF PLYMOUTH
                                                                                                        Continue, Modify
             Housing Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                       or Delete Program
 H-1 Annual General Plan Review
 The City will ensure that residential
 development projects are consistent with
 the goals and policies of its General Plan
 and that there is internal consistency
 between the Housing Element and the rest
 of   the   General    Plan.   To    ensure
 consistency, the City will implement an
 annual monitoring program to report to
 the Planning Commission and City
 Council on progress toward meeting its
 goals. Monitoring will include a review of
 the progress toward achieving Housing                                                               Continue.
                                            The city adopted a comprehensive update to its Zoning
 Element objectives by the City and other                                                            This will now be a
                                            Ordinance on March 27, 2014.         The update achieves
 responsible agencies and departments,                                                               joint    Cities/County
                                            consistency with the General Plan and implements a
 meeting timing and funding commitments                                                              Housing         Element
                                            number of the programs listed in the Housing Element.
 for implementing actions, as well as the                                                            program.
 number of housing units provided or
 other measurable indicators achieved for
 each measure that has been put into
 place.
 Responsible         Agencies:         City
 Administrator, Planning, Public Works,
 Engineering, and Finance Departments,
 Planning Commission, and City Council
 Time     Frame:    Annually,     beginning
 December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                             D-1
                                      APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Program
 H-2 Zoning Code Review And Update
 To ensure that the Zoning Code works in
 conjunction with General Plan policies to
 achieve housing and other City objectives,
 the City will review and modify its Zoning
 Code on an ongoing basis. Revisions will
 be made, as appropriate, to promote
                                                The recently adopted Zoning Ordinance provides for a range
 flexibility in densities and uses, along with
                                                of densities and uses within the City’s residential zoning
 incentives      for     affordable    housing
                                                districts and incorporates several affordable housing-related Continue.
 production.
                                                concepts, including density bonus provisions and use
 Responsible            Agencies:          City listings required by state law.
 Administrator, Planning and Engineering
 Departments, Planning Commission, and
 City Council
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding       Source(s):     General    Fund,
 Developer Fees
 H-3 Subdivision Ordinance Review And
 Update
 The City will undertake a review and
 update of the subdivision ordinance.
 Along       with     updated       subdivision
 standards, the review will consider            This program has not been implemented.                        Continue.
 regulatory concessions that can help
 reduce the costs of affordable housing
 development       while     balancing    basic
 environmental, health, and safety needs.
 While reducing allowable lot sizes can
 contribute substantially to a reduction in
February 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                                   D-2

                                                                                                                                  - -
                                                                                                                      I  -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     I   I I"  ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                                I I
                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
  total housing costs (i.e., lower per-unit
  land and infrastructure improvement
  costs due to higher densities), the vast
  majority of single-family residential lots
  are already at a minimum size to allow
  single-family    residential  units.     The
  subdivision ordinance should be reviewed
  and revised, if necessary, with regard to
  multi-family unit conversion from rentals
  to      for-purchase      housing       (i.e.,
  condominiums).
  Responsible        Agencies:      Planning,
  Engineering, Building, and Public Works
  Departments, Planning Commission, and
  City Council
  Time Frame: December 2012
  Funding      Source(s):    General    Fund,
  Developer Fees
  H-4 Local, State, And Federal Programs
  The City will actively pursue funding
  through various state and federal                                                                        Modify     to     review
  programs. The City will submit grant           No residential development has occurred in Plymouth since redevelopment agency
  applications depending on the availability     the mid-2000s, so there has been no opportunity for this  references.
  of funding, Plymouth’s eligibility for such    program to apply since the Housing Element was last
                                                 updated.    However, the City did receive a Community     This will now be a
  funding, and the applicability of the
                                                 Development Block Grant that funded the majority of the   joint    Cities/County
  programs for use in Plymouth projects
                                                 recently completed Zoning Ordinance update process.       Housing         Element
  according to its housing needs. Priority for
                                                                                                           program.
  funding will be given to extremely low-
  income households. Local, state, and
  federal programs include:
I
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                   D-3

                                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                    Accomplishments
                                                                                     or Delete Program
  • BEGIN (federal)
  • CalHome Program (federal)
  • Community Development Block Grant
     (federal)
  • Multifamily Housing Program (federal)
  • Section 8 (federal)
  • State Homeownership Program (state)
  • Residential      Energy    Conservation
     (state)
  • Community Reinvestment Act (federal)
  • Mortgage Credit Certificate
  • Redevelopment 20% set-aside funds
     for low- and moderate-income housing
  • Non-Profit      Housing    Development
     Corporation
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning
 Department, Grants Coordinator
 Time Frame: Annually, and as NOFAs are
 released
 Funding       Source(s):   General    Fund,
 Program Administration Funds (Housing
 Authority), Redevelopment Funds (future)
February 2015                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                         City of Plymouth
                                                D-4

                                                                                                                          - -
                                                                                                                I -
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 I I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                        I I
                                                                                                       Continue, Modify
             Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                       or Delete Program
 H-5 Density Bonus Ordinance
 The City will adopt and implement a
 density bonus ordinance in compliance
 with Government Code Section 65915 to
 help create affordable housing units
 without a direct cash outlay by the City.
 This program will provide a property
 owner with the ability to increase the
 income and therefore the value of a
 property by allowing the developer to build
 a few more income-producing units than
 allowed under the base zoning. This         As part of the city’s comprehensive update to its Zoning
                                                                                                      Delete.
 increased income then can be used to        Ordinance, density bonus provisions have been adopted.
 help subsidize below-market rental rates
 for very low- and low-income households
 and to purchase housing for middle-
 income households.
 Responsible       Agencies:       Planning
 Department, City Council
 Time Frame: December 2012
 Funding     Source(s):    General    Fund,
 Developer   Fees, Redevelopment     Funds
 (future)
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                 February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                              D-5

                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
 H-6     Fee Structure
 The City will conduct an annual review
 and revision of City financing mechanisms
 and fee structure to ensure that (1)
 adequate     funding    is   available   for
 infrastructure and services needed to
 support growth, and (2) fees and revenues
 are adequate without causing an undue
 burden.. If any constraints are identified,
 the City will establish mitigating actions
 including concessions or incentives such     The City regularly reviews its financing mechanisms and fee
                                                                                                           Continue.
 as deferring or reducing housing impact      structure, but not on an annual basis.
 fees for developments that include
 affordable units.
 Responsible           Agencies:         City
 Administrator, Planning, Building, Public
 Works,     Engineering,     and     Finance
 Departments
 Time Frame: Annually, as projects are
 submitted by developers and landowners
 Funding Source(s): Developer Fees
 H-7 Residential Land Inventory
                                                                                                           Continue.
 To ensure that there is a sufficient supply
                                                                                                           This will now be a
 of multi-family and single-family zoned      No new development has occurred in the City for nearly a
                                                                                                           joint    Cities/County
 land to meet the City’s regional housing     decade. With the possibility of development increasing, this
                                                                                                           Housing        Element
 needs allocation (RHNA), the City will       program should be implemented.
                                                                                                           program.
 annually review its land inventory. The
 City will focus on the examination of
 single-family-zoned vacant infill lots for
February 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                 City of Plymouth
                                                                D-6

                                                                                                                           - -
                                                                                                                 I -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 I I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                         I I
                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                        Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                        or Delete Program
  potential redevelopment and additional
  development of affordable second units,
  multi-family dwellings, and special needs
  housing.
  Responsible       Agencies:      Planning
  Department
  Time Frame: Annually
  Funding Source(s): General Fund
  H-8 Redevelopment Plan
  In    2007    the   City   completed    a
  redevelopment feasibility study which
  determined that the establishment of a
  redevelopment area would be viable. Due
  to budget constraints, the City has been
  unable to move forward with this. Once
  funding is available, the City plans to
  prepare and implement a Redevelopment
  Plan to rehabilitate and revitalize the
  commercial and residential structures in  Following the adoption of the last Housing Element update,
                                                                                                       Delete.
  Plymouth. The City will use all potential redevelopment was eliminated by the state.
  sources of public and private housing
  funding for repairs and upgrades. With
  implementation, 20 percent of the tax
  increment       generated     by      the
  Redevelopment Agency’s program will go
  into a Redevelopment Low- and Moderate-
  Income Housing Fund.
  Responsible Agencies: Redevelopment
  Agency, City Administrator, Planning,
'
  Public Works, Engineering, and Finance
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                  February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                             D-7

                                     APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                  Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                         Accomplishments
                                                                                                                  or Delete Program
 Departments
 Time Frame: December 2014
 Funding Source(s): Municipal Services
 Agreement with Ione Band of Miwok
 (tentative), Redevelopment Funds (future),
 State and Federal Grants
 H-9 Design Review
 The City will consider adopting design
 guidelines for development of duplexes and
 small-scale multi-family units in addition to   The recently adopted Zoning Ordinance update requires
 other flexible housing designs. The             design review for certain residential projects. Depending
 guidelines      will    consider      building  upon the scope of the project, this could result in Minor
 orientation, ceiling height, street layout, lot (staff level determination) or Major (Planning Commission
 design, landscaping, and street tree            determination) Design Review.The City adopted design
 configuration in subdivision review for the     guidelines for the Historic Downtown Overlay District in
 purposes of solar access and energy/water       2012. The document addresses the preservation of several
                                                                                                                Modify the program to
 conservation.                                   historic structures along Main Street and the perpetuation
                                                                                                                omit the creation of a
                                                 of the corridor’s historic character through new infill
 The design review process, as a component                                                                      historic district and
                                                 projects, building renovations and site designs. The City is
 of project review, will be carried out either                                                                  design guidelines for
                                                 currently in the process of drafting design guidelines for the
 as ministerial or discretionary review,                                                                        the district.
                                                 Scenic Corridor Overlay District. While the documents do
 according to project type. The process will
                                                 not specifically address residential development, they do
 encourage innovative housing types and
                                                 provide guidelines that will facilitate the enhancement of
 design, and allow mobile homes and
                                                 residential projects.
 factory-built housing with permanent
 foundations that also meet all design review
 requirements to be placed on residentially
 zoned parcels, pursuant to zoning and
 design review requirements.
 Finally, design reviews will be used to
 ensure that historic structures are
February 2015                                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                      City of Plymouth
                                                                    D-8

                                                                                                             - -
                                                                                                  I  -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                 I   I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                           I I
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                          Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                         or Delete Program
  retained. The Planning Commission will
  create a historic district so that the design
  review process can be applied to the
  identified structures and to allow for the
  application of the State’s Historic Building
  Code.
  To ensure the design review guidelines do
  not pose a constraint on the development of
  affordable housing the city will, during the
  drafting of the guidelines reach out to
  nonprofit and other developers as well as
  annually review and revise the process.
  Responsible         Agencies:        Planning
  Department, Planning Commission, City
  Council
  Time Frame: Consider adopting design
  guidelines by December 2011; Creation of
  historic district by December 2011; and
  ongoing for design review. Annually review
  as part of the City’s APR.
  Funding      Source(s):     General     Fund,
  Developer Fees, Redevelopment Fund
  H-10 Fair Housing
                                                                                       Continue.
  The City will adopt a formal policy
                                                                                       This will now be a
  statement prohibiting discriminatory and
                                                                                       joint    Cities/County
  unfair housing practices within the City.     This program has not been implemented.
                                                                                       Housing         Element
  The City plans to establish a relationship
                                                                                       program.
  with the Amador/Tuolumne Community
  Action Agency in order to refer persons to
I
  them to resolve fair housing complaints.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                  February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                D-9

                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                         Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                        or Delete Program
 Information on state and federal fair
 housing laws will be made available at
 City Hall and will be mailed to rental
 property owners, lenders, and real estate
 agents in the community.
 Responsible Agencies:        Planning and
 Building Departments,        Redevelopment
 Agency
 Time Frame: Ongoing, adopt a policy by
 December 2013, establish relationship
 with     Amador/Tuolumne        Community
 Action Agency by December 2013.
 Funding Source(s): Redevelopment Funds
 (future), State and Federal Grants
 H-11 Public/Private Partnerships
 The City will work with nonprofit and for-
 profit housing development corporations
 specializing in housing for various special
 needs groups to accommodate housing                                                                  Continue.
 that meets the needs of these groups.
                                                                                                      This will now be a
 These agencies include Mercy Housing
                                             No development has occurred in the city since the mid-   joint    Cities/County
 California and its Self-Help Housing
                                             2000s; therefore, this program has not been implemented. Housing        Element
 Program. The City will identify the needs
                                                                                                      program.
 of these housing groups that can be met
 by the City to facilitate development of
 units affordable to extremely low-, very
 low-, and low-income households. If there
 is an interest in developing housing for
 older adults that will provide a continuum
 of care for senior residents of Plymouth
February 2015                                                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                            City of Plymouth
                                                              D-10
                                                                                     - -
                                                                          I  -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                          I  I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                   I I
                                                                                       -
                                                                  Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                   Accomplishments
                                                                  or Delete Program
  (e.g., independent living units with
  common dining facilities, assisted care
  facilities, and skilled nursing facilities),
  the City will work closely with these
  groups      to     eliminate   governmental
  constraints (e.g., reduce fees, provide
  flexibility in development standards) to
  ensure that this type of housing can be
  built.
  The City will also work with nonprofit
  housing corporations to educate its
  citizens regarding the necessity of
  providing the affordable housing needed
  to support the job growth occurring in
  Plymouth. Specifically, this information
  will focus on the need to provide
  affordable housing close to jobs in an
  effort to reduce the traffic and air quality
  impacts that result from long commutes.
  In     addition,    programs    will  target
  community        opposition  to affordable
  housing projects in an effort to remove
  negative perceptions. Education will occur
  through public meetings, presentations to
  the community, and articles published in
  the local newspaper.
  The City will promote and publicize the
  availability of funding for housing
  rehabilitation loans and grants (when
  additional     CDBG/HOME        funds    are
  acquired) through the local media,
  mailings to property owners in targeted
'
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                           February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                               D-11
                                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Program
 areas, and mailings to local contractors
 and developers. Section 8 information will
 also be made available at City Hall.
 Responsible Agencies: City Council, City
 Administrator, Planning, Engineering, and
 Finance Departments
 Time Frame: Ongoing 2010–2014
 Funding      Source(s):     Redevelopment
 Funds (future), State and Federal Grants
 H-12 Interagency Coordination               The City has entered into multiple agreements to provide
                                             various services. The City has an ongoing agreement with
 The City will continue to work with         the Amador Fire Protection District (AFPD) to provide fire
 Amador Water Agency to find a solution to   protection services for the city at the same rate the district
 the City’s domestic water needs. In         charges property owners throughout their service area in
 addition, the City will work with Amador    Amador County. Additionally, the Amador County Sheriffs
 Fire Protection District and Amador         Office has agreed to provide limited law enforcement
 County Sheriff to ensure that fire          services to the City in exchange for the annual COPS
 protection,    law    enforcement,     and  allocation funding provided by the State of California. The
 emergency services are available to City    City built a water pipeline in conjunction with the Amador
 residents    and    business     operators. Water Agency (AWA) to provide water for the current              Continue.
 Furthermore, the City of Plymouth will      residents of Plymouth and to provide water through the
 cooperate with Amador County in the (1)     current anticipated General Plan build-out in Plymouth.
 development of transportation options       The City purchases wholesale water from the AWA and
 that better meet the needs of seniors; (2)  resells the water to local water customers. The City
 study of in-home and visitation care        maintains all of the water infrastructure within the service
 issues for seniors; (3) exploration of      area boundary. The City of Plymouth will continue to
 demand for a continuum of care facility     cooperate with Amador County in the (1) development of
 (i.e., independent living, assisted living, transportation options that better meet the needs of
 and skilled nursing) in Plymouth and/or     seniors; (2) study of in-home and visitation care issues for
 nearby communities; and (4) provision of    seniors; (3) exploration of demand for a continuum of care
 opportunities for cooperative housing. The  facility (i.e., independent living, assisted living, and skilled
February 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                                 D-12

                                                                                                                                  - -
                                                                                                                        I -
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                         I I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                                I I
                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                               Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Program
 City will also work with other jurisdictions    nursing) in Plymouth and/or nearby communities; and (4)
 to identify the need for homeless shelters.     provision of opportunities for cooperative housing. The City
                                                 will also work with other jurisdictions to identify the need
 Responsible            Agencies:           City
                                                 for homeless shelters.
 Administrator, Planning, Public Works,
 Engineering, and Finance Departments
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding       Source(s):     General     Fund,
 Redevelopment Fund (future)
 H-13     SB 520 Requirements
 To ensure the City complies with all
 requirements of Senate Bill (SB 520), the
 City will amend the Zoning Code to
 update the definition of family to state
 “[o]ne or more persons occupying a
 housing unit and living as a single
 housekeeping unit.” The City will also
 formalize a process for reasonable
 accommodation         for     persons      with The recently adopted Zoning Ordinance includes Section
 disabilities     (and     their    designated   19.10.060, Reasonable Accommodations, which details this     Delete.
 representatives) to ensure the process          information.
 facilitates the development, maintenance,
 and improvement of housing for persons
 with disabilities, including minimizing
 public hearings and reviewing and
 revising     decision-making      criteria   to
 ensure consistency with fair housing
 regulations.      The     City    will    make
 information available to the public about
 its formal reasonable accommodation
 process based on the guidelines from the
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                  D-13

                                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                         or Delete Program
 California Department of Housing and
 Community Development (HCD). This
 information will be available through
 postings and pamphlets at the City and
 on the City’s website.
 In addition, the City will continue to
 ensure that all construction projects
 requiring building permits comply with
 the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
 as provided by the Uniform Building Code.
 The City will assist property owners and
 contractors in complying with ADA
 requirements      when      retrofit    or
 rehabilitation projects are initiated for
 public or commercial structures.
 Responsible       Agencies:      Planning
 Department, Planning Commission, City
 Council
 Time Frame: Amend the Zoning Code to
 update the definition of family by
 December 2011. Adopt a reasonable
 accommodation procedure by December
 2011
 Funding      Source(s):  General     Fund,
 Redevelopment Fund (future)
 H-14 Building Codes
 The City will continue to adopt current    The City is continuing to adopt current updates and enforce
                                                                                                        Continue.
 updates and enforce the Uniform Building   the Uniform Building Code.
 Code to ensure that all new and
 rehabilitated housing constructed in
February 2015                                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                             City of Plymouth
                                                              D-14

                                                                                    - -
                                                                         I  -
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                          I  I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                  I I
                                                                 Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                    Accomplishments
                                                                 or Delete Program
 Plymouth complies with applicable health
 and safety requirements, including energy
 conservation        and        handicapped
 accessibility.
 The update would incorporate the
 provisions of the State Historical Building
 Code, a statute within the Health and
 Safety Code. The California Historical
 Building Code consists of regulations
 adopted pursuant to building standards
 law—Part 8 of Title 24 of California’s Code
 of Regulations, and Chapter 34, Division
 II of the California Building Code. Such
 standards and regulations will facilitate
 the restoration or change of occupancy so
 as to preserve the buildings original or
 restored elements and historical features,
 to encourage energy conservation and a
 cost-effective approach to preservation,
 and to provide for reasonable safety from
 fire or other hazards for occupants and
 users of these buildings and to provide
 reasonable availability and usability by
 the persons with disabilities.
 Responsible Agencies:        Planning   and
 Building Departments
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding Source(s): None required
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                              D-15

                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          Continue, Modify
             Housing Program                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                          or Delete Program
 H-15 Manufactured/Mobile Homes
 The City will amend the Zoning Code to
 allow manufactured housing to be
 regulated in the same manner as a
 conventional or stick-built structure. The
 City shall only subject manufactured
 homes (mobile homes) to the same
                                                                                                        Modify to remove the
 development standards to which a
                                                                                                        requirement to have
 conventional     single-family   residential
                                              This program was partially implemented with the adoption  the same development
 dwelling on the same lot would be subject,
                                              of the updated Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance     standards           for
 including, but not limited to, building
                                              now provides the same development standards for           manufactured/mobile
 setback standards, side and rear yard
                                              manufactured/mobile homes and standard SFR typologies,    homes                as
 requirements, standards for enclosures,
                                              but only allows mobile homes with a use permit.           conventional    single-
 access, and vehicle parking, aesthetic
                                                                                                        family   homes     and
 requirements, and minimum square
                                                                                                        continue.
 footage requirements.
 Responsible Agencies:        Planning   and
 Building Departments
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): Developer Fees,
 Permit Fees, Redevelopment Fund (future)
 H-16 Assisting “At-Risk” Units
 The City currently contains no deed-
 restricted units and therefore there are no
 “at-risk” units at this time. Should the     The city has yet to acquire any deed-restricted units.    Continue.
 City have any affordable units in the
 future, the City will contact all state and
 federal agencies that might provide
 affordable housing funds to determine
February 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                              City of Plymouth
                                                                D-16

                                                                                                                            - -
                                                                                                                  I -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                  I I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                          I I
                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                          Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                         or Delete Program
  whether any funding is available for
  future preservation of assisted housing
  developments. The City will work with
  not-for-profit housing providers to apply
  for affordable housing subsidies that may
  be available for this use, if necessary in
  the future.
  Responsible         Agencies:       Planning
  Department, Redevelopment Agency
  Time Frame: As needed
  Funding Source(s): State and Federal
  Grants, Redevelopment Fund (future)
                                                                                                                              -
  H-17 Energy Efficiency
  The City will continue to enforce the State
  of     California’s    Title    24     energy
  requirements.        Title     24      energy
  requirements        define       construction
  standards       that      promote      energy
  conservation. In addition, the City will
  continue to partner with Amador-
  Tuolumne Community Action Agency and          The City has not deviated away from enforcing Title 24. Continue.
  ACES, Inc. (formerly Amador County
  Environmental Services) to promote
  energy conservation.
  Some measures the City could undertake
  to assist in the implementation of the
  ATCAA       program      include    providing
  brochures at public counters, providing
  brochures to senior centers, or using
I
  redevelopment funds (if pursued) to assist
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                  February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                 D-17

                                    APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                          or Delete Program
 homeowners            in        undertaking
 weatherization projects in conjunction
 with government-assisted rehabilitation
 projects.
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning,
 Building, and Engineering Departments
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding Source(s): None required
 H-18 Transitional         and    Supportive
 Housing (SB 2)
 Pursuant to Senate Bill (SB) 2, the City
 must explicitly allow both supportive and
 transitional    housing     types    in   all
 residential zones. The City will update its
 Zoning     Code    to    include    separate
 definitions of transitional and supportive
 housing as defined in Health and Safety
                                               The recently adopted Zoning Ordinance update incorporates
 Code Sections 50675.2 and 50675.14.
                                               provisions pertaining to transitional and supportive      Delete.
 Both transitional and supportive housing
                                               housing.
 types will be allowed as a permitted use
 subject to only the same restrictions on
 residential uses contained in the same
 type of structure.
 Responsible        Agencies:        Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
February 2015                                                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                                               D-18
                                                                                                                                - -
                                                                                                                     I  -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                     I  I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                              I I
                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                             Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
  H-19 Emergency Shelters (SB 2)
  Pursuant to Senate Bill (SB) 2, the City
  will amend the Zoning Code to allow for
  emergency shelters by right in the
  Commercial (C) zoning district with a
  Heavy      Commercial      General        Plan
  designation, which is close to services
  (grocery) and transit stops along Highway
  49. Within the C3 zone, the City has
  identified 16 acres on seven parcels
  ranging in size from 0.44 acres to 10.6
  acres that will allow adequate capacity for
  the provision of an emergency shelter. In      The city incorporated basic provisions pertaining to
  addition, the City will evaluate adopting      emergency shelters via the Zoning Ordinance update, but
  development and managerial standards           did not allow the use in the appropriate zoning districts.
  that will be consistent with Government        Staff has processed a zoning amendment to allow            Delete
  Code      Section     65583(a)(4).      These  emergency shelters by right in the Commercial, Suburban
  standards may include such items as:           Commercial,        Highway          Commercial,       and
                                                 Industrial/Business Park districts.
    • Lighting;
    • On-site management;
    • Maximum number of beds or persons
      to be served nightly by the facility;
    • Security during hours that             the
      emergency shelter is in operation.
    • Off-street     parking     based        on
      demonstrated need; and
  Responsible         Agencies:      Planning
  Department
'
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                      February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                 D-19

                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                            or Delete Program
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
 H-20 Farmworker Housing
 State law (Section 17021.5 and 17021.6 of
 the Health and Safety Code) requires that
 farmworker housing consisting of 36 beds
 or 12 units or spaces is deemed an
 agricultural use permitted without a
 conditional use permit, zoning variance,
 or other zoning clearance shall be
 required of this employee housing that is
 not required of any other agricultural      The recently adopted Zoning Ordinance update incorporates
                                                                                                          Delete.
 activity in the same zone. The City         provisions pertaining to farmworker housing.
 currently allows farmworker housing in its
 RS zone, but will amend the City’s Zoning
 Code to allow employee housing by right
 in zones allowing agricultural uses.
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
 H-21         Extremely         Low-Income   The city incorporated a more adequate definition for single- Modify to eliminate
 Households (AB 2634)                        room occupancy (SRO) units via the Zoning Ordinance          the requirement of
                                             update; however, the document does not include specific      updating           the
 Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 requires the
                                             development standards for the units in any of the city’s     definition for SRO
 quantification and analysis of existing and
                                             commercial districts.                                        units.
 projected housing needs of extremely low-
 income households. Housing elements         Since no development has occurred in the city since the      This will now be a
 must also identify zoning to encourage      Housing Element was last adopted, the community has not      joint    Cities/County
February 2015                                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                City of Plymouth
                                                              D-20

                                                                                                                             - -
                                                                                                                   I -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                   I I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                           I I
                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                           Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                          or Delete Program
  and facilitate supportive housing and         had the opportunity to help fund or otherwise encourage  Housing       Element
  single-room occupancy units (SROs). In        the development or rehabilitation of units affordable to program.
  order to facilitate housing for extremely     extremely low-income residents.
  low-income persons, the City will amend
  the Zoning Code to clarify the definition of
  single-room occupancy units, as well as
  describe specific development standards
  for these units in the Commercial (C)
  zoning district with a General Plan
  designation of Urban Commercial.
  In addition, the City will prioritize funding
  and/or offer financial incentives or
  regulatory concessions to encourage the
  development or rehabilitation of single-
  room occupancy units and/or other units
  affordable to the extremely low-income,
  such as supportive and multi-family
  units.
  Responsible        Agencies:         Planning
  Department
  Time Frame: December 2011
  Funding Source(s): General Fund
  H-22 Second Units (AB 1866)
  The City will ensure compliance with the
  second dwelling unit law (AB 1866) by         The recently updated Zoning Ordinance permits second
  reviewing and amending its Zoning Code        dwelling units in ministerial fashion in all residential Delete.
  to consider second dwelling units             districts.
  permitted uses in the RS zoning district
  ministerially, that is, without any
I
  discretionary review or a public hearing.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                    February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                 D-21
                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                              or Delete Program
 The amendment will ensure that second
 units are allowed uses in the RS zoning
 district and require only ministerial review
 without    any     excessive   burdensome
 conditions of approval.
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
 H-23 Parking Requirements
 The City will amend the Zoning Code to
 require 1.5 parking spaces for studio
 apartments and 1 bedroom units in multi-
 family housing developments.
                                               This program has not been implemented.                        Continue.
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
 H-24 Zoning Changes                           This program has not been implemented. The City’s default
 As described in Section 3, the City of        density did not increase to 20 units an acre from 15 units
 Plymouth is planning to create a new          an acre in this planning period as had been anticipated.
 Residential High Density Multifamily (RH)     The City’s current General Plan allows a maximum of 16
 zoning district. This RH zoning district will units per acre and the City feels that this is an appropriate Delete.
 allow for a density range from 16 units       density to accommodate affordable housing.
 per acre to 21 units per acre by right.       As the default density remained 15 units per acre, currently
 The City’s current General Plan allows for    zoned land was sufficient to meet the 4th round RHNA and it
 a maximum residential density of 16 units     was determined that rezoning wasn’t necessary.
February 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                   City of Plymouth
                                                                D-22

                                                                                                                                    - -
                                                                                                                        I  -
  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                        I  I I"  ;r:1=t
                                                                                                                                  I I
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                                or Delete Program
  an acre, however, consistent with General
  Plan Section 3.42 properties proximate to
  major roadways should be eligible for
  additional      development        intensity.
  Therefore once applicable sites are
  rezoned to the RH zoning district they will
  allow for up to 21 units per acre
  (consistent     with     current      zoning
  regulations) by right and will not require a
  CUP or other discretionary approval
  Responsible         Agencies:       Planning
  Department
  Time Frame: Amend the Zoning Code to
  include the RH zoning district December
  2012
  Funding Source(s): General Fund
  H-25 Rezone To Meet The RHNA
  Based on the Vacant Residential Land          This program has not been implemented. The City’s default
  Inventory (Table 31), the City has a          density did not increase to 20 units an acre from 15 units
  shortfall of land available to extremely      an acre in this planning period as had been anticipated.
  low-,    very    low-,   and    low-income    The City’s current General Plan allows a maximum of 16
  households. The City needs enough land        units per acre and the City feels that this is an appropriate
  to accommodate 26 units on sites that         density to accommodate affordable housing.                    Modify    to    include
  allow for 15 units per acre. To address                                                                     different   site    and
  this shortfall, the City is planning to       No development has occurred in the city since the early
                                                                                                              continue
  rezone and redesignate 2.5 acres of site 2    2000s and the City can accommodate the 4th round RHNA
  (APN 010011047000) to the new RH              on existing sites that allow up to 16 units per acre.
  zoning district and Urban Residential (UR)    However, the City is obligated to rezone land to address the
  General Plan designation within one year      26 units. Program H-9 has been included in the updated
  of adoption.       The site that will be      element to address this shortfall.
  redesignated and rezoned will allow
I
  exclusively residential uses by right, (will
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                         February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                  D-23

                                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
              Housing Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                     or Delete Program
 not require a CUP or other discretionary
 approval) and a minimum of 16 units per
 acre. The site will have the capacity for at
 least 16 units per site and will be
 available for development within the
 planning period where water and sewer
 can be provided and not have any
 physical or environmental constraints on
 the site.
 In conjunction with Action H-24, both
 sites 1 and 2 fall within proximately to
 major roadways and are eligible for
 additional development intensity (General
 Plan Section 3.42). Therefore once said
 sites are rezoned to the RH zoning district
 they will allow for up to 21 units per acre
 by right and will not require a CUP or
 other discretionary approval).
 If, through the planning process it is
 determined that it is not feasible to
 redesignate and rezone site 2 to a higher
 density, the City will consider 2.5 acres of
 site 1 or identify additional sites to meet
 their RHNA shortfall of 26 units.
 Responsible        Agencies:       Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2012
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
 H-26 Remove the CUP Process in the
                                              This program has been implemented through the updated
 Residential High Density Multifamily                                                               Delete.
                                              Zoning Ordinance.
 (RH) Zoning District
February 2015                                                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                          City of Plymouth
                                                             D-24
                                                                                    - -
                                                                         I  -
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT                          I  I I" ;r:1=t
                                                                                  I I
                                                                                      -
                                                                 Continue, Modify
             Housing Program                     Accomplishments
                                                                 or Delete Program
 Currently projects proposing more than
 fourteen units are required to be reviewed
 under the conditional use permit process.
 To ensure the conditional use permit
 process does not impact the timing, cost,
 and supply of multi-family development,
 the City shall remove the CUP process
 requirement for the Residential High
 Density Multifamily (RH) zoning district
 Responsible       Agencies:       Planning
 Department
 Time Frame: December 2011
 Funding Source(s): General Fund
                                                                                      -
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                          February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                              D-25
                                      APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank
February 2015                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                         City of Plymouth
                                                    D-26
 APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
INTRODUCTION
Senate Bill (SB) 244 (Wolk) was approved by Governor Brown in October 2011 and requires cities
and counties to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged unincorporated communities
(DUC) in city and county general plans, Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) Municipal
Service Reviews (MSR), and annexation decisions.
Government Code Section 65302.10(a) requires that before the due date for adoption of the next
housing element after January 1, 2012, the general plan land use element must be updated to identify
and describe each DUC (fringe community, legacy community, and/or island community) that exists
within unincorporated areas of the county or in spheres of influence (SOI) of each city; analyze for
each identified community the water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and structural fire protection
needs; and identify financial funding alternatives for the extension of services to any identified
communities. SB 244 defines a DUC as a place that meets the following criteria:
       Contains 10 or more dwelling units in “close proximity” to one another where 12 or more
        registered voters reside (for the purpose of this analysis, “close proximity” is defined as a
        density greater than 1 unit per acre).
       Is either within a city sphere of influence (SOI) (also known as a fringe community), is an
        island within a city boundary (also known as an island community), or is geographically
        isolated and has existed for at least 50 years (also known as a legacy community). Figure 1
        graphically depicts these types of communities. Only legacy communities potentially occur in
        the unincorporated area of Amador County.
       Has a median household income that is 80 percent or less than the statewide median
        household income. (According to the US Census Bureau, American Community Survey
        (ACS), the median household income for California between 2008 and 2012 was $61,400;
        therefore, communities with an area median income of $49,120 or lower qualify.)
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  E-1

                                              APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
                   FIGURE 1: TYPES OF COMMUNITIES THAT MAY BE DUCS
                           , ,. - -   ---------- ---- - - -- - '                \
                                                                                          Legacy
                     I
                       /
                         ~
                                                                                 I
                                                                                 I
                                                                                         j
                    I                                                            I    @
                    I                                                            I
                                             City
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                 I
                                                                              I
            Island                                                            I
                                                                              I
                                                                              \
                                                                   ®<            ' I
                                                                                        Fringe
                                                                                   I
                       ~---' ----- -- - - - - - -- -- -1~-
     Sphere of Influence
                         '                                                    ~
                                                                                      Com munity  I
Source: OPR 2013
ANALYSIS OF AMADOR COUNTY, PLYMOUTH, JACKSON, IONE, AND
SUTTER CREEK DISADVANTAGED UNINCORPORATED COMMUNITIES
An analysis to identify DUCs within unincorporated Amador County and the SOIs of the cities of
Plymouth, Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek was conducted in July 2014 in order to address the
requirements of SB 244. In conducting the analysis, resources utilized included the SB 244 Technical
Advisory (OPR 2013), the Amador County 2014 Municipal Service Reviews (MSR), the city limit
boundary maps of the five cities in Amador County using geographic information systems (GIS),
water management plans, and other documentation from local jurisdictions, agencies, and special
districts. Unless otherwise stated, service review information is drawn from the 2014 MSR.
Qualifications for DUCs vary slightly for unincorporated communities within city SOIs and those
outside SOIs, as discussed in the section above in the second bullet. Analysis to identify DUCs
within the SOIs of the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek and the unincorporated
county was conducted based on the requirements for each. A dozen unincorporated communities
were identified using Census Designated Place (CDP) information and were considered for inclusion
of communities to analyze as DUCs. Most were eliminated because they did not meet the
qualifications, based on census income data, mapping information, and plat records.
The criteria the used to determine whether communities are DUCs are shown in Table 1.
February 2015                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Plymouth
                                                   E-2

 APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
                                  TABLE 1: DUC IDENTIFICATION MATRIX FOR AMADOR COUNTY
                                                                                                     Dwelling
                                                                                         Legacy                  All Criteria
                                                          80% of CA Median Income                  Units Close
                                                                                       Community                    Met?
                                                                                                    Proximity
       Unincorporated
                                    Jurisdiction          CDP Median
          Community                                                         Qualifies?  Qualifies? Qualifies?
                                                             Income
                                                                                                                  Qualifies?
                                                                                                   Density >1
                                                                     ≤$49,120          Age ≥50 yrs
                                                                                                    unit/acre
 Buena Vista                      Amador County              $49,167           NO           —           —            NO
 Comanche North Shore             Amador County              $55,078           NO           —           —            NO
 Drytown                          Amador County              $21,094          YES         YES          YES           YES
 Fiddletown                       Amador County              $65,603           NO           —           —            NO
 Kirkwood                         Amador County              $38,015          YES          NO           —            NO
 Martell                          Amador County              $13,649          YES         YES          YES           YES
 Pine Grove                       Amador County              $46,957          YES          NO           —            NO
 Pioneer                          Amador County              $36,146          YES          NO           —            NO
 River Pines                      Amador County              $40,269          YES         YES          YES           YES
 Volcano                          Amador County              $89,637           NO           —           —            NO
Sources: 2008–2012 ACS, US Census; County Plat Maps; GIS Mapping, 2014
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                  February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                                        E-3

                                            APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
After the initial review, it was determined that Plymouth does not have any DUCs in the sphere of
influence.
PLYMOUTH
No concentrations of residences exist within the City of Plymouth’s Sphere of Influence outside of
the city limits. Therefore, no potential DUCs were identified.
FUTURE ANNEXATIONS
The LAFCo Municipal Service Review was consulted to determine whether any annexations from
the county into Plymouth are anticipated. No annexations are anticipated.
CONCLUSION
No DUCs have been identified in the City of Plymouth sphere of influence. No further action by
the City is required.
February 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                               City of Plymouth
                                                 E-4

 APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS                                                          :~
LIST OF REFERENCES AND AGENCIES CONSULTED
Amador County. 2010. Amador County Existing General Plan Land Use Classifications.
Amador County LAFCo (Local Agency Formation Commission). 2014. Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 6 Jackson City Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 9 Amador Fire Protection District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 11 Amador Water Agency Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 12 Drytown County Water District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 25 River Pines Public Utility District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 32 County Service Areas Municipal Service Review.
Calfee, Christopher. 2012. Senior Counsel, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. November
        20.
DWR (California Department of Water Resources). 2014. Disadvantaged Communities (DAC)
        Mapping Tool.
McHargue, Jim. 2014. Director of Solid Waste/Safety Programs, Amador County. Personal
        correspondence. July 30.
OPR (California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research). 2013. Technical Advisory. Senate Bill
        244: Land Use, General Plans, and Disadvantaged Communities.
US Census Bureau. 2008–2012 American Community Survey.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       February 2015
City of Plymouth
                                                  E-5

                                      APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
This page is intentionally left blank
February 2015                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                    City of Plymouth
                                         E-6
