                    October 2014                                                    10. Healthy Communities Element
CHAPTER 10
Healthy Community
Element
Introduction
Pico Rivera is committed to a future that promotes the social, physical, and
mental well-being of its residents, workers and visitors. It is the purpose of the
Pico Rivera Healthy Community Element to highlight the connections between
health and the local physical, natural, social, and economic environments to set
forth a strategy for achieving and maintaining a healthy community.
It is widely understood that the way a community is built and functions has a
direct impact on the physical health, mental health, and social interactions of its
citizens. An increasing number of Americans suffer from chronic diseases such
as obesity, diabetes, heart disease, asthma, and depression. Designing
communities that facilitate active lifestyles and healthy choices is a critical
component in combating such chronic diseases and improving the long term
health and welfare of our population.
A healthy community provides opportunities for people of all ages and abilities to
engage in routine and safe physical activity, to access basic needs, and to
promote self-improvement and intellectual development for personal and
economic growth. Communities that have access to safe and convenient
transportation options, arts and cultural facilities, extensive social interaction,
varied parks and recreation facilities and programs, healthy foods, medical and
mental health care services, and quality educational facilities experience better
                                                                                                    Smith Park
health outcomes and improved quality of life.
Recognizing that planning decisions can have a strong impact on our
transportation choices, housing, and social interactions, this Element recognizes
that proper planning can improve our residents’ physical and mental health by
providing opportunities for physical activity like walking, providing easier access
to nutritious food, and facilitating the ability of neighbors to interact with each
other on a regular basis.
Safe and Balanced Transportation System
Healthy communities are designed to provide for safe and balanced multi-modal
travel including transit use, walking, and biking. The desirability of alternative
travel modes is influenced by the availability of quality interconnected
                                         10-1

  10. Healthy Communities Element
                                  transportation facilities, as well as the nature of adjacent land uses. Compact,
                                  higher density land use patterns that provide for a mix of complementary uses
                                  and services increase the destinations that can comfortably and conveniently be
                                  reached by alternatives to the automobile.
                                  Pico Rivera is largely built out with a mix of residential, commercial, employment
                                  and public uses, the predominant use being lower density residential. The City
                                  experiences substantial traffic congestion along many of its key transportation
                                  routes during peak hours, and there are a number of constraints to providing
                                  added roadway capacity. Public transit options exist, but are limited to fixed route
                                  buses. Washington Boulevard, including a station at Rosemead Boulevard, is
                                  one of two alternative alignments being considered for the proposed Metro Gold
                                  Line light rail extension. Opportunities exist to promote focused higher intensity
                                  mixed use projects at key locations, and to encourage alternative travel modes
                                  within the city.
                                  Alternative travel modes reduce vehicle miles traveled, resulting in decreased
                                  congestion, vehicle emissions, greenhouse gas impacts, and noise generation. In
                                  addition, lower driving rates can reduce stress, anxiety, traffic accident rates, and
                                  transportation costs. Walking and bicycling to school, work or for daily errands
                                  increases overall physical activity and contributes to physical and mental health.
                                  Non-Motorized Transportation
                                  Non-motorized transportation, including facilities for biking and walking, are
                                  addressed in Section 5, Circulation Element, in the non-motorized transportation
                                  section.
                                  Arts and Culture
                                  Cultural enrichment helps shape a community’s quality of life and identity by
                                  offering forms of expression and engagement that embody local spirit. Public art
                                  displays and performances bring people together, offer social and educational
                                  opportunities, augment the local economy, and contribute to a healthy
                                  community.
                                  Major cultural facilities in Pico Rivera include two public libraries, the Center for
Pico Rivera Sports Arena          the Arts, Senior Center and the Pico Rivera Historical Museum, as shown in
                                  Figure 10-1. The City is also home to the Pico Rivera Municipal Sports Arena, a
                                  popular entertainment venue for the Los Angeles area Hispanic community,
                                  famous for its Mexican rodeos (chareadas) and Latin entertainment. In addition,
                                  residents are only ten to twenty miles from several regional cultural centers that
                                  serve Los Angeles County, such as the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the
                                  Natural History Museum of Los Angeles, and the Los Angeles Children's Museum.
                                  A variety of programs that support social interaction are provided to residents of
                                  Pico Rivera by federal, state, county, City, non-profit, school, religious,
                                                                            10-2

                    October 2014                                                     10. Healthy Communities Element
recreation, business, and other organizations. These programs target youths,
adults, seniors and other special and general interests. Communities with good
social capital tend to be safer and benefit from better health, higher educational
achievement, enhanced economic growth, and a strong sense of civic identity.
Libraries
Pico Rivera contracts with the Los Angeles County Public Library system to
operate two libraries within the community: the Pico Rivera Library and the Rivera
Library. They both offer residents and local business people a wealth of information
and entertainment through books, periodicals, audio and video discs, research
materials and on-line access. They also provide homework help, career guidance
materials, reading events and a quiet place to read or study. Meeting rooms are
also available for rental.
The Pico Rivera Library is in the center of the city across Mines Avenue from                      Pico Rivera Library
Smith Park. The Library recently underwent an expansion, funded by the City
and Los Angeles County. The second facility is the Rivera Library located at 7828
S. Serapis Avenue. The Friends of the Pico Rivera Libraries Book Store is located
at 9449 Slauson Avenue and helps to raise money and collect books for the Pico
Rivera and Rivera Libraries.
                                         10-3
10. Healthy Communities Element
                                Figure 10-1: Cultural Amenities
                                              10-4
                     October 2014                                                        10. Healthy Communities Element
Social Capital
Social networks are a valuable asset to a community. Social interaction enables
people to build a sense of community, trust, reciprocity and tolerance. Social
capital refers to the integrated network of family, community, and civic institutions
and networks that shape the quality and frequency of community interactions.
Parks and Recreation
Open space and recreational facilities for the enjoyment of all citizens are
essential for the well being of a community. Parks not only serve the recreation
and social needs of individuals, they act as community gathering places for
families and neighbors to meet and interact, as well as add relief to the
surrounding urban environment. Convenient access to parks, trails, open space,
and recreation programs provide opportunities for organized and informal
recreation and associated physical activity. An active lifestyle can provide a wide
                                                                                                 Smith Park Aquatic Center
range of physical, social and mental health benefits.
When the City of Pico Rivera incorporated in 1958, it inherited an existing park
system from Los Angeles County. As the community built out, additional parks
were added and existing parks were improved. Today, with little or no land
available for park development or expansion, the City is focusing its efforts on
improving existing facilities. The result is a well-developed parks system that
includes athletic fields, sports courts, playgrounds, picnic areas, gymnasiums,
community centers, youth and senior centers, community gardens, an outdoor
amphitheater, a skate park, aquatic facilities, and a nine-hole executive golf course
(privately managed under contract to the City).
The City’s existing parks and recreation facilities and service areas are illustrated
on Figure 10-2.
The City previously used a traditional parks classification system to sort parks
into various neighborhood, community and regional categories. However, in a
built out community with little opportunity for new park development, these
traditional classifications have little meaning, and are no longer in use. The
National Recreation and Park Association recommends that cities, based on their
unique needs, establish a park classification system that details service areas,                         Rivera Park
size of parks, intended uses and preferred sets of amenities. This would support
the city focusing their efforts on providing a high level of facilities and recreational
services within existing parks, as well as expanding existing facilities when
opportunities arise. The City’s developed parks and recreational facilities,
including nearby regional facilities, and planned improvements are shown in
Table 10-1.
As shown in Table 10-1, the City has approximately 102 acres of developed park
and recreation facilities. This total includes the City’s Community Parks,
                                          10-5

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                Neighborhood Parks, Mini-Parks and the Pico Rivera Municipal Golf Course and
                                results in approximately 1.6 acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. If the Sports
                                Arena/Bicentennial Park Campground area is rehabilitated for recreational use it
                                would add 120 acres to the city’s developed park and recreation facilities
                                resulting in approximately 3.5 acres of parkland per 1,000.
                                The City’s future park system will allow for a broader range of parks, including
                                linear, mini, school, neighborhood, and special-use facilities. The City will create
                                a park classification system and design standards for each type of park as part of
                                a Comprehensive Park and Open Space Master Plan. Recommended park
                                classifications are shown in Table 10-2:
   Obregon Park
                                                                        10-6

October 2014                                                         10. Healthy Communities Element
             Figure 10-2: Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities
                                       10-7
10. Healthy Communities Element
                                This page intentionally left blank.
                                              10-8
October 2014                                                                                                            10. Healthy Communities Element
 tion Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
ddress            Existing Amenities                                                       Planned Improvements                              Acres
528 Beverly       Indoor gymnasium, multi-purpose auditorium, meeting rooms, dance            1. New picnic facilities                         17
oulevard          studio, lighted baseball/softball and football fields, walking path,        2. New restrooms
                  drinking fountains, outdoor patio, picnic pavilion, picnic benches and      3. New perimeter access road, pedestrian
                  barbecues, playground equipment, outdoor restrooms, and parking                walkways, and jogging trail
                  lot.
                                                                                              4. Exercise equipment
                                                                                              5. New children's playground
                                                                                              6. Changes to irrigation systems to
                                                                                                 reclaimed water
                                                                                              7. New landscaping
421 San Luis      Multi-purpose auditorium, dance studio, lighted baseball/softball and    Complete renovation of the sports field, turf,      13
otosi Street      soccer fields, lighted handball courts, picnic pavilion, picnic benches  lights, playground, picnic areas, and
                  and barbecues, playground equipment, outdoor restrooms, outdoor          additional security lighting.
                  basketball courts, and parking lot.
530 Shade Lane    Indoor gymnasium, multi-purpose auditorium, meeting rooms, lighted       Renovated in January 2013.                         15.8
                  baseball/softball and football fields with covered bleachers,
                  scoreboards and dugouts, concession/restroom building with
                  storage, shade shelter, group picnic area with shade shelter,
                  individual picnic areas, batting cage, lighted handball courts, horse
                  shoe courts, universal access playground, drinking fountains, a
                  walking path. parking lot, and maintenance yard,
016 Rosemead      Multipurpose auditorium; two meeting rooms; lighted                      Renovations pending completion at time of           16
oulevard          baseball/softball fields with grass, skinned infields, public address    General Plan Update.
                  system, bleachers, and covered dugouts; football/soccer stadium
                  with grandstand, artificial turf and practice fields; lighted basketball
                  courts with spectator seating; skate park; picnic facilities, drinking
                  fountains; walking path; Olympic size swimming pool; picnic areas;
                  accessible playground equipment; exercise stations ; lighted
                  walkways and parking.
                                                            10-9
 ent
 tion Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
ddress            Existing Facilities                                                   Planned Improvements                           Acres
ks
751 Coffman &     Lighted baseball/softball fields with dugouts and spectator seating;  Renovations pending completion at time of       4.52
ico Road          basketball courts; shade shelter; picnic tables; barbecues;           General Plan Update.
                  playground equipment; restroom/concession/storage building;
                  drinking fountains and parking.
298 S. Sandoval   Walking path, sitting benches, drinking fountains, open grass area.   No improvements are planned at this time.       1.3
venue
539 Durfee        Lighted baseball fields, outdoor basketball courts, picnic pavilion,  Planned renovations at Streamland Park are      7.6
venue             picnic benches and barbecues, playground equipment, outdoor           pending funding. Planned renovations
                  restrooms, equestrian trails, and parking lot.                        include:
                                                                                           1. An additional parking lot and additional
                                                                                              parking stalls
                                                                                           2. Separation of the baseball diamonds
                                                                                           3. Improved area lighting
                                                                                           4. A new soccer field with lights
                                                                                           5. New play area
                                                                                           6. New changing room/restroom facility
                                                                                           7. ADA access improvements
325 Garth         This facility includes a playground, park benches, a walking path and No improvements are planned at this time.       0.7
ardner Lane       parking lot.
                  Park benches                                                                                                          0.5
                  Park bench                                                                                                            0.25
                  Park bench                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                        0.5
260 Fairway Drive Nine-hole, par 29 executive course, covered driving range, two        1. Renovations completed in July 2013.          24.5
                  putting greens, a café and banquet facility. Privately managed under
                  city contract.
                                                          10-10

October 2014                                                                                                            10. Healthy Communities Element
 tion Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
ddress            Existing Facilities                                                       Planned Improvements                             Acres
1003 Rooks Rd     Adjacent to the former Bicentennial Park Campground is the 6,000          The Sports Arena concessionaires are               120
                  seat Sports Arena. Famous for its Mexican rodeos (chareadas) and          renovating the Sports Arena with landscape
                  Latin entertainment, the Pico Rivera Sports Arena is a popular            improvements, the installation of an LED
                  recreation spot for the Los Angeles area Hispanic community. This         billboard and infrastructure improvements.
                  facility was built in 1979, and is reputed to be the largest Mexican      A Campground Master Plan was recently
                  rodeo ring in the country. An average of 25 shows, preceded by a          prepared for rehabilitation of the campground
                  traditional Mexican rodeo, is held at the Sports Arena every year.        area.
                  Since 1975, the 120-acre site within the Whittier Narrows Flood Control   Since the area's primary purpose is flood
                  Basin has been leased to the City of Pico Rivera for recreational         protection, water supply and groundwater
                  activities. It presently encompasses the Pico Rivera Sports Arena, the    recharge, these proposals are subject to
                  former Bicentennial Park campgrounds, and the former Pico Rivera          environmental review and approval by the
                  Stables                                                                   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
535 Beverly Road  The community gardens provide a gathering place for community             No improvements are planned at this time.          N/A
ear Paramount     residents and an area for residents to lease a plot of land to grow their
nd Beverly Road   own fruits and vegetables. The City provides water to the garden free
                  of charge.
632 Orange Street Auditorium and kitchen                                                    No improvements are planned at this time.          N/A
200 Mines Avenue Multi-purpose auditorium, fitness center, billiard/game room,              Recently renovated.                                N/A
                  computer lab, dance studio, meeting room, wireless accessible,
                  outdoor patio, kitchen and parking lot.
200 Mines Avenue Gallery space and classroom area.                                                                                             N/A
                  The facility serves as water storage/recharge facility and consists of    A bike path that connects the existing County      698
                  698 acres with 6 miles of proposed trails, under the jurisdiction of      LARIO (Los Angeles River) trail with the city's
                  Los Angeles County Public Works Department Flood Control                  bike lane along Mine Avenue. The bike path is
                  Division.                                                                 part of the "Paseo del Rio at Rio Hondo
                                                                                            Coastal Basins Spreading Grounds" project,
                                                                                            collaboration between the City of Pico Rivera
                                                                                            and the County of Los Angeles that began in
                                                                                            1999.
                                                                                            Educational programs, field trips and group
                                                                                            visitors may also become a part of the project.
                                                                                            The project is also being developed in
                                                                                            conjunction with the San Gabriel and Los
                                                                                            Angeles Rivers Watershed and Open Space
                                                                                            Plan in order to promote a regional river
                                                                                            parkway that connects neighboring
                                                                                            jurisdictions.
                                                            10-11
 ent
 tion Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
ddress                 Existing Facilities                                                    Planned Improvements                          Acres
acilities
50 Santa Anita         Picnic grounds. a water sanctuary, fishing lakes, a skeet and trap                                                    973
venue,                 shooting area, baseball and softball fields, tennis, basketball and
outh El Monte, CA volleyball courts, and an archery area.
000 Durfee Road, A 400-acre sanctuary of riparian woodland that borders the San                                                               133
outh El Monte, CA Gabriel River. It features four lakes, including many plants and
                       animals native to wetland communities and the lakes provide a
                       winter sanctuary for migrating waterfowl.
640 Rush Street,       This facility features 27 regulation holes of golf: one 18-hole                                                        278
osemead, CA            regulation course and one 9-hole regulation course.
700 S. Juarez          Baseball/Softball Fields, Children’s Play Area, Multi-purpose Field,                                                  4.52
venue                  Picnic Areas with BBQ Grill, Walking and Biking Trails
 hittier, CA
003 Pioneer            Includes historic gardens and the restored adobe home of Pio Pico.                                                      5
oulevard, Whittier,    Is registered as California Historic Landmark No. 127. Park activities
A                      include guided tours, interpretive school group programs, special
                       events, living history days, and picnic facilities.
d by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, but are operated by the Los Angeles County Department of Parks and Recreation.
d operated by the Los Angeles County Department of Parks and Recreation.
rks and Recreation staff; Rio Vista, Rivera, Smith Park and Streamland Park Concept Plans; City of Pico Rivera, Parks and Recreation Department,
 s/parks/facilities/default.asp, accessed May 28, 2014; Los Angeles County Department of Parks and Recreation, http://parks.lacounty.gov, accessed
                                                               10-12

                     October 2014                                                            10. Healthy Communities Element
Table 10-2:
Pico Rivera Park Classification
Category                       Park Classification
Mini Parks                     Mini parks serve adjacent residents, address limited,
                               isolated or unique recreational and aesthetic needs, and
                               serve as recreational and beautification spaces where
                               acquisition of larger parks is not possible. Mini parks can
                               provide limited active and passive recreation opportunities
                               and be linked to community pathways and sidewalks.
Neighborhood Park              Neighborhood parks typically serve residents within a ½
                               mile and serve as the recreational and social focus of the
                               neighborhood. These parks, which are the basic unit of the
                               City’s park system, provide informal, active and reflective
                               recreational options for all ages. These parks are often
                               interconnected to trails/sidewalks and within walking/biking
                               distance of most users. Neighborhood park facilities are
                               typically less than 10 acres in size.
Community Parks                Community parks provide a broader range of recreational
                               and community gathering place functions than
                               neighborhood parks, and typically serve residents within 1
                               to 2 miles. Community parks provide larger-scale sports
                               fields, gymnasium, and community center needs, as well
                               as facilities for recreation programs. Located more
                               centrally and connected by collector streets and trail
                               networks, community parks are generally larger than 10
                               acres in size.
Natural Resource Areas         This includes lands set aside for the preservation of
                               significant natural resources and open space and includes
                               the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel River spreading grounds.
Special Use                    Special-use park and recreational facilities include the Golf
                               Course, Community Gardens, Youth Center, Senior
                               Center, and Centre for the Arts that are designed for
                               specific or specialized uses. This also includes the Sports
                               Arena/Bicentennial Park Campground, which provides
                               commercial and regionally oriented facilities.
Greenways/linear parks         Greenways and linear parks are intended to tie park
                               system components together to form a continuous park
                               environment, and provide uninterrupted and safe
                               pedestrian movement between parks throughout the
                               community and opportunities for water quality. Typical
                               locations include natural features, such as along the rivers,
                               remnant right-of-way, railroad sites, power-line easement
                               areas and street rights-of-way.
In 2002, the City developed conceptual drawings for the upgrade of the city’s
major park facilities. As part of the city’s effort to enhance the provision of vital
city services, the City has made recent renovations to Smith, Rio Vista, Pico,                          Equestrian trail near
Rivera, Rio Hondo and Streamland parks. The City has also completed                                       Streamland Park
renovations to the Senior Center, Golf Course and aquatic center. Future
projects will include improvements to the former Bicentennial Park campgrounds
and the Pico Rivera Sports Arena Complex The City also has a Joint-Use
Agreement with the El Rancho Unified School District (ERUSD), which gives
them access to the classrooms, cafeteria, athletic fields, basketball courts, and
playgrounds at the elementary, middle, and high schools within ERUSD.
                                               10-13

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                In addition to City facilities, there is a wide range of regional recreation facilities
                                accessible to Pico Rivera residents. The nearby Whittier Narrows and the Santa
                                Fe Dam recreation areas provide a range of recreational opportunities.
                                Rio Hondo Park and the San Gabriel River spreading grounds offer bike trails
                                and walking/jogging paths. The Whittier Narrows area and the City also provide
                                for equestrian trails. In addition, there are numerous other public and private
                                recreation facilities located throughout the Los Angeles basin.
                                The City has received several grants from KaBoom, a national non-profit, to
                                construct a shade shelter and children’s playground equipment at existing
                                playgrounds and was designated Playful City USA by KaBoom in 2011, 2012 and
                                2013. This recognition honors communities that are making bold commitments by
                                investing in program and infrastructure to keep kids active, playing and healthy.
                                Access to Healthy Foods and Nutrition
                                A healthy community offers access to an abundant selection of healthy foods,
                                fresh produce, and other locally grown products. Access to healthy and locally
                                grown products can assist people in making informed decisions about what they
                                eat, enhance consumption of fresh products, reduce the risks of a number of
                                chronic health issues, and minimize environmental impacts associated with long-
      Lario Trail               distance shipping.
                                In addition to traditional food outlets, farmers markets, community gardens, urban
                                produce stands, and school food service and garden programs can increase
                                access to healthy food options. While such programs are limited in Pico Rivera,
                                the City’s Parks and Recreation Department has established the Pico Rivera
                                Community Gardens to promote healthy living and provide residents who do not
                                have garden space with the opportunity to grow produce for personal use. In
                                addition, there are farmers markets in nearby Whittier, Montebello, and Downey.
                                The City also participates in the Let’s Move Campaign and promotes a walking
                                program and healthy food policies.
                                Access to Health Care and Mental Health Care
                                Ensuring adequate, accessible and affordable health care and mental health care
                                facilities and programs is important for maintaining a healthy community. A
                                number of private and non-profit care providers offer routine medical, hospital
                                and mental health services to local residents. In addition, a variety of programs
                                are provided by federal, state, county, and local/non-profit agencies including
                                intervention, medical, support, and recovery programs. Many of these services
                                and facilities are located outside of Pico Rivera, requiring residents to travel to
                                access necessary health needs. It is anticipated that service demand will
                                increase in the future, particularly as the population ages, adding to the need for
                                local health care in Pico Rivera.
                                                                           10-14

                    October 2014                                                     10. Healthy Communities Element
There is no homeless shelter in the City, although shelters are provided in the
surrounding cities of Whittier, Santa Fe Springs, Norwalk, and Bell. To address
the local homeless situation, Pico Rivera is cooperating with the Los Angeles
Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) and the Gateway Cities Council of
Governments in addition to providing financial support to local service providers.
The City, as required by Program 11 of the Housing Element, will also continue
to monitor the inventory of sites appropriate to accommodate emergency shelters
and transitional and supportive housing and will work with the appropriate
organizations to ensure the needs of homeless and low income residents are
met.
Schools and Day Care Facilities
Schools and day care facilities contribute to the overall well-being of residents. A
variety of public and private entities within and surrounding Pico Rivera provide
educational and day care services.
The El Rancho Unified School District and the Montebello Unified School District
serve Pico Rivera. Included within the city are elementary, middle and high
schools, as well as an early learning center and adult education facility (see
Figure 10-3). The Whittier School District serves the portion of the City’s sphere
of influence east of the San Gabriel River and south of the Whittier Boulevard,                El Rancho High School
but has no facilities located in this area. The Pico Rivera Parks Department
oversees a K-5 after school REACH program which operates within state
curriculum guidelines. The last several years have demonstrated a trend of
declining grades K-12 enrollment, which is anticipated to continue in Pico Rivera
as well as Los Angeles County as a whole. Beyond the public K-12 system, there
are a number of private schools, trade institutions and higher education facilities
located within or near the city. This includes Rio Hondo Community College in
adjacent Whittier, which serves Pico Rivera and the remainder of the southern
San Gabriel Valley and the El Rancho Adult Education Center located in Pico
Rivera.
The City of Pico Rivera and it citizens place a high priority on quality education.
The high priority placed on schools results from the stable, family-oriented nature
of the community and is reflected in a key initiative of the community to have a
college graduate residing within every Pico Rivera household.
Although the construction of school is the responsibility of local school districts
and not the City, municipal development policies, along with changing
demographics, significantly affect school facilities needs. In addition, school
districts are exempt from local regulations and cannot be required to adhere to
City General Plan policies. However, cooperation between the City and the local
                                        10-15

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                Figure 10-3: School Facilities
                                             10-16
                      October 2014                                                    10. Healthy Communities Element
school districts is essential to provide high quality educational facilities. Present
laws regulating school facility financing place responsibility on the State and local
school districts. State law also caps development fees for schools, and limits the
ability of cities to require new development to provide new school facilities. In
general, payment of development fees established by local school districts is
considered to be “mitigation in full” for the impacts of such development on
schools, whether or not the maximum fees allowable under the law are adequate
to construct new facilities.
There are a variety of day care facilities serving City residents. The City of Pico
Rivera Parks Department runs a pre-school program for pre-kindergarden
children at three park sites. Quality child care establishes a foundation for
success in school, contributes to work/life balance, reduces workplace
absenteeism, and is beneficial to economic growth.
Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
Overall Community Health
Goal 10.1
Health and well-being for all members of the community.
Policy 10.1-1 Education. Collaborate with Los Angeles County Department of
Public Health, health care providers, and social organizations to educate the
public on healthy lifestyles and promote preventative health care and behaviors
to improve overall health of the community.
Policy 10.1-2 Health Events. Host, sponsor, and/or work with non-profit groups
and public and private institutions to organize citywide public health events such
as health fairs, senior fairs, speakers, lectures, and workshops.
Policy 10.1-3 Community Health Monitoring. Establish procedures to track
community health information, determine indicators to measure results by, and
improve health over time.
Implementation Program for Policy 10.1-4:
•    Work with Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, local and
     regional healthcare providers, and social organizations to obtain and track
     community health data. Work to define indicators to measure community
     health results, which could include the amount of bicycle routes or walking
     trails in the City, or park acreage per resident.
Healthy Transportation System
Goal 10.2
A balanced and healthy transportation system where transit,                                    See also policies addressing
bicycling, and walking are alternative methods to the automobile.                              bicycle and pedestrian trails in
                                                                                               the Circulation Element.
                                          10-17

    10. Healthy Communities Element
                                    Transit
                                    Policy 10.2-1 Transit Service Expansion. Work with appropriate providers to
                                    expand transit service throughout Pico Rivera especially along major
                                    transportation corridors, and to key locations such as employment centers,
                                    grocery stores, medical offices, schools, libraries, parks, and other civic facilities.
                                    Policy 10.2-2 Transit Improvements. Work with appropriate providers to
                                    improve transit facilities and stations to make them safer and conveniently
                                    located.
                                    Policy 10.2-3 Gold Line Light Rail Extension. Continue to work with the
                                    Metropolitan Transit Authority to locate the station for the Gold Line light rail
                                    extension within Pico Rivera to encourage transit ridership.
                                    Policy 10.2-4 Bus Turnouts. Work with the Metropolitan Transit Authority,
                                    Montebello Bus Lines, and Downey Link to identify locations along existing and
                                    future transit routes for additional bus turnouts to increase transit usage.
                                    Implementation Program for Policy 10.2-4:
                                    •    Prioritize transit routes where additional bus turnouts are needed; and work
                                         with the transit agencies to pursue funding for construction of turnouts.
                                    Safe Transportation System
                                    Goal 10.3
                                    A transportation system where residents can safely walk or ride
                                    their bicycles to school and other destinations.
See also policies addressing        Policy 10.3-1 Safe Routes to School. Continue working with the school districts
safe routes to schools in the       to implement safe routes to schools projects for all schools within the City.
Circulation Element.
                                    Implementation Program for Policy 10.3-1:
                                    •    Complete a Safe Routes to School Master Plan to integrate infrastructure
                                         improvements, education programs, activities and events to encourage
                                         participation in bicycling and walking to school, and enforcement of traffic
                                         regulations to address safety concerns.
                                    Policy 10.3-2 Traffic Calming. Implement traffic calming features to reduce
                                    traffic speeds, improve safety, and minimize pollution in residential
                                    neighborhoods.
                                    Policy 10.3-3 Conflicts with Vehicles. Ensure safe bicycle lanes and
                                    pedestrian routes that reduce conflicts with users and motor vehicles through
                                    design improvements, and well-marked pedestrian crossings and bicycle routes.
                                    Policy 10.3-4 Truck Routes. Modify designated truck routes to limit or avoid
                                    truck traffic through or adjacent to residential neighborhoods and schools, to the
                                    extent feasible, to minimize health and safety concerns.
                                    Policy 10.3-5 Rail Crossings. Continue to work with railroad companies and
                                    appropriate agencies to create railroad grade separations to increase safety,
                                    while taking steps to make the existing at-grade rail crossings safer for
                                    pedestrians and vehicles.
                                    Policy 10.3-6 Education. Encourage bicycle, pedestrian, and vehicle safety
                                    through education programs.
                                                                              10-18

                     October 2014                                                    10. Healthy Communities Element
Arts and Culture
Goal 10.4
Enhanced quality of life through arts and culture.
Policy 10.4-1 Public Art. Encourage the provision of public art, especially in
municipal locations accessible to the public and at key entryways into the City to
serve as landmarks and entry features.
Policy 10.4-2 Art Programs. Continue to promote arts and cultural programs at
the Pico Rivera Centre for the Arts and other appropriate locations to foster
community identity.
Policy 10.4-3 Display of Public Art. Encourage the use of publicly owned
facilities and spaces, such as the Pico Rivera Centre for the Arts and City Hall,
for the display of local art, and for future art and cultural events.
Libraries
Goal 10.5
Opportunities for lifelong learning and cultural enrichment.
Policy 10.5-1 Libraries. Continue to work with Los Angeles County in the
provision of adequate library services, facilities, materials and programs that
meet the needs of all residents.
Policy 10.5-1 Convenient Access. Continue to coordinate with Los Angeles
County to ensure that library facilities are conveniently accessible to pedestrians
and bicyclists and along transit corridors.
Policy 10.5-1 Multi-Functional Use. Support the use of libraries as multi-
functional facilities, acting as gathering places, cultural centers, and venues for
community events and programs.
Social Capital
Goal 10.6
An improved and integrated system of family, community, and civic
networks in Pico Rivera.
Policy 10.6-1 Development patterns. Promote development patterns that
reduce commute times, provide public space for people to congregate and
interact socially, that encourage civic participation and foster safe and attractive
environments.
Policy 10.6-2 Community Event Participation. Strive to increase participation
in community events that include youth and senior activities, and family
programs.
Implementation Program for Policy 10.6-2:
•    Continue to disseminate information on community events through the City’s
     website, local newspapers, direct mailers, at community centers, and through
     community organizations such as churches and schools.
                                           10-19

   10. Healthy Communities Element
                                   Parks and Recreation
                                   Goal 10.7
                                   A complete system of parks and recreational facilities and programs
                                   that provide diverse opportunities for active recreation, passive
                                   recreation, and social interaction, meeting the needs of the
                                   community.
                                   Policy 10.7-1 Parks Master Plan. Adopt and maintain a Parks Master Plan,
                                   responding to community needs as they change over time.
                                   Implementation Programs for Policy 10.7-1:
                                   •    Implement any identified improvements in the conceptual drawings to ensure
                                        the community’s park needs are being met.
                                   •    Adopt a Comprehensive Parks and Open Space Plan that provides for and
                                        addresses the following:
                                        •   Identifies gaps within the City with insufficient green space and identifies
                                            options to meet those needs
                                        •   Identifies sites for mini-parks
                                        •   Land banking for future parks
                                        •   Expands opportunities for passive recreation
                                        •   Expands jogging/walking paths and fitness stations at parks
                                        •   Identifies opportunities for dog parks
                                        •   Strives to attain a parks standard of three (3) acres per 1,000 people
                                        •   Continually revise the Parks and Recreation Standards Manual to
                                            provide guidance for the development of new parks and rehabilitation of
                                            existing parks
                                        •   Regularly review and update the Parks Master Plan.
                                   Policy 10.7-2 Existing Facility Improvement. Continue to improve, rehabilitate,
                                   and expand existing park and recreation facilities, as funding is available, to meet
                                   the needs of Pico Rivera residents, employees, and visitors.
                                   Policy 10.7-3 New Development. Require new residential development to
                                   dedicate land or contribute in-lieu fees at a standard of three (3) acres per 1,000
                                   population, and contribute park development fees, to finance acquisition,
                                   development, improvement, and maintenance of park and recreational facilities.
                                   Policy 10.7-4 Fees. Periodically review park development fees and funding
                                   sources to ensure their adequacy to cover park acquisition, development,
                                   improvement, and maintenance.
                                   Policy 10.7-5 Public Involvement. Encourage residents to become involved in
                                   the design, improvement, operation, maintenance, and security of park facilities
                                   throughout the community.
                                   Policy 10.7-6 Collaboration. Coordinate park and recreational facilities planning
See also policies for the Sports   with local and regional agencies in an effort to enhance recreational opportunities
Arena/Kruse Road Area              in the City.
Opportunity Area.
                                   Policy 10.7-7 Sports Arena and former Bicentennial Park Campground.
                                   Improve the Sports Arena and Bicentennial Park Campground area as a major
                                                                            10-20

                     October 2014                                                   10. Healthy Communities Element
recreational venue, including sports fields, equestrian uses, and habitat
restoration.
Implementation Program for Policies 10.7-7 and 10.7-8:
•     Continue working with Army Corps of Engineers to implement the
      Campground Master Plan which provides for the rehabilitation of the
      campground site.
•     Prepare a comprehensive plan for the future use of the Sports Arena and
      Bicentennial Park Campground area, which also includes the former
      campgrounds, to ensure that the area’s value as a recreational resource,
      community gathering place, conservation area and economic driver are
      addressed.
•     Pursue local, state, and federal funding (such as Strategic Growth Council
      “Greening” grants) to plan for and improve the Sports Arena and Bicentennial
      Park Campground area.
Policy 10.7-8 Sports Arena Entrance. Work with Caltrans, Los Angeles County,
and City of South El Monte to include signage, improve access, and create an
entry from Highway 60 to the Sports Arena and Bicentennial Park Campground.
Policy 10.7-9 Easements. Consider the use of utility and railroad right-of-ways
for active and passive recreation uses, such as including a linear park along the
rail line west of Passons Boulevard, as part of the lands originally purchased for
the Passons Grade Separation project, as well as providing for expanded park
land as part of the proposed Durfee grade separation.
Policy 10.7-10 Joint Use. Support the City’s joint use agreement with El
Rancho Unified School District which provides access to the classrooms,
cafeteria, athletic fields, basketball courts, and playgrounds at the elementary,
middle, and high schools within ERUSD El Rancho Unified School District.
Policy 10.7-11 Onsite Open Spaces. Provide development incentives for
private commercial, office, industrial, and other non-residential developments to
provide onsite usable open space that is accessible to the public such as green
rooftops, public plazas, and walking paths.
Policy 10.7-12 Increasing Recreational Opportunities. Partner with the
Watershed Conservation Authority to promote and increase recreational
opportunities in the City by:
•     Expanding trails, where feasible, along the portions of the Rio Hondo and
      San Gabriel river corridors;
•     Exploring opportunities to create more passive recreation, including fitness
      zones at the spreading grounds
•     Assisting in improving the access to Whittier Narrows recreation areas; and
•     Promoting a coordinated approach to future land use decisions adjacent to
      the Sports Arena.
•     Conducting an equestrian trails study to identify where equestrian trails may
      be properly developed and link to the Whittier Narrows equestrian trails and
      local horse boarding facilities.
Policy 10.7-13 Municipal Golf Course. Support continued renovation efforts
and any future expansions of the Pico Rivera Golf Course to help meet the
recreational needs in the City and provide additional economic opportunities.
                                         10-21

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                Policy 10.7-14 Equestrian Facilities. Expand opportunities for equestrian-
                                oriented recreational facilities in the City, and permit this use in the Sports Arena
                                and Bicentennial Park Campground area.
                                Policy 10.6-15 Efficiency and Conservation. Incorporate energy efficiency and
                                water conservation in parks and recreation areas, and require the use of native,
                                drought-tolerant plants, to the extent feasible and as recommended by Assembly
                                Bill 1881.
                                Policy 10.7-16 Private Recreation. Encourage the location of additional private
                                health clubs and recreation facilities in Pico Rivera.
                                Policy 10.7-17 Parks as Gathering Places. Identify and provide facilities within
                                City parks to enhance their function as community gathering places and ensure
                                they are distributed throughout the community.
                                Policy 10.7-18 New Gathering Places. Support the revitalization of the
                                shopping center at the southwest corner of Rosemead Boulevard and Mines
                                Avenue to reinforce Smith Park, the community center and adjacent library as a
                                community gathering place.
                                Community Centers
                                Policy 10.7-19 Community Centers. Regularly maintain, improve, and expand,
                                when necessary, existing community centers to adequately meet the City’s
                                needs.
                                Recreational Programs
                                Policy 10.7-20 Program Diversity. Ensure that recreation programs and
                                services meet the diverse needs of the community that serve residents of all
                                ages, backgrounds, and interests.
                                Implementation Program for Policy 10.6-20:
                                •    Periodically assess the city’s recreation programming needs through citywide
                                     surveys to ensure that that community’s needs are being met.
                                Policy 10.7-21 Recreational Program Costs. Continue maintaining fees for
                                residents to participate in city recreational programs at or below the city’s cost
                                whenever feasible.
                                Policy 10.7-22 Seniors. Continue to provide dance classes, recreational
                                programs, local and regional trip opportunities for physical activity, and services
                                for seniors.
                                Policy 10.7-23 Youth Programs. Collaborate with the school district, religious
                                organizations, non-profit groups, law enforcement, and other appropriate
                                organizations to determine needs and continually improve upon the services and
                                programs for children and youth.
                                Access to Healthy Foods and Nutrition
                                Goal 10.8
                                Convenient access to and a range of options for fresh and nutritious
                                foods in Pico Rivera.
                                Policy 10.8-1 Food Access. Strive for the majority of residents to be in close
                                proximity to a supermarket or other healthy food establishment.
                                                                          10-22

                    October 2014                                                    10. Healthy Communities Element
Implementation Program for Policy 10.8-1:
•   Consider facilitating consolidation of the vacant commercial parcel at the
    southeast corner of Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly Boulevard with
    existing commercial centers to the south to provide for a larger commercial
    capable of supporting development of a supermarket at that location.
Policy 10.8-2 Transit Service to Access Healthy Foods. Work with local and
regional transit agencies to ensure that bus routes provide service from
underserved neighborhoods to healthy food retail stores.
Policy 10.8-3 Community Gardens. Facilitate establishment of community
gardens by allowing gardens on vacant properties, at existing parks, and any
other appropriate locations provided the gardens are managed and operated to
prevent adverse impacts on adjoining uses.
Policy 10.8-4 Green Roofs. Encourage new buildings to incorporate green roofs
and the conversion of existing roofs to maximize opportunities for urban
gardening.
Policy 10.8-5 Edible School Yards. Work with the El Rancho Unified School
District to explore the feasibility for creating “edible school yards” that provide
gardens and gardening educational programs on school property.
Policy 10.8-6 Healthy Foods at Schools. Work with the El Rancho Unified
School District to ensure provision of healthy food options.
Policy 10.8-7 Summer Meals Program. Continue to provide summer meal
programs for youth.
Policy 10.8-8 Seniors. Continue to provide nutritious meals to seniors at the
Senior Center.
Policy 10.8-9 Healthy Foods at City Events. Provide healthy food options at
municipal buildings and at city events where food is available by the City.
Policy 10.8-10 Drive-Through Restaurants. Limit the number of drive-through
restaurants near schools, and in areas where there are high concentrations of
these uses.
Policy 10.8-11 Food Education. Disseminate information about healthful eating
habits.
Policy 10.8-12 Farmers Market. Pursue the establishment of a farmers market
within the city limits to increase access to healthy, local, affordable foods and
encourage community-building.
Implementation Program for Policy 10.8-12:
•   Identify potential farmers’ market sites on public property, including parks
    and schools.
•   Adopt zoning regulations that establish farmers’ markets as a permitted use
    in appropriate locations. Farmers markets are compatible with all land use
    designations shown on the General Plan Land Use Plan.
Policy 10.8-13 Sit-down Restaurants. Pursue and encourage sit-down
restaurants within City limits.
                                         10-23

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                Access to Health Care and Mental Health Care
                                Goal 10.9
                                Access to affordable and high quality health care in Pico Rivera.
                                Policy 10.9-1 Healthcare Services. Work with local health care providers to
                                increase the availability of high quality and affordable health care services that is
                                in Pico Rivera.
                                Policy 10.9-2 Healthcare Facility Sites. Identify potential sites for healthcare
                                facilities that are well-served by transit, and specifically include these types of
                                facilities as a permitted use within appropriate commercial and industrial areas.
                                Policy 10.9-3 Seniors. Continue to provide, and support other organizations that
                                provide, health screenings for seniors as preventative care.
                                Policy 10.9-4 Mental Health Care. Support the efforts of Los Angeles County
                                and other local organizations that provide mental health services to ensure
                                residents of Pico Rivera are being adequately served.
                                Policy 10.9-5 Homeless. Support the efforts of various agencies such as the
                                Los Angeles County and the Gateway Council of Governments to address
                                homeless issues and to help advance individuals to lead a stabilized and
                                productive life.
                                Policy 10.9-6 Co-location of Facilities. Encourage the co-location of healthcare
                                and social services to increase access to care.
                                Policy 10.9-7 Outreach. Educate the community on the availability of health
                                care options, as well as social services in and around Pico Rivera.
                                Schools and Day Care Facilities
                                Goal 10.10
                                High quality day care, education, and lifelong learning opportunities
                                for all members of the community.
                                Schools
                                Policy 10.10-1 School Services. Support public school districts and private
                                schools in providing educational services.
                                Implementation Program for Policy 10.10-1:
                                •    Undertake regular meetings with local school districts and private schools to
                                     address and resolve issues of mutual interest.
                                Policy 10.10-2 School Capacity. Work with local school districts to ensure that
                                school facilities have sufficient capacity to meet the needs of current and
                                projected enrollment, within the limits of State law.
                                Policy 10.10-3 Development Proposal Review. Provide school districts the
                                opportunity to review and comment on residential development proposals to
                                ensure projects adequately address school capacity issues.
                                Policy 10.10-4 Joint Use. Coordinate with the school district to maintain joint
                                use of school and park facilities during non-school hours. Joint use agreements
                                should be maintained to maximize public use of facilities with shared financial
                                and operational responsibilities.
                                                                         10-24

                    October 2014                                                    10. Healthy Communities Element
Policy 10.10-5 Funding Sources. Cooperate with school districts in identifying
and pursuing sources of funding for the improvement of existing schools.
Policy 10.10-6 Higher Education. Support the development of higher education
and vocational education facilities in the City to increase access to these
services.
Day Care Facilities
Policy 10.10-7 Range of Day Care Services. Encourage the development of a
range of day care facilities including family day care homes and public and
private day care centers for youth and seniors that are high quality and affordable
to meet the needs of Pico Rivera residents.
Policy 10.10-8 High Quality and Affordable Day Care. Encourage day care
facilities and services to be located in or near residential areas and employment
centers, as well as along transit and major transportation routes.
Implementation Program for Policies 10-10-7 and 10.10-8:
•    Work with local and regional agencies to assess childcare supply and
     demand, and implement programs to address any deficiencies.
                                        10-25

10. Healthy Communities Element
                                This page intentionally left blank.
                                              10-26
                     October 2014                                                      11. Noise
                   	
CHAPTER 11
Noise Element
Introduction
Pico Rivera recognizes the relationship between noise and the well-being of the
community. Residents seek a peaceful living environment, and businesses seek
the ability to conduct business without being interrupted by excessive noise
levels. As a result, excessive noise levels can affect the physical health, property
values, and economic productivity of the city’s residents and businesses.
Regulating noise is thus essential to creating a peaceful and productive
community. The City’s ability to regulate noise falls into three broad
classifications: achieving noise compatible land uses, addressing noise
generated by transportation, and dealing with noise generated by temporary
construction activities. Achieving noise compatible land use involves making sure
that new development is placed within an appropriate noise setting and that
adjacent land uses do not generate so much noise that they disturb adjacent
uses. Addressing transportation noise generated by the highways, roadway, and
rail lines that run through the community, focuses attention on protecting the land
uses adjacent to these transportation facilities from excessive noise. Finally,
dealing with noise generated by temporary construction activities includes
regulating the timing of constructing during the day and working with developers
to reduce noise generated by construction equipment.
This element examines noise sources in Pico Rivera with a view toward
identifying and evaluating the potential for noise conflicts, and identifies ways to
reduce existing and potential noise impacts. This element addresses noise that
affects the community at large, rather than noise associated with site-specific
conditions. It contains goals, policies, and implementation programs to achieve
and maintain noise levels compatible with various land uses.
Noise Context
Noise has long been an accepted part of modern civilization and the urbanization
process. The City of Pico Rivera is subject to noise sources that can be generally
classified as transportation noise sources and stationary noise sources.
 Traffic Noise. Primary noise sources in Pico Rivera are and will continue to
    be transportation related. Existing and future traffic noise is greatest along the
    city’s major roadways which include Rosemead Boulevard, Paramount
    Boulevard, Beverly Boulevard, Whittier Boulevard, Washington Boulevard,
                                         11-1

11. Noise
              Slauson Boulevard, and Telegraph Road, as shown in Appendix G, Tables
              G-1 and G-2. Future roadway noise exposure and contour distances based on
              development allowed under this General Plan are presented in Appendix G,
              Table G-3.
           Railroads. Both the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) and Union Pacific
              railroads maintain lines through the city, as shown in Figure 5-4. Metrolink, a
              regional rail system that includes commuter and passenger services also has
              lines through the city. Existing and future railroad noise is shown in Appendix
              G, Tables G-1 and G-2.
              Future transit facilities to be located in the city are being considered and
              include the Metro Gold Line light rail but is not anticipated to generate a
              significant amount of noise. The California High Speed Rail Authority is also
              considering an east-west alignment of the High Speed Rail line through the
              city, to be located north of Slauson Avenue. Implementation of either transit
              facility would result in substantially higher, although intermittent noise levels
              along those transit corridors and within adjacent areas.
           Stationary Sources. Stationary noise sources also contribute to the ambient
              noise environment in Pico Rivera. Within the community, stationary noise
              sources related to industry and construction are present. Industrial noise is
              typically generated by industrial processing and operations, as well as
              maintenance yards. Construction noise sources can be from diesel engines,
              air compressors, and electric motors. Residential areas can generate noise
              through the use of heating and cooling equipment, and through landscape
              maintenance activities such as gasoline-powered lawnmowers. Commercial
              uses can generate noise through the operation of rooftop heating and cooling
              equipment, and other activities such as trash collection and deliveries.
          Characteristics of Noise
          The principal characteristics of sound are its loudness (amplitude) and frequency
          (pitch). The frequency of a sound is significant because the human ear is not
          equally sensitive to all frequencies. The ear is not very sensitive to low frequencies,
          characterized as a rumble or roar. The ear, however, is most sensitive at higher
          frequencies, characterized as a screech or a whine. To reflect this varying
          sensitivity, an A-weighted decibel scale (dBA) is typically used to measure the
          perceived loudness of a sound.
          Noise refers to sound pressure variations audible to the ear. Whether the sound
          is judged as noise depends largely on the listener's current activity and attitude
          toward the sound source as well as the amplitude and frequency of the sound.
          To obtain convenient measurements and sensitivities at extremely low and high
          sound pressures, sound is measured in units of the decibel (dBA). A listener
          often judges an increase in sound levels of 10 dBA as a doubling of sound.
          Examples of the decibel level of various noise sources are shown in Figure 11-1.
                                                    11-2

                    October 2014                                                  11. Noise
                  	
Maximum Sound Level
The Maximum Sound Level is the highest A-weighted sound level observed during
a single noise event no matter how long the sound may persist.
Sound Exposure Level (SEL)
The Sound Exposure Level value represents the A-weighted sound level integrated
over the entire duration of one second. Hence, it normalizes the event to a
1-second event. Typically, most events last longer than one second, and the SEL
value will be higher than the maximum sound level of the event. SEL is usually
applied in situations with multiple sound events, each one having its own
characteristic SEL.
Equivalent Noise Level (Leq)
The equivalent noise level (Leq) is a measure of the exposure resulting from the
accumulation of A-weighted sound levels over a particular time period.
Conceptually, Leq may be thought of as a constant sound level over the period of
interest that contains as much sound energy as the actual time-varying sound
level with its normal peaks and valleys.
Day-Night Average Sound Level (Ldn)
The Day-Night Average Sound Level is the 24-hour energy average A-weighted
sound level with a 10dBA weighing added to those levels occurring between
10 p.m. and 7 a.m. the following morning. The 10 dBA weighing is a penalty
representing the added intrusiveness of noise during normal sleeping hours. Ldn
is used to determine land use compatibility with noise from aircraft and surface
traffic. The expression Ldn is often used in equations to designate the day-night
average sound level.
                                        11-3
11. Noise
          Figure 11-1: Common Noise Sources
                          11-4
                    October 2014                                                           11. Noise
                  	
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
The Community Noise Equivalent Level is an artificial decibel increment added to
quiet-time noise levels in a 24-hour noise receptor because community receptors
are more sensitive to unwanted noise intrusion during the evening and at night. An
addition of five decibels is added to sound levels that occur in the evening from
7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., and an addition of 10 decibels to sound levels that occur
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. An interior CNEL of 45 dBA is mandated for
multi-unit residential dwellings and is considered a desirable noise exposure for
single-unit residential dwellings as well. Since typical noise attenuation within
residential structures with closed windows is well over 20 decibels, an exterior
noise exposure of 65 decibels CNEL is generally the noise/land use compatibility
guideline for new residential dwellings in California.
Vibration
Vibration is produced when moving objects in contact with the ground radiate
mechanical energy through the ground. If the object is massive enough and/or
close enough to an observer, the ground vibrations are perceptible. Vibration
magnitude is measured in vibration decibels (VdB).
Effects of Noise
Documented effects of excessive noise on people can range from annoyance
and inconvenience to temporary or permanent hearing loss. However, problems
associated with noise can be much more widespread. Although no human illness
is known to be directly caused by noise, studies have shown that noise is an
important cause of physical and psychological stress, and stress has been
directly linked to many common health problems. Therefore, noise can be
associated with many disabilities and diseases, such as heart disease, high
blood pressure, headaches, fatigue, and irritability. Noise is also suspected to
interfere with children's learning. Excessive background noise can reduce the
amount and quality of verbal exchange and, therefore, impact education, family
lifestyles, occupational efficiency, and the quality of recreation and leisure time.
Sensitive Noise Receptors
Noise sensitive land use are defined as those specific land uses that have
associated indoor and/or outdoor human activities that may be subject to stress
and/or significant interference from noise produced by community sound sources.
Such human activity typically occurs daily for continuous periods of 24 hours or is
of such a nature that noise is significantly disruptive to activities that occur for
shorter periods. Specifically, noise-sensitive land uses in Pico Rivera include:
residences of all types, health care facilities, libraries, cultural facilities, places of
worship, schools and day care centers. Minimizing noise exposure to sensitive
areas is important to ensure the proper function of land uses and to maintain the
quality of life.
                                          11-5
11. Noise
          Relatively noise tolerant land uses are business, commercial, and professional
          developments. Noise tolerant receptors include industrial, manufacturing, utilities,
          natural open space, undeveloped land, parking lots, and transit terminals.
          Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
          Land Use Compatibility
          Goal 11.1
          An acceptable noise environment for existing and future residents
          that also meets the business needs of the community.
          Policy 11.1-1 Land Use Compatibility. Strive to achieve and maintain land use
          patterns that are consistent with the noise compatibility guidelines set forth in
          Table 11-1.
          Table 11-1:
          Maximum Allowable Environmental Noise Standards
                                                                                       Hours of Day
                                                                  Exterior Noise Level                Interior Noise Level
                                                                  From Property Line                             (1)
           Land Use                                                   Ldn/CNEL, dB                       Ldn/CNEL, dB
           Residential (Low Density, Multi Family,
                                                                              65                                 45
           Mixed-Use)
           Transient Lodging (Motels/Hotels)                                  65                                 45
           Schools, Libraries, Churches,
           Hospitals/Medical Facilities, Nursing                              70                                 45
           Homes, Museums
           Theaters, Auditoriums                                              70                                 N/A
           Playgrounds, Parks                                                 75                                 N/A
           Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water
                                                                              75                                 N/A
           Recreation
           Office Buildings, Business Commercial
                                                                              70                                 N/A
           and Professional
           Industrial, Manufacturing, and Utilities                           75                                 N/A
           The noise level standard is the maximum decibel level which may be imposed upon the referenced land use.
           Where a proposed use is not specifically listed on this table, the use shall comply with the noise exposure
           standards for the nearest similar use as determined by the Planning Director.
           1) This noise exposure maximum requires window and doors to remain closed to achieve the acceptable interior
           noise level and will necessitate the use of an air conditioning unit and/or exterior noise level reduction measures
           such as a block wall and double pane windows.
          Policy 11.1-2 Existing Noise Incompatibilities. Within areas where existing or
          future noise levels exceed the guidelines set forth in Table 11-1, encourage
          establishment of noise buffers and barriers, modifications to noise-generating
          operations, and/or retrofitting of buildings housing noise-sensitive uses, where
          feasible and appropriate.
                                                                    11-6
                    October 2014                                                    11. Noise
                  	
Implementation Program for Policies 11.1-1 through 11.1-2:
 Adopt regulations in the zoning ordinance addressing acceptable noise and
   vibration levels and duration.
Policy 11.1-3 New Noise-Sensitive Development. Require development of new
noise-sensitive land uses to provide appropriate noise buffers or barriers, as well
as to implement feasible building designs needed to meet the noise compatibility
guidelines shown in Table 11-1.
Policy 11.1-4 New Stationary Noise Sources. Require new stationary noise
sources to mitigate impacts on noise-sensitive uses consistent with the noise
compatibility guidelines set forth in Table 11-1.
Policy 11.1-5 Development Site Planning. Encourage new mixed use and
multi-unit residential developments to provide for separation of onsite noise-
sensitive and noise-generating uses to the extent feasible, as well as to use
appropriate building placement to create noise barriers that protect noise-
sensitive uses. In addition to sound barriers, design techniques to mitigate noise
impacts may include, but are not limited to:
 Increase building setbacks to increase the distance between the noise source
   and sensitive receptor.
 Orient buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to
   noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise sensitive areas and uses.
 Orient delivery, loading docks, and outdoor work areas away from noise-
   sensitive uses.
 Place noise tolerant uses, such as parking areas, and noise tolerant
   structures, such as garages, between the noise source and sensitive receptor.
 Cluster office, commercial, or multi-unit residential structures to reduce noise
   levels within interior open space areas.
 Provide double glazed and double paned windows on the side of the structure
   facing a major noise source, and place entries away from the noise source to
   the extent possible.
Implementation Program for Policies 11.1-3 through 11.1-5:
 Require preparation of noise studies as part of the development review
   process for projects involving development of noise sensitive uses in proximity
   to major noise sources or development that has the potential to impact noise
   sensitive land uses. Mitigation should minimize noise-related annoyance,
   sleep disruption, speech interference, and other similar effects using metrics
   and methodologies appropriate to the effect(s) to be assessed and avoided.
                                         11-7

11. Noise
          Transportation-Related Noise
          Goal 11.2
          Minimize disruptions to residential neighborhoods and businesses
          caused by transportation-related noise.
          Policy 11.2-1 New High Noise-Generating Uses. Locate future transit stations,
          rail projects such as the potential Metro Gold Line light rail and High Speed Rail,
          or other high noise-generating uses away from noise-sensitive land uses to the
          extent feasible.
          Implementation Program for Policy 11.2-1:
           Request that transportation agencies proposing facilities improvements and
              routes through Pico Rivera fully analyze potential noise impacts, and provide
              noise reducing measures as part of project design such that noise impacts of
              proposed transportation facilities are consistent with the standards set forth in
              Table 11-1.
          Policy 11.2-2 Mitigation along Roadways. Include noise mitigation measures in
          the design of street and highway improvement projects adjacent to noise-
          sensitive areas. Measures should emphasize the establishment of natural buffers
          or use of setbacks between roadways and adjoining noise sensitive uses, and
          use of pavements that reduce roadway noise, when feasible.
          Policy 11.2-3 Speed Limits. Enforce established speed limits to control noise
          levels.
          Implementation Program for Policy 11.2-3:
           Consider installation of traffic calming improvements along roadways within
              residential areas where speeding is an ongoing problem.
          Policy 11.2-4 Truck Routes. Maintain a system of truck routes that avoid truck
          travel through or adjacent existing and future residential neighborhoods, to the
          extent feasible.
          Policy 11.2-5 Development along Major Roadways and Rail Lines. Require
          that noise attenuation measures be incorporated into all new development and
          remodels of noise-sensitive uses in close proximity to major roadways and
          existing or known planned rail lines where railroad-generated noise levels exceed
          the guidelines set forth in Table 11-1.
          Implementation Program for Policy 11.2-5:
           As part of railroad grade separation projects, consider acquisition of
              residential uses immediately adjacent to the rail line as part of project
              improvements.
          Policy 11.2-6 Railroad Noise. Work with the railroad lines operating in
          Pico Rivera to minimize noise levels produced by trains and whistle noise by
          continuing to construct additional grade separations at busy intersections,
          reducing nighttime operations, and maintaining consistency with the noise levels
          shown in Table 11-1.
          Implementation Program for Policy 11.2-6:
           Continue to pursue federal, State, regional, and local funds to construct
              additional grade separations at busy intersections within the City.
                                                   11-8

                              October 2014                                                                          11. Noise
                           	
Construction Noise Sources
Goal 11.3
Minimize disruptions to residential neighborhoods and businesses
caused by construction-related noise.
Policy 11.3-1 Construction Noise. Minimize construction-related noise and
vibration by limiting construction activities within 500 feet of noise-sensitive uses
from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. seven days a week; after hour permission shall be
granted by City staff, Planning Commission, or the City Council.
 Require proposed development adjacent to occupied noise sensitive land
    uses to implement a construction-related noise mitigation plan. This plan
    would depict the location of construction equipment storage and maintenance
    areas, and document methods to be employed to minimize noise impacts on
    adjacent noise sensitive land uses.
 Require that construction equipment utilize noise reduction features (e.g.,
    mufflers and engine shrouds) that are no less effective than those originally
    installed by the manufacturer.
 Require that haul truck deliveries be subject to the same hours specified for
    construction. Additionally, the plan shall denote any construction traffic haul
    routes where heavy trucks would exceed 100 daily trips (counting those both
    to and from the construction site). To the extent feasible, the plan shall denote
    haul routes that do not pass sensitive land uses or residential dwellings.
Policy 11.3-2 Vibration Standards. Require construction projects and new
development anticipated to generate a significant amount of vibration to ensure
acceptable interior vibration levels at nearby noise-sensitive uses based on
Federal Transit Administration criteria as shown in Table 11-2.
Table 11-2:
Groundborne Vibration Impact Criteria for General Assessment
                                                                             Impact Levels (VdB)
                                                                Frequent          Occasional           Infrequent
Land Use Category                                                Eventsa             Eventsb             Eventsc
Category 1: Buildings where vibration would                            d                  d                    d
                                                                    65                 65                   65
interfere with interior operations
Category 2: Residences and buildings where
                                                                    72                 75                   80
people normally sleep
Category 3: Institutional land uses with
                                                                    75                 78                   83
primarily daytime uses
Vibration levels are measured in or near the vibration-sensitive use.
a.    “Frequent Events” is defined as more than 70 vibration events of the same source per day.
b.    “Occasional Events” is defined as between 30 and 70 vibration events of the same source per day.
c.    “Infrequent Events” is defined as fewer than 30 vibration events of the same source per day.
d.    This criterion limit is based on levels that are acceptable for most moderately sensitive equipment such as
      optical microscopes. Vibration-sensitive manufacturing or research will require detailed evaluation to define
      the acceptable vibration levels.
Source: Federal Transit Administration, Transit Noise Impact and Vibration Assessment, May 2006.
                                                           11-9

11. Noise
          This page intentionally left blank.
                        11-10
                     October 2014
CHAPTER 3
Land Use Element
Introduction
The Land Use Element focuses on the organization of the community’s physical
environment into logical, functional, and visually pleasing patterns, consistent
with local values and priorities. Of primary concern are the type, intensity,
location, and character of land uses desired for the future. The Land Use
Element provides appropriate land for each of the variety of activities associated
with a successful community, and guides the manner in which this land will be
developed and used.
A key consideration in defining the type, intensity, location, and mix of future land
uses is achieving a close relationship between local employment and housing.          Multiple family housing
Reducing the number of miles residents must travel between home and work and
providing opportunities for “transit-oriented” development consisting of high
density, mixed use development adjacent to transit nodes will ease traffic
congestion, reduce fuel and energy consumption, improve regional air quality,
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The arrangement and pattern of land uses set forth in this Element takes into
consideration existing development, transportation routes, infrastructure capacity,
natural and man-made barriers, and a variety of interrelated aspects that shape
the community.
As required by State planning law, this Land Use Element designates the general
distribution, location, and extent of land uses for housing, business, industry,
open space, institutions, city facilities, and other categories of public and private
uses of land within the city and its Sphere of Influence (SOI).
A description of the general layout desired for each land use type is provided in
this Land Use Element. Another purpose of this Element is to identify
opportunities to enhance the planning area’s existing built form and make
suggestions regarding appropriate options for design improvements.
Through the provisions of this Element and its implementation, the City seeks to:
• Establish and maintain an orderly pattern of development;
• Identify acceptable land uses and their general location, along with standards
    for residential density and non-residential intensity for development;
• Establish a land use classification system that implements land use policies;
                                           3-1

3. Land Use Element
                      • Provide a pleasant, functional, and organized built environment that helps
                         residents, workers, and visitors have a sense of well-being while in the
                         community;
                      • Encourage residents, workers, and visitors to use businesses within the city
                         by making commercial areas more attractive and functional;
                      • Provide good “wayfinding” to assist residents, workers, and visitors in finding
                         facilities and services within the community;
   Krikorian Theatre  • Attract future development of a high quality by giving developers and new
                         businesses the confidence that their investment in the community will be
                         protected; and
                      • Visually reflect the quality and heritage of the community.
                      Land Use Issues
                      Community Image and Character
                      Underlying the livability and economic vitality of a community is its perceived
                      image. Quality in the design of the built environment is an investment that pays
                      dividends in residents’ perceptions of their quality of life and the perceptions that
                      prospective employers and retailers will have regarding the desirability of Pico
                      Rivera as a location for their businesses.
                      Pico Rivera’s existing community character is a result of its natural setting, a
Single-family housing compact community flanked by two rivers, and the history of the area, which
                      began as Spanish and Mexican ranchos and later evolved into two small
                      separate residential communities situated between the rivers – the towns of Pico
                      and Rivera—that were ultimately incorporated into the City of Pico Rivera.
                      The city has enjoyed a marked improvement in the quality of its built environment
                      over the past 20 years. New investments have been made in large-scale
                      commercial development along Whittier and Washington Boulevards, and a
                      modern industrial park has replaced the former Northrup manufacturing plant. In
                      addition, significant investment has been made in upgrading streetscapes, as
                      evidenced by recent improvements along Beverly, Rosemead, Washington, and
                      Paramount Boulevards including the Passons Boulevard Underpass project.
                      Yet, much work remains to be accomplished, including streetscape
                      improvements along some major roadways, improved design of community
                      entries and gateways, and upgrading of some older commercial corridors and
                      aging industrial areas.
                      Organization of Land Uses
                      Throughout much of the planning area, the overall land use pattern is well
                      established, and is not intended to change over time. Future development will
                      primarily consist of infill projects, expansion of existing uses, and improvements
                      to existing buildings. Within the northern portion of the city, some older, existing
                                                                3-2

                     October 2014                                                    3. Land Use Element
general industrial development is planned to transition to higher employment-
generating lighter industrial uses. Higher density housing will be introduced in
strategic locations, including mixed-use development.
Recognizing that the planning area’s land use pattern is well established and the
need to protect existing residential neighborhoods, there are two overarching
themes for future land use within the community. The first is to “Preserve and
Protect” those neighborhoods, open space and commercial/industrial areas that
are functioning well. The second is to focus on “Opportunity Areas” which
represent the portions of the city where investment in design improvements or
land use changes would improve economic prosperity and the visual quality of
the community, while also meeting its future housing needs.
The General Plan provides a blueprint for community development by
designating lands for different types of uses. In designating land uses, the
General Plan takes into account:
• Existing Land Use: What is the current pattern of developed land by type of
    land use – residential, commercial, service, manufacturing, and others?
• Demand: How much demand exists for existing and new land uses of various
    types (housing, retail, industry, etc.)?
• Desired Future Land Use: What locations within the community are best
    suited for uses that are different than those that exist today? What different
    uses do we need in the future? Is there sufficient land in appropriate locations
    to satisfy future needs?
• Infrastructure Availability: Are urban services – water supply, wastewater
    collection and treatment, transportation facilities, and others – adequate to
    serve existing and future development?
Taking these considerations into account, the General Plan indicates where
various kinds of land uses are best located, and how much of each use should
be provided. The General Plan provides opportunities, but does not cause
development to happen. The General Plan recognizes that, ultimately,
development depends on the initiative of individual developers and businesses,
for whom the provisions of the General Plan establish a context for evaluating the
economic feasibility of their specific projects.
Land Use Transitions and Buffers
Although Pico Rivera’s overall land use pattern is well established, and are not
intended to change over time, there exist within the community locations where
incompatible land uses sit side-by-side together. For example, within the northern
portion of the city, certain residential neighborhoods are located adjacent to
industrial uses, including along Kruse Road and in the area north of Whittier
Boulevard east of Durfee Avenue. The General Plan proposes land use changes
                                            3-3

3. Land Use Element
                    and includes appropriate policies to address land use transitions and to create
                    buffers to address these incompatibilities.
                    Historic Resources
                    While the City’s history has played a role in defining Pico Rivera’s current land
                    use pattern, certain pieces of history have also endured and become important
                    assets to the community. The City in consultation with the Pico Rivera History
                    and Heritage Society has gathered a great deal of local historical information and
                    identified a total of 13 buildings and sites with the potential for historical
                    significance (see Table 3-1). Only one of the sites, the La Mano building located
      Pico Rivera   at 9235 Whittier Boulevard is a California registered historical building. It was the
  Historical Museum
                    former National Bank of Pico Rivera. None of the other sites are currently listed
                    in federal or state registers. However, regardless of whether these sites are
                    eligible for official registration with the federal or state government, the City is
                    committed to acknowledging, protecting and enhancing its historic resources.
                    General Plan goals and policies support this commitment by recommending
                    protection of these sites subject to further study of their historical significance.
                                                               3-4

October 2014                                                                                                                  3. Land Use Element
 s and Sites
                                   Address                                               APN     Historic Significance
                                   5537 Rosemead Boulevard                            6372028022 Historic home of baseball player Jack Bliss.
er Church                          4245 Acacia Avenue                                 5272018029 First Catholic church in Pico, c. 1930s
                                   8823 Dunlap Crossing Road                          6372026021 Historic home, c.1900
ouse                               8612 Dunlap Crossing Road                          6371011033 Historic ranch house, c.1897
 Mission Bells                     Pico Rivera Plaza (in plaza area between Target               Historic El Camino Real route linking
                                   and Food For Less, 8800-8600 Whittier Boulevard)              California Missions
ad Station (Pico Rivera            Relocated, 9122 Washington Boulevard                          Site of the Sante Fe Depot (1884-1888)
ge Society)                                                                           6381003900
House                              8310 Orange Avenue                                 6385002045 Historic house, c.1912
                                   8321 Passons Boulevard                             6387011013 Historic house, c.1914
  tist Church                      9125-9141 Burke Street                                        Original site of the First Baptist Church of
                                                                                      6382020050 Rivera (1888-1916)
                                   9239 Mines Avenue                                  6377027035 Site of historic home
e                                  9109 Mines Avenue                                  6377029022 Historic house, c. 1903
  g                                9235 Whittier Boulevard                            6374016023 Old Nation Bank, California registered
                                                                                                 historic building*
   onument                         Mines Avenue and Dunlap Crossing Road ( behind                Veterans memorial, C. 1978
                                   the Pico Rivera Library)
 g Department, 2014
 ia registered, all other sites need further study to determine their historic value.
                                                                         3-5
       3. Land Use Element
                                  Land Use Plan
                                  This section presents the Land Use Plan and an overview of the standards of
                                  density and building intensity, and allowed uses for the various land use
                                  designations in the plan, consistent with the requirements of State Planning Law.
                                  Figure 3-1 presents the Land Use Plan for Pico Rivera. Table 3-2 describes the
                                  uses and densities permitted for each land use category.
                                  Intensity standards are expressed as an allowable range of residential densities
Residential Density               and nonresidential floor area ratios (FARs) per gross acre. Examples of typical
Residential density is expressed  densities and FARs are illustrated on Figure 3-2.
as units per gross acre, and is
calculated as the total number
of units within a defined area
                                  California Planning law calls for conformity between the land use map and the
divided by the gross acres of the zoning map. This consistency provision is important, since the zoning ordinance
area.                             serves as the primary implementation tool of the Land Use Element. In instances
Non-Residential Development       where there is a conflict and an inconsistency arises, the general plan
Intensity                         designation prevails. State law indicates that local governments have a
Non-residential development       “reasonable amount of time” to amend their zoning ordinance to ensure
intensity is expressed as Floor
Area Ratio (FAR), which is the    consistency. Appendix A, Zoning Compatibility Matrix provides information
ratio of the gross square footage regarding zoning districts and their consistency with the various land use
of all buildings on a lot to the  designations of the General Plan.
gross square footage of the lot.
                                  In areas where zoning has not been brought into conformity with the General
                                  Plan and a discretionary permit is required for development, the City shall allow
                                  property owners to either:
                                  1. Develop consistent with the existing zoning provided the City makes a finding
                                      that approval of the project would not interfere with the long-term
                                      development of the area consistent with the General Plan; or
                                  2. Develop under the General Plan designation, in which case the City and
                                      property owners will facilitate a rezoning consistent with the General Plan.
                                                                            3-6

October 2014                           3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-1: Land Use Plan
                         3-7
3. Land Use Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
                                   3-8
                           October 2014                                                                  3. Land Use Element
Table 3-2:
General Plan Land Use Categories
     Map                                                                          Maximum Density/
   Symbol                                    Intention                            Land Use Intensity
 Land Use Designations
 Residential Land Uses
 Densities are stated as the maximum permissible number of dwelling units per net acre that exists
 within the project site prior to any new dedication requirements. Density is assumed to accrue only to
 lands that are “developable.” Developable acres are those that are not encumbered by prior
 dedications of easements or rights-of-way, and are not flood-prone or subject to other hazards as to
 be unable to support new development.
 Second units on a residential lot may be permitted subject to the provisions of the zoning
 ordinance, provided that second units are developed within the applicable maximum allowable
 density of lot they are being developed on and per State law.
 Provision of density bonuses to facilitate the development of housing for lower income residents as
 allowed by State law and City ordinance may result in development densities in excess of the
 nominal maximum density for any land use designation.
      RR         The Rural Residential designation preserves large lot           Density: Up to 2
                 rural lifestyles, including the keeping of animals within an    dwelling units per net
                 urban setting. Housing types range from large ranch             acre
                 estate homes to several detached houses on a single
                 large lot when consistent with the maximum allowable land
                 use intensity and permitted by the zoning ordinance.
     LDR         The Low Density Residential designation makes up the            Density: 2-6 dwelling
                 majority of the residential land use within the city. These     units per net acre.
                 areas typically consist of traditional suburban subdivisions
                 with one house per lot or in some case, one house on a lot
                 with an attached or detached rental unit. A mixture of
                 housing types may be developed within a single project
                 site consistent with Low Density Residential density
                 limits are not exceeded and a determination by the City
                 that the proposed mix of dwelling units will be compatible
                 with the surrounding neighborhood.
     MDR         Lands designated Medium Density Residential are                 Density: 6-14 dwelling
                 typified by a wide range of living accommodations,              units per net acre.
                 including conventional detached homes, detached
                 dwellings on small lots, mobile homes, duplexes,
                 townhouses, condominiums, and garden apartments. A
                 mixture of detached homes and attached for-sale or for-
                 rent dwelling units could also be permitted within a
                 proposed development consistent with Medium Density
                 Residential density limits and a determination by the City
                 that the proposed dwelling unit mix will be compatible with
                 the surrounding neighborhood.
     HDR         The High Density Residential designation is typified by         Density: 14-30 dwelling
                 townhouses, condominiums and apartments. Since the Land         units per net acre.
                 Use Map designates density rather than specific housing
                 types, a mixture of houses, condominiums, and apartments
                 could also be permitted within a proposed development if
                 High Density Residential density limits are not exceeded
                 and a determination is made by the City that the proposed
                 development will be compatible with the surrounding
                 neighborhood and General Plan policies. High Density
                 Residential designations are primarily located along major
                 street corridors and near major activity centers.
                                                      3-9

3. Land Use Element
                    Table 3-2 (continued):
                    General Plan Land Use Categories
                        Map                                                                            Maximum Density/
                      Symbol                                     Intention                             Land Use Intensity
                    Business-Oriented Land Uses
                    The General Plan identifies business-oriented land use designations to provide a broad range of
                    shopping, commercial service, and employment opportunities for the community. Permitted
                    maximum land use intensities for each designation are stated as maximum floor area ratios (FAR),
                    which are determined by dividing the total proposed building area (square feet) of a development by
                    the square footage of the development site prior to any new dedication requirements. Achievement
                    of this maximum is neither guaranteed nor implied. The final density achieved by any particular
                    development is dependent upon the project’s design, any constraints that might be present within
                    the site, traffic and site access considerations, available infrastructure and services, and other
                    factors. Applicable zoning standards may also limit attainment of maximum allowable intensities.
                          C           The Commercial land use designation is intended to             Intensity: Maximum
                                      provide appropriately located areas for the general            FAR of 0.75
                                      shopping, commercial services, dining and entertainment,
                                      and professional office needs of the community. Examples
                                      of the intended nature of development within the
                                      Commercial designation include shopping centers, in-line
                                      shops, specialty shops, stand-alone commercial uses, and
                                      office buildings. Within the Commercial designation, and
                                      subject to applicable General Plan policies and Pico Rivera
                                      ordinance provisions, appropriate land uses include a broad
                                      range of commercial, retail, service, and office uses. Typical
                                      uses include general retail, markets, commercial services,
                                      restaurants, automotive repair and service, hardware and
                                      home improvement, durable goods sales, commercial
                                      recreation, professional and business offices, financial
                                      institutions, and automotive sales.
                          LI          The Light Industrial land use designation is characterized Intensity: Maximum
                                      by a variety of light industrial uses, including               FAR of 0.60
                                      warehousing/distribution, assembly, light manufacturing,
                                      research and development, mini-storage, and repair
                                      facilities conducted within enclosed structures as well as
                                      supporting retail and personal services. Light Industrial
                                      areas are intended for industrial uses compatible with a
                                      location in closer proximity to residential development than
                                      general industrial areas and are intended for businesses
                                      that do not generate substantial volumes of heavy truck
                                      traffic.
                           I          General Industrial designations are intended for a range       Intensity: Maximum
                                      of industrial businesses, including uses, which, because of    FAR of 0.60
                                      their truck-intensive nature or for reasons of potential
                                      environmental effects, are best segregated from other,
                                      more sensitive, land uses, such as residential
                                      neighborhoods. These areas provide for a wide range and
                                      variety of manufacturing and assembly, large-scale
                                      warehousing and distribution uses, contractors storage
                                      yards, and wholesale activities.
                                      Retail or service uses designed to meet the needs of
                                      businesses may be permitted subject to applicable zoning
                                      regulations. General Industrial areas are intended to
                                      make a positive contribution to the local economy and
                                      municipal revenues, and furnish local employment
                                      opportunities for area residents.
                                                                          3-10

                          October 2014                                                                   3. Land Use Element
Table 3-2 (continued):
General Plan Land Use Categories
    Map                                                                            Maximum Density/
  Symbol                                    Intention                              Land Use Intensity
Community and Public Land Uses
The General Plan identifies Community and Public land use designations to provide for public and
institutional activities, as well as for the preservation of open space. Pico Rivera recognizes that the
City might not have jurisdiction over certain public facilities, and that public entities might not be
required to follow the City’s development standards. In such cases, the City’s land use policies,
including maximum development intensity are intended as a guideline for the agency.
    P/OS        The primary purpose of areas designated Park/Open                Intensity: The maximum
                Space is the provision of recreational facilities,               land use intensity is
                preservation of environmental resources, managed                 governed by the open
                production of resources, and protection of the public health     space/recreation
                and safety. Certain open space areas, such as those that         purpose of the land so
                exist to protect public health or sensitive environmental        designated.
                resources or those owned and managed by private
                entities, might not be open to public use. The most
                prevalent public open space uses are City parks. It is also
                the intent of this designation to include uses, such as utility
                corridors, that serve as interim and permanent open
                space. Only uses consistent with the open space purposes
                of lands designated Park/Open Space are appropriate,
                subject to the applicable General Plan policies and zoning
                ordinance provisions. This designation recognizes that
                certain recreational uses such as the municipal golf course
                and equestrian centers may be of higher intensity use than
                typical parks and open space areas. In addition, wholesale
                nurseries and landscape growers may be permitted within
                public utility easements subject to General Plan policies
                and zoning ordinance provisions.
      PF        The Public Facilities designation is intended to recognize Intensity: Maximum
                existing publicly owned facilities, and to provide areas for     FAR of 1.0
                the conduct of public and institutional activities, including
                but not limited to State and Federal agencies, special
                districts, public schools and associated administrative
                offices, and public and private utilities. Uses within this
                designation include public and private schools, public
                corporation yards, libraries, fire stations, civic center, and
                other governmental offices and facilities. Uses also include
                open space, parks, greenways and trails that are intended
                for public use.
Mixed Use Development
Two unique land use designations provide for flexible land use in activity centers and provide for
innovation in design. Whereas the other land use designations generally focus on a single type of
land use, mixed land use categories produce a successful blend of land uses to create successful
districts.
      MU        The primary purpose of areas designated Mixed Use is to          Intensity: Maximum
                provide a different style of development than traditional        FAR shall be 1.0 for
                neighborhoods, commercial, and employment areas that             non-residential uses
                are physically separated from each other. The specific mix       and up to 30 dwelling
                of uses and development density are to be appropriate to         units per net acre for
                the site’s location, access, size, and adjacent land uses.       residential uses
                The intent is to create areas in which a mix of uses can
                come together to meet the community’s housing,
                shopping, employment, and institutional needs through            The scale, size and mix
                efficient patterns of land use. The Mixed Use designation        of land uses vary by
                provides flexibility to develop standalone residential or        area. Further direction
                                                                                 regarding land use
                                                    3-11

3. Land Use Element
                    Table 3-2 (continued):
                    General Plan Land Use Categories
                      Map                                                                         Maximum Density/
                     Symbol                                  Intention                            Land Use Intensity
                                commercial or a combination of both. Within the Mixed           distributions, densities
                                Use designation, both “vertical mixed use” (various types       and intensities within
                                of uses integrated within individual buildings, such as         each area is provided
                                commercial on the ground floor with residential uses            by provisions of the
                                above) and “horizontal mixed use” (individual buildings         Opportunity Area within
                                housing different types of uses within an integrated site       which the development
                                plan) are appropriate.                                          is located.
                       SP       The Specific Plan designation is intended to be used in         Intensity: The maximum
                                combination with underlying General Plan land use               overall intensity of
                                designations to allow for the creation of flexible standards    development within the
                                in areas of the city which have unique characteristics,         Specific Plan
                                environmental constraints, or would not otherwise achieve       designation shall be
                                General Plan goals and policies using the existing              consistent with the
                                designations.                                                   provisions of the Pico
                                Within the Specific Plan designated areas, all land uses        Rivera General Plan as
                                which underlie the Specific Plan designation are considered     determined through the
                                to be appropriate subject to applicable General Plan policies   development review
                                and Zoning ordinance provisions. Development or                 process. In all cases,
                                redevelopment within the Specific Plan designation will be      the intensity of Specific
                                subject to the requirements of Government Code Section          Plan developments, and
                                65450. In addition, Specific Plans must include:                each portion thereof,
                                                                                                shall be compatible with
                                • A land use plan incorporating high quality design             the underlying General
                                    concepts and a consistent design theme;                     Plan densities and
                                • A circulation plan which shows appropriate access to          intensities and adjacent
                                    and from the development as well as how the project         and adjacent and
                                    roadways will be designed;                                  existing and planned
                                                                                                land uses.
                                • A landscape plan providing a consistent planting
                                    theme;
                                • A description (which includes illustrative examples) of
                                    techniques which will be used to buffer residential and
                                    non-residential uses;
                                • An implementation plan which includes a phasing plan
                                    for the installation of capital improvements which is
                                    consistent with area master plans, how increases in the
                                    level of public services such as sheriff, fire, and schools
                                    are to be addressed;
                                • An overall development phasing plan for the
                                    development;
                                • An assessment of the fiscal and economic impacts of
                                    the development; and
                                • When determined necessary by the City, a
                                    development agreement which includes the elements
                                    listed above and setting forth the terms and conditions
                                    agreeable to the City and the developer for
                                    implementation of the project.
                                Upon adoption of a specific plan as defined above, the
                                underlying General Plan and Zoning Designations shall be
                                represented by the “SP” Specific Plan designation.
                                                                      3-12

                       October 2014                                                                    3. Land Use Element
Table 3-2 (continued):
General Plan Land Use Categories
   Map                                                                          Maximum Density/
  Symbol                                Intention                               Land Use Intensity
Special Planning Areas
Special Planning Areas provide additional direction for specific locations in Pico Rivera that
supplements and is in addition to other general plan policies.
Opportunity   Several areas within the city are identified as “Opportunity    Intensity: The maximum
   Area       Areas,” and are intended to accommodate much of the             overall intensity of
              City’s anticipated redevelopment and potential new              development within
              growth. Each area has its own purpose and intent. The           each Opportunity Area
              identification of “Opportunity Areas” allows for flexibility in shall be consistent with
              determining specific intentions for use, design and             the provisions of the
              character unique to each area that supplements and is in        General Plan for the
              addition to other General Plan policies.                        Opportunity Area within
                                                                              which the development
                                                                              is located.
  Housing     These sites are identified by the Housing Element to meet       The following density
  Element     the Regional Housing Needs Assessment. These sites              standards shall apply to
   Sites      are subject to a rezoning program pursuant to Program 15        residential
              in Section 2, Housing Plan of the Housing Element.              development:
                                                                              6 to 14 dwelling units
                                                                              per acre in MDR.
                                                                              A minimum 30 dwelling
                                                                              units per acre in HDR.
                                                                              A 50% development
                                                                              capacity and minimum
                                                                              30 dwelling units per
                                                                              acre in MU for
                                                                              residential uses.
                                                 3-13

3. Land Use Element
                                                     Figure 3-2: FAR
                    Development Potential
                    An adequate supply of employment and revenue generating land uses is a key
                    component of a healthy and prosperous community. The estimated development
                    potential allocated by the General Plan is summarized in Table 3-3. Given the
                    built-out nature of the planning area and the typical variations in the intensity of
                    individual projects, a “realistic” development scenario was developed for the
                    purposes of calculating development potential.
                    Table 3-3 summarizes the maximum and realistic density and intensity of
                    development allowed within each General Plan land use designation and the
                    likely buildout associated with these assumptions.
                                                            3-14

                              October 2014                                                                                                         3. Land Use Element
Table 3-3
General Plan Estimated Development Potential
                                                         Density/Intensity1                                      Development Capacity2
                                                                                                             Units/                      Population/
     Land Use              Acres                   Max                      Assumed                      Square Feet                     Employees
Residential
Rural Residential
                              78                     2                            2                            156                            588
(RR)
Low Density
Residential                 1,837                    6                            6                          11,022                         41,553
(LDR)
Medium Density
Residential                   60                    14                           14                            840                           3,167
(MDR)
High Density
Residential                  179                    30                           25                           4,475                         16,871
(HDR)
Business Oriented
Commercial (C)               152                   0.75                          0.5                       3,310,560                         4,555
Light Industrial
                             172                    0.6                          0.4                       2,996,928                         2,757
(LI)
General
                             366                    0.6                          0.5                       7,971,480                         6,696
Industrial (I)
Community and Public Land Uses
Park/Open
                             252
Space (P-OS)
Public Facilities
                            1,382                    1                          0.25                       3,713,490                         3,713
(PF)3
Mixed-Use Development
Mixed-Use (MU)4
     Housing                                    1.0 - 50%                    .35 - 50%                      1,414 du                   5,331 residents
     Element                  73
     Sites                                  30 du/ac - 50%               30 du/ac - 50%                   557,241 sf                   947 employees
                                                                            0.60 - 50%
     Other MU                                   1.0 - 50%                                                    242 du                     913 residents
                              27                                         20 du/ac - 50%
     Sites                                  30 du/ac - 50%                                                351,529 sf                   325 employees
Specific Plan (SP)
     SP 301                   12              Per SP 301                         NA                            159                            409
     SP 400                  216              Per SP 400                         NA                        3,611,847                         3,910
     Right-of-way            864
                                                                                                           18,308 du                  68,831 residents
     Total                  5,670
                                                                                                         22,513,076 sf               22,905 employees
Notes:
1.    Historically, citywide buildout levels do not achieve the maximum allowable density/intensity on every parcel and are, on average lower than allowed by the Land Use
      Plan. Accordingly, the buildout estimates do not assume buildout at the maximum density or intensity for all land use categories and are adjusted downward in some
      cases. To view the buildout assumptions, see the Pico Rivera Development Potential Methodology in Appendix B.
2.    To view the factors used to generate the estimated population and employees see Appendix B.
3.    Calculation for development potential was not applied to areas for water (including San Gabriel and Rio Hondo rivers and their spreading grounds), flood control, electrical
      power, and railroad uses.
4.    Development potential for Mixed Use areas is based on general estimates and subject to refinement through future, more detailed plans.
                                                                                     3-15
     3. Land Use Element
                               Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
                               Community Image and Character
                               Goal 3.1
                               Protect and enhance the character of the City’s rural residential
                               neighborhoods which are the last vestige for animal keeping and
                               agricultural activities within Pico Rivera.
                               Policy 3.1-1 Land use. Retain the Rural Residential land use designation in its
                               current locations.
                               Policy 3.1-2 Equestrian trails. Expand the equestrian trail system to complete
     Equestrian trail near
       Streamland Park         connections from the City’s rural residential neighborhoods to existing and future
                               equestrian facilities.
                               Implementation Program for Policies 3.1-2:
                               •   Prepare an equestrian trail plan and feasibility study as an independent study
                                   or as part of a comprehensive trails plan to identify necessary trail
                                   improvements and funding sources to construct and maintain an expanded
                                   equestrian trail system.
                               Policy 3.1-3 Equestrian uses. Establish equestrian oriented uses at the
                               Bicentennial Park Campground adjacent to the Sports Arena.
Additional policies addressing
equestrian facilities can be   Policy 3.1-4 Equestrian facilities. Preserve the horse ranch located east of the
found in the Healthy Community
Element under Parks and        I-605 freeway north of Rose Hills as an equestrian oriented facility and expand
Recreation                     safe trail connections to this facility from the rural residential neighborhoods and
                               any future equestrian facilities.
                               Goal 3.2
                               Enhance key entryways and gateways to the city to create a distinct
                               sense of arrival and identify a central space for civic gathering to
                               promote a positive image and strengthen the identity of Pico Rivera
                               Policy 3.2-1 Gateway Design and Improvement. Create a city-wide entry and
                               wayfinding signage program to create clear entry statements at key gateways to
                               the city, to improve the identification of important destinations throughout the city,
                               to distinguish and brand the city and for beautification. Design gateway
                               treatments for key entryways into the city that incorporate landscaping, signage,
  A monument sign in Pico      public art, and/or structural elements that communicate a sense of arrival.
             Rivera.
                               Implementation Program for Policies 3.2-1:
                                   •     Adopt a Gateway Improvement and Wayfinding Signage Program that
                                         identifies consistent gateway treatments for the key entryways to the city,
                                         including design and development standards and specific locations for
                                         installation of the necessary improvements.
                                                                          3-16

                   October 2014                                                          3. Land Use Element
Policy 3.2-2 Central Gathering Place. Enhance the Smith Park/Pico Rivera
Library Area as a central gathering place by creating a more diverse array of      Smith Park/Pico Rivera Library
community services – farmers market, shopping, entertainment, recreation, and      is also an Opportunity Area.
community events.                                                                  Additional policies addressing
                                                                                   this area can be found under
                                                                                   Opportunity Areas.
Policy 3.2-3 Investment. Focus community investment and resources in the
development of the Smith Park/Pico Rivera Library area as a central gathering
place and focal point for the city.
Goal 3.5
Recognize the importance of the Whittier Narrows Dam, Rio Hondo
and San Gabriel River channels in shaping the character, identity
and physical structure of the community by protecting and                          See also the Healthy
enhancing these features.                                                          Communities Element under
                                                                                   Parks and Recreation for
                                                                                   additional policies regarding the
Policy 3.5-1 Trails. Expand bicycle and pedestrian trails, where feasible along    Whittier Narrows Dam, Rio
the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel River channels.                                      Hondo and San Gabriel River
                                                                                   channels.
Policy 3.5-2 Habitat. Identify areas where natural habitats along the Rio Hondo
and San Gabriel River channels could be restored.
Policy 3.5-3 Recreation. Identify opportunities for passive recreation areas
within and along the Whittier Narrows Dam, Rio Hondo and San Gabriel River
channels.
Policy 3.5-4 Open Space and Landscaping. Identify opportunities to provide
open space/parks and/or landscaping along the Whittier Narrows Dam, Rio
Hondo and San Gabriel River channels that will soften and enhance the edges
adjacent to these natural features.
Goal 3.6
Improve the community image by ensuring a consistent level of high
quality design and ongoing maintenance and improvement of
existing development.
                                                                                 See also Implementation
Policy 3.6-1 Design Guidelines. Ensure a consistent level of high quality design Program for Policy 3.6-1 for
                                                                                 design review and design
through the development of design guidelines and a design review process for     guideline programs.
new development. At a minimum, the design guidelines should provide direction
on the following:
• Site design
• Building design
• Parking and circulation
• Landscaping
• Services and Accessory Structures
                                      3-17

3. Land Use Element
                    Policy 3.6-2 Sustainable Development. Promote land development practices
                    that reduce energy and water consumption, pollution, greenhouse gas emissions,
                    and disposal of waste materials incorporating such techniques as:
                    • Concentration of uses and design of development to promote walking,
                       bicycling, and use of public transit in lieu of the automobile;
                    • Encourage development of transit-oriented development near public transit
                       and residential areas;
                    • Capture and reuse of stormwater on-site for irrigation;
                    • Management of wastewater and use of recycled water, including encouraging
                       the use of grey water;
                    • Orientation of buildings to maximize opportunities for solar energy use,
                       daylighting, and ventilation;
                    • Use of landscapes that conserve water and reduce green waste;
                    • Use of permeable paving materials or reduction of paved surfaces;
                    • Shading of surface parking, walkways, and plazas and incorporation of solar
                       technology; and/or
                    • Recycling and/or salvaging of reuse of construction and demolition debris.
                    Implementation Program for Policy 3.6-1 and 3.6-2:
                    •    Amend the Zoning Code to include a design review process.
                    •    Prepare and adopt city-wide design guidelines for commercial, industrial,
                         mixed-use and residential development to ensure consistent, high quality
                         design.
                    •    As part of the City’s Design Review process develop an evaluation of the
                         performance of the proposed project based on environmental sustainability
                         objectives, including adherence to the U.S. Green Building Council’s
                         Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) and California
                         Building Industry Association’s California Green Building (CBG) rating or
                         comparable criteria.
                    Policy 3.6-2 Retrofits. Encourage retrofits and reuse of older and underutilized
                    industrial and commercial buildings throughout the city to create more modern
                    buildings and sites with a higher quality of design.
                    Implementation Program for Policy 3.6-2:
                    •    Explore development of a program that encourages individuals or businesses
                         to complete retrofits for their properties through incentives such as tax
                         credits, financing opportunities or other means.
                    Policy 3.6-3 Code Enforcement. Improve the appearance of substandard
                    structures, properties and signage through improved code enforcement efforts,
                    which is the primary means to ensure that properties are well maintained.
                                                              3-18

                   October 2014                                                         3. Land Use Element
Implementation Program for Policy 3.6-3:
•    Evaluate the City’s code enforcement efforts including funding and staffing to
     ensure that they are adequate to meet the needs of the community.
Policy 3.6-4 Sign Ordinance. Update the existing sign ordinance to better
regulate the quantity of signs as well as size, location and overall design to
maintain and enhance the visual quality of the community.
Implementation Program for Policy 3.6-4:
•    Adopt an update to the existing sign ordinance.
•    Complete an inventory of signs to identify illegal signs, legal, non-conforming
     signs and conforming signs and develop an amortization schedule and
     procedures for property owners to bring these signs into compliance with the
     sign ordinance.
Organization of Land Uses
Residential Land Uses
Goal 3.7
Protect and enhance existing residential neighborhoods, assuring
that they are safe, attractive, provide quality housing choices and
are designed and maintained to enhance livability.
Policy 3.7-1 Design. Regulate the design and site planning of new development
in and adjacent to residential neighborhoods to ensure compatibility between the
new development and the existing residential areas.
Policy 3.7-2 Neighborhood Revitalization. Promote revitalization of
neighborhoods in need by maintaining public improvements, encouraging infill
development compatible with the scale and character of existing development,
and supporting public and private efforts to upgrade and maintain neighborhood
appearance and the existing housing stock.
Policy 3.7-3 Housing Maintenance. Promote the maintenance of existing
residential units and improvements through code enforcement and the Housing
Rehabilitation Program to assure a quality living environment for residents and
consistency with their neighborhood setting.
Policy 3.7-4 Safety. Require that residential developments be designed to
facilitate and enhance neighborhood surveillance for safety.
Policy 3.7-5 Innovative Housing. Encourage development of innovative forms           Additional policies addressing
of housing that increase the diversity of affordable housing options in the city and affordable housing can be found
                                                                                     in the Housing Element
provide additional quality housing options for residents of all income levels.
                                        3-19

    3. Land Use Element
                                Policy 3.7-6 Walkability. Maintain sidewalks, parkways, street trees and
                                landscaping throughout the residential neighborhoods to create a pleasant
                                environment for walking and outdoor activities.
                                Commercial and Mixed-Use Land Uses
                                Goal 3.8
                                Diverse and attractive commercial, office and mixed-use
                                development that serves the community’s needs and contributes to
                                the City’s economic vitality
                                Policy 3.8-1 Appearance and Vitality. Support public and private efforts to
                                reinvest in and renovate existing commercial development to increase economic
                                vitality, improve aesthetic appearance, expand pedestrian orientation and
                                enhance street frontages.
                                Policy 3.8-2 Reuse and Intensification. Promote the reuse of vacant,
                                underutilized and inefficient commercial uses for more economically productive
                                purposes, including higher intensity businesses, housing and mixed-use
                                development.
                                Policy 3.8-3 Revitalization of Obsolete and Underused Properties.
                                Encourage the consolidation of small parcels, joint public-private partnerships
                                and land clearance and resale, to facilitate revitalization of underused and
                                obsolete commercial properties.
                                Policy 3.8-4 New Commercial and Mixed-Use Development. Promote high
                                quality commercial, office and mixed-use development and redevelopment that is
                                compatible with surrounding uses, and enhances adjacent streetscapes.
                                Policy 3.8-5 Diversity of Uses. Provide for and encourage the development of a
                                broad range of uses in the commercial areas that reduce the need to travel to
                                adjoining communities and capture a greater share of local spending.
                                Policy 3.8-6 Enhanced Design Character. Encourage the renovation, infill and
                                redevelopment of existing commercial areas to improve their architectural design
                                and quality, reduce the visual prominence of parking lots, make centers more
                                pedestrian friendly, reduce visual clutter associated with signage, and enhance
                                the definition and character of the street frontage and associated streetscapes.
See also policies addressing    Implementation Programs for Policies 3.8-1 to 3.8-6:
streetscape enhancements and
pedestrian improvements in the  •    Explore potential incentives to promote desired infill and redevelopment
Circulation Element.                 opportunities. Incentives may include priority processing, flexible
                                     development standards, density/intensity bonuses, fee deferrals, support of
See also the Economic                infrastructure upgrades or similar.
Prosperity Element for policies
pertaining to new and existing
businesses.
                                                                         3-20

                      October 2014                                                        3. Land Use Element
•    Pursue grant and other available funding sources to support planning,
     infrastructure and building upgrades, streetscape and pedestrian
     improvements, incentives and other programs within revitalization areas.
•    Amend the Zoning Code to require conditional use permits for automotive
     repair facilities, liquor stores, motels and fast food restaurant establishments
     to avoid an overconcentration of these types of uses and to protect
     opportunities for higher intensity and higher quality commercial development.
•    Create a database to keep track of underutilized commercial properties
     throughout the city to assist in the identification of future development
     opportunities.
•    Consider adoption of a vacant buildings ordinance to register vacant and
     abandoned commercial and industrial buildings, require appropriate
     maintenance and monitoring, and encourage redevelopment to protect the
     surrounding areas from decline and devaluation.
Policy 3.8-7 Buffering Adjoining Residential Areas. Require buffering,
screening, setbacks and other measures for new and expanded commercial uses
adjacent to residential neighborhoods to minimize impacts and compatibility
conflicts.
Implementation Program for Policy 3.8-7:
•    Amend the Zoning Code to provide standards to ensure that new
     development minimizes incompatibility between adjacent land uses.
Policy 3.8-8 Connectivity to Neighborhoods. Link commercial districts to
adjoining residential neighborhoods and other districts by well-designed and
attractive pedestrian sidewalks and trails, where appropriate.
Industrial Land Uses
Goal 3.9
A wide range of quality industries that provides job opportunities for
Pico Rivera’s residents while ensuring compatibility with nearby
residential neighborhoods.
Policy 3.9-1 New Industrial Development. Promote high quality industrial
development and redevelopment that is compatible with surrounding uses and            See also policies addressing
enhances the adjacent streetscape.                                                    economic development in the
                                                                                      Economic Prosperity Element
Policy 3.9-2 Promote Industrial Development. Promote recruitment of a
diverse range of new industrial users and retention and intensification of existing
users that offer job opportunities for the city’s residents and revenues to the City.
Policy 3.9-3 Supporting Uses. Encourage the integration of compatible
supporting uses in industrial districts that serve the needs of employees and
reduce their need to travel off-site during the workday.
                                           3-21

        3. Land Use Element
                                Policy 3.9-4 Design and Buffer. Ensure that industrial developments are sited
                                and adequately buffered from surrounding neighborhoods and development to
                                minimize negative impacts such as visual pollution, noise, odors, truck activities,
                                and other such conflicts on non-industrial uses.
                                Policy 3.9-5 Infrastructure. Ensure the long-term maintenance of the city’s
                                roads that are more heavily impacted by industrial, trucking uses.
                                Implementation Programs for Policies 3.9-1 to 3.9-5:
                                •   Amend the Zoning Code to include performance based standards for
                                    industrial zones that will ensure high-quality design and site planning while
                                    protecting adjacent non-industrial uses through sufficient buffering, screening
                                    and transitions between uses.
                                •   Explore the development of a truck intensive overlay zone to further manage
                                    the location and concentration of trucking uses so as to better mitigate noise,
See also policies addressing        traffic and circulation, air pollution and other impacts to adjacent or nearby
truck routes in the Circulation     sensitive land uses.
Element.
                                Public Facilities, Open Space and Parks
                                Goal 3.10
                                A mix of governmental, educational, recreational and open space
                                facilities that conveniently support the needs of Pico Rivera’s
                                residents and businesses.
                                Policy 3.10-1 Adequate Facilities. Ensure that community facilities and parks
                                are distributed equitably throughout the city to provide efficient services to the
                                broadest number of residents.
                                Policy 3.10-2 Location. Locate new parks, community centers, schools and
                                other public facilities to be easily accessible by local residents, facilitate
                                opportunities for joint use and enhance neighborhood interaction and identity.
                                Policy 3.10-3 Coordination with Non-City Public Service Providers.
                                Coordinate, partner with, and encourage school and utility districts and other
                                government and independent agencies that may be exempt from City land use
                                control and approval to plan and improve their properties and design
                                improvements to achieve a high level of visual and architectural quality that
                                maintains the character of the neighborhoods or district in which they are located.
                                Policy 3.10-4 Parks and Open Spaces. Seek to expand the city’s parklands,
                                greenways and open spaces as land and funding become available, encouraging
                                the redevelopment of vacant sites and coordinate with the appropriate regional
                                agencies for future planning related to the river corridors, the Bicentennial Park
                                Campground and the Sports Arena area.
                                Implementation Programs for Policies 3.10-1 to 3.10-4:
                                •   Pursue available state, federal and other funding sources to support facilities,
                                    equipment, programming and staffing for police, fire, parks and recreation.
                                                                          3-22

                     October 2014                                                     3. Land Use Element
•    Continue to support the City’s joint use agreement with El Rancho Unified
     School District for joint use of schools and parks.
•    Pursue available county, state, federal and other funding sources to
     rehabilitate the Bicentennial Park Campgrounds as regional open space
Specific Plans and Sphere of Influence Areas
Goal 3.11
New growth and redevelopment that is carefully planned, efficient,
and contributes positively to the community.
Policy 3.11-1 Annexation Proposals. Support annexation proposals that
provide for the efficient extension of City infrastructure and services and
contribute positively to the City’s fiscal viability and quality of life.
Policy 3.11-2 Specific Plans. Support the preparation and adoption of new
specific plans consistent with policies pertaining to the redevelopment of
properties within opportunity areas to assure achievement of the intended scale,
character and quality of development.
Historic Resources
Goal 3.12
Inventory and protection of Pico Rivera’s historic and cultural
resources.
Policy 3.12-1 Identification. Maintain and periodically update the inventory of
historic and cultural resources. This inventory shall include properties that may
be eligible for listing in national and state registers as well as properties that do
not meet the criteria for these registers but are important to protect in terms of
local significance.
Policy 3.12-2 Adaptive Reuse. Encourage the adaptive reuse of buildings of
historical significance to serve meaningful contemporary uses while preserving
the character, spirit and original identity of the structures.
Policy 3.12-3 Consultation. Consult with appropriate organizations and
individuals to minimize potential impacts to historic and cultural resources,
including the Pico Rivera History and Heritage Society.
Policy 3.12-4 Education. Support programs to raise the awareness of the city’s
historic resources and the value of their protection.
Implementation Programs for Policies 3.12-1 to 3.12-4:
•    Adopt a preservation ordinance that would require a special permit to
     demolish or modify a historic resource.
                                           3-23

3. Land Use Element
                    •   Work with the Pico Rivera History and Heritage Society, Los Angeles
                        Conservancy and property owners to highlight locations of historic and
                        cultural interest.
                    •   Pursue funding for an in depth historic survey of significant properties
                        including those listed on Table 3-1, Potential Historic Buildings and Sites.
                    •   Preserve El Camino Real historic markers along Whittier Boulevard, which
                        mark the California Mission Trail.
                    Regional Cooperation
                    Goal 3.13
                    Coordinate land use planning programs between local, regional,
                    State and Federal agencies.
                    Policy 3.13-1 Planning Coordination. Ensure that City planning activities are
                    coordinated with other affected or responsible government agencies as
                    appropriate.
                    Policy 3.13-2 Regional Planning. Participate in regional planning efforts with
                    the Gateway Cities Council of Governments, Southern California Association of
                    Governments (SCAG), Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
                    Authority (Metro), Watershed Conservation Authority and other appropriate
                    organizations to ensure that City issues and interests are represented.
                    Policy 3.13-3 Project Review. Review, comment and coordinate on plans and
                    projects of overlapping or neighboring agencies to ensure compatibility with the
                    City’s General Plan and to make certain that impacts on the city are mitigated.
                    Opportunity Areas
                    This section outlines each Opportunity area within the City of Pico Rivera and
                    provides direction for these specific locations in Pico Rivera that will
                    accommodate much of the city’s anticipated redevelopment and potential new
                    growth. These areas are organized into two broad categories:
                        1. Corridors
                        2. Targeted Planning Areas
                    Direction in this section expresses specific intentions for use, design and
                    character for each area.
                    Figure 3-3 illustrates the locations of the opportunity areas intended for policy
                    and program guidance. The boundaries on the map are intended to denote
                    generally where specific actions are sought. Application of the actions to adjacent
                    or nearby parcels is also appropriate if that action will contribute to the desired
                    outcome.
                                                            3-24

                    October 2014                                                       3. Land Use Element
Corridors
The City of Pico Rivera is spanned by a number of major corridors. These
corridors are part of the city’s urban framework and contain a varied mix of
residential, commercial, industrial and other business-related uses including
some sites that are vacant, underutilized, or in need of revitalization. The
opportunity exists to remake these corridors into more pedestrian-friendly and
visually pleasing destinations. Through revitalization, undesirable or incompatible
uses can be transitioned to more appropriate locations and older, indistinct
buildings can be refreshed and enhanced to create a more coherent design.
Through enhancements to the streetscape, including street trees, landscaping
and other amenities and changes to parking standards and parking
arrangements, these corridors will become more inviting and accessible. The
intent is to bring new vitality to the areas, encouraging public and private
investment and reinvestment while creating more distinct places for commercial
activities and social interaction.
While the General Plan provides broad direction and intent for each corridor, it is
anticipated that more detailed plans will be prepared for each corridor either
individually or in combination to further define objectives, strategies and specific
actions. Subsequent planning efforts should engage local business owners and
residents to address land use; market strategies; mobility; utilities, infrastructure,
and streetscape improvements; parking; design guidelines and development
standards; regulatory incentives; and implementation/financing programs. The
City will pursue grants and other available funding sources to help finance such
planning efforts.
                                        3-25

3. Land Use Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
                                  3-26
October 2014                               3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-3: Opportunity Areas
                          3-27
3. Land Use Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
                                  3-28
                      October 2014                                                  3. Land Use Element
1 - Whittier Boulevard Commercial Corridor
Existing Conditions
The Whittier Boulevard Commercial Corridor is located along Whittier Boulevard
between the railroad and the San Gabriel River. The north side was built
between the 1920s and 1950s and is characterized by smaller scale commercial
development on shallow lots with limited parking on the street or behind the
buildings. The south side of Whittier Boulevard was built in the 1980s and is
characterized by larger scale, commercial center development on larger lots.
There is a need to revitalize the corridor, as described in further detail below.    Older retail storefront
                                                                                         development on
The Whittier Boulevard Corridor is divided into three sub-areas. Development in        Whittier Boulevard
sub-area 1, located along the north side of Whittier Boulevard consists of a mix of
small-scale commercial buildings. There are older retail storefronts, including
several buildings with historic character and dated strip commercial development.
The buildings are in need of upgrades, additional parking and lack consistent
design elements to create a more inviting streetscape. Because of multiple
ownerships, assembling parcels to create commercial center-style development
will be difficult for parcels along the north side of Whittier Boulevard. There are
also some existing industrial uses, primarily concentrated west of Paramount
Boulevard.
Sub-area 2 is located along the south side of Whittier Boulevard and consists of
mostly newer large commercial centers with ample parking. However, buildings
are of various ages and designs and increasing commercial vacancies in these
centers reinforces the need to assess revitalization strategies for this area.
Sub-area 3 consists of a mix of older, small-scale commercial buildings similar to
those in sub-area 1.
Opportunity
This corridor is important to the city in that it provides a range of shopping
opportunities while also providing some relatively affordable space for locally-
owned businesses. The area on the north side of Whittier Boulevard should
remain predominantly small-scale commercial, with a focus on upgrading and
enhancing the older commercial buildings through programs such as a façade
enhancement program and by incorporating appropriate design standards for
commercial development in the Zoning Code. Design improvements should
provide connectivity and a more unified aesthetic theme between the commercial
areas along the north and south sides of the corridor. This can be achieved
through consistent and well-managed landscaping, signage, sidewalks, and
medians. Additionally, appropriate parking standards should be incorporated into
the Zoning Code recognizing the extent of parking that is feasible to provide
onsite. This may include shared parking arrangements or potential options for
creating municipal parking facilities at key locations along Whittier Boulevard.
                                          3-29

3. Land Use Element
                    Figure 3-4: Whittier Boulevard Commercial Corridor
                                             3-30
                     October 2014                                                           3. Land Use Element
The corridor provides an opportunity to enhance the existing storefronts on the
north side of the Corridor for existing buildings with architecturally historic
character to create a pedestrian-scaled environment.
Objectives
Land Uses and Businesses
    • Encourage more employee-intensive, industrial development within the
         area designated Light Industrial located on the north side of Whittier
         Boulevard between Paramount Boulevard and the Railroad. New
         development or redevelopment within this area will need to address
         compatibility with the existing mobile home park and should create a
         stronger connection to the Krikorian Theatre Village Walk commercial
         center located across the street on the south side of Whittier Boulevard.
    •    The development and retention of small businesses and locally-owned
         stores and shops will be a priority for the north side of the corridor.     Transparent Storefronts
    •    Promote the aggregation of small, underutilized and irregular shaped
                                                                                     The storefront is arguably the
         parcels into larger parcels to support viable and cohesive development      most valuable space in a store
         projects.                                                                   and should be used to full
                                                                                     advantage. A transparent
    •    Encourage locally serving retail commercial uses in sub-area 1 along this   storefront welcomes customers
                                                                                     inside with products and
         corridor.
                                                                                     services on display, discourages
                                                                                     crime with more “eyes on the
    •    Encourage the introduction of mixed-use development including higher        street”, reduces energy
         density residential and an intensification of commercial and office uses in consumption by letting in natural
                                                                                     light, and enhances curb appeal
         sub-area 2.                                                                 and value of the store and the
                                                                                     neighborhood.
    •    Encourage live-work development in sub-area 3.
Beautification and Intensification
    • Existing buildings with no setback and with a retail storefront on the
         street, should be preserved, restored, rehabilitated, or reused and
         maintained whenever possible.
                                                                                     Parking Management
    •    Preserve buildings with historic character in this area, specifically the   Parking management includes a
                                                                                     variety of strategies that
         former National Bank of Pico Rivera located at 9235 Whittier Boulevard      encourage more efficient use of
         built in the late 1920s, and Clearman’s Steak N Stein built in the 1940s.   existing parking facilities,
                                                                                     improve the quality of service
    •    New development in sub-area 1 and 3 should be oriented to and frame         provided to parking facility users
         the street, provide minimal setbacks, front entries, transparent            and improve parking facility
                                                                                     design. Parking management
         storefronts, appropriate building heights and interior parking lot          can help address a wide range
         configurations (where feasible).                                            of transportation problems and
                                                                                     help achieve a variety of
    •    Provide better management of parking resources including sharing,           transportation, land use
         regulating and pricing of common public parking facilities, more accurate   development, economic and
                                                                                     environmental objectives.
         requirements, use of off-site parking facilities, improved user information
         and incentives to use alternative modes of transportation through an
         independent Parking Management District or as part of a Transportation
                                         3-31

3. Land Use Element
                             Demand Management Program. The analysis of parking strategies
                             should include an evaluation of the municipal parking lots on the north
                             side of Whittier Boulevard and the potential for their conversion to paid
                             parking lots to optimize their use for local businesses in recognition of
                             the limited on-street parking available along the north side of Whittier
                             Boulevard.
                       •     Work with the Chamber of Commerce to pursue the creation of a
                             business assessment district to assist with repairs, renovation and
                             parking for the Corridor.
                       •     Create distinct activity nodes in key locations along the corridor
                             distinguished by their mix of uses, intensity, compact development form
                             and greater emphasis on pedestrian and transit access. Consider nodes
                             at the following locations:
                                  •   Paramount and Whittier Boulevard
                                  •   Rosemead Boulevard and Whittier Boulevard
                                  •   Durfee Avenue and Whittier Boulevard
                    Mobility and Streetscape
                       • Enhance pedestrian crosswalks to safely accommodate pedestrians and
                             cyclists through clearly identified markings and/or pavers, bulb-outs at
                             corners, signage and traffic controls in particular at Durfee Avenue and
                             Whittier Boulevard and other locations expected to generate significant
                             pedestrian traffic.
                       •     Strengthen pedestrian linkages to adjacent neighborhoods.
                       •     Incorporate signage, decorative banners and other techniques to create
                             a unique identity for the corridor.
                       •     Establish a comprehensive streetscape and landscape program that
                             includes right-of-way improvements to street trees, street lighting,
                             streetscape elements (sidewalk/crosswalk paving, street furniture) and
                             public signage.
                       •     Explore the potential for adding bike routes along the length of the
                             corridor.
                       •     Enhance transit stops, shelters and connectivity to corridor uses.
                                                              3-32

                     October 2014                                                    3. Land Use Element
2 - Durfee Avenue Corridor, North of Whittier Boulevard
Existing Conditions
The Durfee Avenue Corridor is located north of Whittier Boulevard and extends
to Beverly Boulevard. The Durfee Avenue Corridor contains a mix of commercial,
office, industrial and apartment uses along the corridor, creating a series of land
use conflicts. These include, existing multiple family residential adjacent to a
railroad track and existing residential adjacent to industrial uses and heavy
commercial uses. Many of the industrial buildings are in poor condition, including
some open-shell metal structures. Commercial structures are old and of marginal
design, and on-site parking is limited. In 2012, the City of Pico Rivera was
awarded a grant from the Alameda Corridor-East Construction Authority to
design and construct a railroad grade separation along Durfee Avenue.
Construction is set to begin in 2015 and take approximately two years to
construct. The grade separated railroad crossing will address one of the major
concerns along the Corridor to increase vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle safety
and mobility.
Opportunity
Despite the numerous issues along the Durfee Avenue Corridor, it provides
significant opportunities for revitalization. The City prepared a Durfee Avenue
Corridor Plan – Phase I Analysis as a first step in the development of a Durfee
Avenue Corridor Plan. The railroad grade separation project will significantly alter
the character of the Corridor by addressing some major pedestrian and vehicular
safety issues that currently impact the efficiency of movement along the Corridor
and the desirability to develop within the Corridor. It should be designed and
constructed in a manner that will address existing land use conflicts and
incompatibilities and to provide complete street improvements. This can be
accomplished by creating a linear park/greenway along the road, providing
buffers from the railroad track, and relocating the existing apartment complex into
a more appropriate residential location along the Corridor. Additionally, industrial
uses should be relocated to other more appropriate areas of the city and the
older, industrial buildings should be converted to high density housing or mixed-
use commercial/residential. The design of older, more historic commercial
buildings should be upgraded through a façade enhancement program and
appropriate parking standards should be developed recognizing the extent of
parking that is feasible to provide onsite. In addition, the corridor should be
unified through streetscape enhancements, including consistent and well-
managed landscaping, signage, sidewalks and medians. Parcels within the
corridor have been identified in the Housing Element to accommodate the city’s
2014-2021 RHNA by providing opportunities for higher density residential
development and mixed-use development with residential components.
                                          3-33

3. Land Use Element
                    Figure 3-5 Durfee Avenue Corridor
                                    3-34
                    October 2014                                                    3. Land Use Element
Objectives
Using the Durfee Avenue Corridor Plan – Phase I Analysis (June 2013), as a
foundation, prepare a Corridor Plan, Specific Plan or Master Plan to ensure the
area is carefully and comprehensively planned and that development potential is
maximized. The Plan should provide for and address the following:
    •   Discourage further industrial development within this area and assist in
        relocating present incompatible industrial uses to other areas of the City.
    •   Promote the conversion of industrial sites to higher-density residential
        uses or mixed-use commercial and residential.
    •   Encourage new local and business serving retail, offices and services.
    •   Identify complete street improvements, including enhanced pedestrian
        and bicycle safety and connections.
    •   Identify streetscape enhancements, including consistent landscaping,
        street furnishings, paving materials, public signage and lighting.
    •   Identify façade improvements to renovate and reuse the existing
        buildings at the southern end of the Corridor between Whittier Boulevard
        and West Boulevard in a manner that preserves and enhances the
        historic and architectural character of the buildings.
    •   Support improvements to private buildings through the development of
        technical and financial incentive programs for façade enhancements to
        increase the economic vitality and enhance the character of Durfee
        Avenue.
    •   Create an enhanced parkway along the east side of Durfee Avenue
        extending all the way from the entry at Whittier Boulevard to North Park
        Middle School at Beverly Boulevard. The existing parkway is large
        enough to accommodate an enlarged sidewalk, bike path, landscape
        areas and pedestrian amenities. The overhead powerlines, while a
        constraint, are wide enough to provide an opportunity to accommodate
        enhanced landscaping treatments within the existing powerline
        easement. This parkway would serve as a key pedestrian and bicycle
        connection and serve as a safe-route to school.
    •   Provide appropriate buffers from the railroad track to nearby sensitive
        uses. Promote the use of open space/parks to create this buffer and
        provide additional opportunities for beautification and recreation in an
        area that presents challenges for land use compatibility and design.
    •   Explore opportunities to create a gathering space and/or establish a use
        that will draw residents and visitors to the Corridor. Enhance connections
        from adjacent neighborhoods as well as transit stops and shelters.
                                        3-35

3. Land Use Element
                    • Explore opportunities to create parks from vacant sites and remnant
                      parcels due to the development of the Durfee Underpass.
                    • Explore the potential to underground overhead utility lines.
                    • Explore the potential for the City to acquire the vacant parcel located
                      between the fire station and Auxiliary Park to expand the park and
                      provide additional open space or recreation opportunities along the
                      Corridor.
                    • Address the lack of available on-site parking for existing commercial
                      uses through appropriate parking standards and/or parking programs,
                      such as shared parking. Consider conversion of the existing apartment
                      complex on the west side of Durfee, south of the Railroad to a municipal
                      parking lot to serve the increase in commercial activity along the Corridor
                      and the lack of available parking.
                                                      3-36

                    October 2014                                                      3. Land Use Element
3 - Telegraph Road Corridor
Existing Conditions
The Telegraph Road Corridor is located on the north side of Telegraph Road
from Paramount Boulevard on the west to Songfest Drive on the east. Telegraph
Road forms the southern boundary of the city; only uses along the north side are
within Pico Rivera. The Telegraph Road Corridor contains a variety of
commercial, industrial and residential uses. Many of the uses are older and of an
indistinctive design. Other uses, including a large office building are
underutilized, and not necessarily conducive to being adapted for other uses. In
addition, along Rosemead Boulevard just north of the intersection of Telegraph
Road, there are existing commercial properties that are underutilized and of
                                                                                            Existing two-story
marginal design.                                                                           commercial building
The Telegraph Road Corridor is divided into four sub-areas. Sub-area 1 is
located west of Rosemead Boulevard and includes commercial uses at the
corner of Telegraph Road and Rosemead Boulevard, two hotels, apartments and
office buildings. This sub-area is characterized mostly by multi-story buildings. As
described above, the buildings are generally older, with no coherent design
character. The large medical office building at the corner of Telegraph Road and
Birchbark Avenue is in need of significant renovation. Located next to this
medical office building and its large parking lot is a residential apartment building
that stands in stark contrast to the newer residential development immediately
across the street in the City of Downey. The older apartment building and bare
streetscape is visually unattractive. The northwest corner of Rosemead
Boulevard and Telegraph Road consists of older commercial and office uses
including a car wash that are also in need of renovation.
Subarea 2 runs east of Rosemead Boulevard to Serapis Avenue and includes a
mix of commercial and office uses, including a neighborhood market. Buildings
are predominantly freestanding with a couple of two-story commercial buildings
that includes both retail and office uses. Buildings have larger setbacks from the
street separated by parking areas and are in better physical condition than in
other subareas along the Corridor. This area also includes two night clubs at the
northeast corner of Rosemead Boulevard and Telegraph Road that are in need
of renovation.
Subarea 3 runs east of Serapis Avenue to Passons Boulevard and includes
commercial uses on small, shallow lots. There is also a vacant parcel located at
the northeast corner of Serapis and Telegraph Road. Most of the properties are
built at the edge of the sidewalk and many have storefronts on the street. There
is limited on-site parking, which is generally located at the rear or along the side
of the buildings. The buildings are older and in need of significant renovation,
however the location of the buildings and proximity to residential uses creates the
potential to energize this area and create a more pedestrian-friendly
environment.
                                        3-37
3. Land Use Element
                    Figure 3-6: Telegraph Road Corridor
                                     3-38
                    October 2014                                                    3. Land Use Element
Subarea 4 runs east of Passons Boulevard to Songfest Drive and consists mostly
of commercial uses in commercial strip buildings. Some of the buildings are used
for offices. There are no cohesive design elements along the streetscape.
However, the buildings are generally in better physical condition than in the other
sub-areas.
Subarea 5 includes properties along the west side of Rosemead Boulevard to
Terradell Street and the east side of Rosemead Boulevard to Maxine Street from
just north of the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and Telegraph Road.
These existing commercial properties consist of small-lots with multiple
ownerships, are underutilized and of marginal design. The area includes two
night clubs and vacant lots. The entire subarea is in need of significant
redevelopment.
Opportunity
Most of the corridor has been designated for mixed-use to allow flexibility and to
encourage the introduction of residential uses with commercial and office uses.
Larger parcels within sub-areas 1 and 2 have been identified in the Housing
Element to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA by providing opportunities
for mixed-use development that includes higher density residential uses.
However, the different sub-areas along the Telegraph Corridor provide the
opportunity to create distinct nodes and establish a series of unique areas along
the Corridor. Larger parcels within sub-areas 1 and 5 provide the opportunity for
mixed-use with an emphasis on the introduction of higher density residential
uses. Sub-area 3 provides the opportunity to retain and rehabilitate older,
commercial buildings to preserve the more historic character of these buildings.
Sub-area 4 is characterized by small lot configuration and provides the
opportunity for lot consolidation to create more cohesive development. The
narrow lots along Rosemead Boulevard within sub-area 5 may also present an
opportunity to introduce live/work development. In May 2014, in partnership with
the City of Downey, Pico Rivera completed a project to install new medians,
landscaping, sidewalk repairs and signal modification from Passons Boulevard to
Rosemead Boulevard. Also, development activity as of May 2014 in the nearby
city of Downey included a new, three-story townhome at 8605 Gallatin, a façade
modification for the Arrington Professional Building at 9050 Telegraph, and a new
electronic billboard at 7878 Telegraph Road. The investment in street
improvements along with the development activity provides opportunities to
continue to improve and redevelop this area.
Objectives
Land Uses and Businesses
     • Promote the aggregation of small, underutilized and irregular shaped
         parcels into larger parcels to support viable and cohesive development
         projects.
                                        3-39

3. Land Use Element
                       •     Redevelopment of the intersection of Telegraph Road and Rosemead
                             Boulevard should be a priority. This intersection serves as a major
                             gateway into the city of Pico Rivera and therefore improvements should
                             be focused on creating a statement as well as providing a catalyst for
                             further development along the Corridor.
                       •     Larger lots within sub-areas 1, and 2 should be redeveloped with higher-
                             intensity, multi-story office and/or mixed-use development.
                       •     Encourage uses such as small retail shops, specialty food stores and
                             restaurants in sub-area 3 and design standards should be developed to
                             enhance the pedestrian-oriented character of this area.
                       •     Encourage revitalization of existing strip commercial development
                             through intensification and the introduction of mixed-use development in
                             Sub-area 4.
                       •     Encourage live-work development on the narrow lots in sub-area 5.
                    Mobility and Streetscape
                       • Establish a comprehensive streetscape and landscape program that
                             includes right-of-way improvements to street trees, street lighting,
                             streetscape elements (sidewalk/crosswalk paving, street furniture) and
                             public signage.
                       •     Explore the potential for adding bike routes along the length of the
                             corridor.
                       •     Enhance transit stops, shelters and connectivity to corridor uses.
                       •     Strengthen pedestrian linkages to adjacent neighborhoods.
                                                               3-40

                    October 2014                                                   3. Land Use Element
4 - Rosemead Boulevard Corridor
Existing Conditions
The Rosemead Boulevard Corridor includes the east and west sides of
Rosemead Boulevard from Olympic Boulevard to Beverly Boulevard. It includes
properties at the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly Boulevard and
properties along the west side of Rosemead Boulevard, extending north to Isora
Street. It also includes properties along the north and south side of Beverly
Boulevard from the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly Boulevard
to approximately Paramount Boulevard on the west. Existing parcels along this
corridor are generally underutilized or of marginal design.
                                                                                  Existing building at the
                                                                                   northeast corner of
The Rosemead Boulevard Corridor is divided into two sub-areas. Sub-area 1         Beverly Boulevard and
includes the area from Olympic Boulevard, north to the intersection of Rosemead   Rosemead Boulevard
and Beverly Boulevard and the west side of Rosemead Boulevard to Ibsen
Street. This area consists primarily of underutilized, strip commercial
development. However, it also includes several older multiple-family
developments and two old hotels. In May of 2014, a 7,000 square foot Norm’s
Restaurant was constructed at the southeast corner of Rosemead and Beverly
Boulevards. There is a strong desire by the community for a grocery store in the
northern portion of the city; however, the size of the vacant parcel behind the
Norm’s Restaurant will not be sufficient and consolidation with existing
commercial uses to the south would likely need to occur to make the site viable
for development of a grocery store. Most of the properties within this sub-area
have been identified in the Housing Element to accommodate the City’s 2014-
2021 RHNA by providing opportunities for higher density residential development
and mixed-use development. Sub-area 1 also includes properties along Beverly
Boulevard from the intersection to approximately Paramount Boulevard on the
west. This area consists primarily of single-family homes that front on Beverly
Boulevard.
Sub-area 2 includes properties fronting Rosemead Boulevard from Ibsen Street
to Isora Street and is comprised of a mix of underutilized, strip commercial
development and single family homes on shallow lots. All properties within the
sub-area have been identified by the Housing Element to accommodate the
City’s 2014-2021 RHNA by providing opportunities for higher density residential
development and mixed-use development. These properties are in need of
revitalization.
Opportunity
There is potential to improve the design and visual character of the entire
Corridor. In sub-area 1, the intersection of Beverly Boulevard and Rosemead
Boulevard serves as a major entry into the city from the west. There is potential
to intensify development and create a sense of arrival through design                 Opening day at
improvements and intersection enhancements. In addition, the recently              Norm’s Restaurant
constructed Norm’s restaurant could serve as a catalyst for investment and
                                         3-41

3. Land Use Element
                    revitalization in this area. There is also an opportunity to consolidate the two
                    centers in the southeast quadrant of the intersection between Arma Street to
                    provide an ideal location for a grocery store. The area along Beverly Boulevard
                    from Paramount Boulevard to the intersection should be more strongly connected
                    to the corridor with pedestrian, landscape and open space enhancements. The
                    remainder of sub-area 1 provides an opportunity for new mixed-use
                    development. Sub-area 2 also provides an opportunity to introduce live/work
                    development and or open space possibilities extending from the small pocket
                    park on Rosemead Boulevard between Gallatin Road and Isora Street. The City
                    should continually work with the property owners in sub-area 2 to encourage
                    redevelopment of these properties.
                                                            3-42
October 2014                                         3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-7: Rosemead Boulevard Corridor
                               3-43
3. Land Use Element
                    Objectives
                    Land Use and Businesses
                       • Redevelopment of the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly
                             Boulevard should be a priority. This intersection serves as a major
                             gateway into the city of Pico Rivera and therefore improvements should
                             be focused on creating a statement as well as providing a catalyst for
                             further development along the Corridor.
                       •     Encourage development of a grocery store in sub-area 1 and consider
                             implementation of the following:
                                  o   Assistance assembling parcels along the east side of Rosemead
                                      Boulevard south of Beverly Boulevard to create a commercial
                                      center large enough to support a grocery store.
                                  o   Expedited processing.
                                  o   Waiver of fees and/or provision of other financial incentives.
                       •     Encourage revitalization of sub-area 2 with live/work development.
                       •     Work with properties owners in sub-area 2 to upgrade and develop their
                             properties with desirable land uses and high quality design
                             improvements.
                       •     Explore the potential for the City to acquire properties along the west
                             side of Rosemead Boulevard to create additional open space area as an
                             extension of the pocket park located at Gallatin Road and Isora Street.
                    Beautification and Intensification
                       • Encourage revitalization of existing commercial development through
                             intensification and the introduction of multi-story, mixed-use
                             development, particularly in the northeast, northwest and southwest
                             quadrants of Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly Boulevard.
                       •     New development incorporating building orientations, architectural detail,
                             massing, lighting and other treatments that enhance street frontages and
                             reduce the visual prominence of parking areas.
                    Mobility and Streetscape
                       • Establish a comprehensive streetscape and landscape program that
                             includes right-of-way improvements to street trees, street lighting,
                             streetscape elements (sidewalk/crosswalk paving, street furniture) and
                             public signage.
                       •     Enhance pedestrian crosswalks with clearly identified markings and/or
                             pavers, signage and traffic controls at the intersection of Beverly
                                                            3-44

             October 2014                                            3. Land Use Element
  Boulevard and Rosemead Boulevard to safely accommodate pedestrians
  and bicyclists.
• Enhance transit stops, shelters and connectivity to corridor uses.
• Strengthen pedestrian linkages to adjacent neighborhoods.
                                 3-45

3. Land Use Element
                    5 - Slauson Avenue Corridor
                    Existing Conditions
                    The Slauson Avenue Corridor includes properties north of Slauson Avenue
                    extending to the railroad and from the west side of Rosemead Boulevard to the
                    San Gabriel River on the east. It also includes properties on the south of Slauson
                    Avenue from Rosemead Boulevard to just east of Passons Boulevard. The
                    Slauson Avenue Corridor contains a mix of industrial, commercial and residential
                    uses.
                    The Slauson Avenue Corridor is divided into three sub-areas. Sub-area 1 is
                    located east of Rosemead Boulevard to just beyond Passons Boulevard and
                    includes commercial properties on the north and south sides of Slauson Avenue.
                    The north side of Slauson Avenue contains a mix of industrial and commercial
                    uses, while the south side is predominantly commercial. Both sides of the street
                    consist of shallow lots, limiting larger scale commercial development potential.
                    However, the south side of the street consists of more small-scale commercial
                    centers and is generally of better design quality and consistency than the north
                    side. Due to the shallow lot configuration, on-site parking is limited.
                    Sub-area 2 consists of properties located north of sub-area 1 to the Railroad.
                    This area consists of a range of small-scale industrial uses and residential
                    structures. Buildings are of various ages and designs and some are in need of
                    renovation.
                    Sub-area 3 consists of properties located along the north side of Slauson
                    Avenue, just east of Passons Boulevard. This area consists of an industrial
                    business park and public storage use.
                    Opportunity
                    Properties fronting the Slauson Avenue Corridor should be revitalized through
                    the enhancement of older commercial buildings and streetscape improvements.
                    Appropriate parking standards should be incorporated into the Zoning Code
                    recognizing the extent of parking that is feasible to provide onsite. This may
                    include shared parking arrangements or potential options for creating municipal
                    parking facilities at key locations along Slauson Avenue. The area located north
                    of Slauson Avenue behind the commercial frontage could be transformed to an
                    industrial business park area, including a mix of light industrial, office and
                    research and development type uses.
                                                             3-46
October 2014                                     3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-8: Slauson Avenue Corridor
                              3-47
3. Land Use Element
                    Objectives
                    Land Use and Businesses
                       •     Promote the aggregation of small, underutilized and irregular shaped
                             parcels into larger parcels to support viable and cohesive development
                             projects.
                       •     Encourage locally serving retail commercial uses along the frontage of
                             this corridor in sub-area 1.
                       •     Encourage a diverse range of industrial and business park users in sub-
                             areas 2 and 3.
                    Beautification and Intensification
                       • Incorporate appropriate design guidelines for commercial and industrial
                             development to create a more unified theme and encourage higher
                             quality development.
                       •     Renovate existing industrial and commercial development through
                             façade improvements, upgraded landscaping, consistent signage,
                             screening and buffering.
                       •     Support improvements to private buildings through the development of
                             technical and financial incentive programs for façade enhancements to
                             increase the economic vitality and enhance the character of Slauson
                             Avenue.
                       •     Work with the Chamber of Commerce to pursue the creation of a
                             business assessment district to assist with repairs, renovation and
                             parking for the Corridor.
                       •     Explore an area-wide parking program and/or incorporate parking
                             standards such as allowing shared parking arrangements to reduce the
                             total number of on-site parking spaces required.
                       •     Incorporate appropriate standards for industrial uses that are located in
                             close proximity to residential uses in the Zoning Code to eliminate
                             conflicts. These could take the form of standards for provisions of
                             buffers, performance based standards applied to industrial uses with
                             impacts to residential uses, and overlay/special designations for
                             industrial uses located adjacent to residential areas.
                             The City should work with the owner of the commercial center on the
                             northwest corner of Passons Boulevard and Slauson Avenue and the
                             existing cul-de-sac at Bermudez Street and Passons Boulevard to
                             provide for a more viable commercial or office use in the area.
                    Mobility and Streetscape
                       • Establish a comprehensive streetscape and landscape program that
                             includes right-of-way improvements to street trees, street lighting,
                                                            3-48

             October 2014                                                3. Land Use Element
  streetscape elements (sidewalk/crosswalk paving, street furniture) and
  public signage.
• Enhance transit stops, shelters and connectivity to corridor uses.
• Strengthen pedestrian linkages to adjacent neighborhoods.
                                 3-49

3. Land Use Element
                    6 - San Gabriel River Parkway Corridor
                    Existing Conditions
                    The San Gabriel Parkway Corridor is made up of parcels north of Beverly
                    Boulevard and the intersection of San Gabriel River Parkway and Springland
                    Drive. Parcels included within this opportunity area consist primarily of industrial
                    properties that are of marginal design or are underutilized. However, it should be
                    noted that pockets of residential development are located along the Corridor, but
                    outside of the identified opportunity area, creating land use conflicts and planning
                    challenges. The San Gabriel Parkway Corridor provides a single access point at
                    Springland Drive to a residential neighborhood. The majority of the neighborhood
                    is located within unincorporated Los Angeles County and is not within the City of
                    Pico Rivera’s Sphere of Influence; however, a small strip of single-family
                    residential development along Elford Drive exists between this unincorporated
                    neighborhood and adjacent industrial uses. The only entrance and exit point for
                    this unincorporated residential neighborhood is via Springland Drive to San
                    Gabriel River Parkway. Parking is also a problem for industrial uses in this
                    corridor. Roadway improvements including curbs, gutters and sidewalks are
                    lacking.
                    Opportunity
                    The San Gabriel Parkway Corridor should be upgraded through enhanced design
                    elements including unified streetscape enhancements such as consistent and
                    well-managed landscaping, signage, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and medians. In
                    addition, appropriate screening and buffering design elements should be used to
                    address land use conflicts. Appropriate parking standards should be incorporated
                    into the Zoning code for different types of industrial uses. Underutilized properties
                    should be redeveloped with more intensive uses.
                    Objectives
                    Land Use and Businesses
                             • Promote intensification of underutilized properties with a diverse
                                 range of employment-generating light industrial uses that would not
                                 result in a large amount of truck traffic, and that would be compatible
                                 with adjacent residential uses.
                                                             3-50

October 2014                                              3. Land Use Element
           Figure 3-9: San Gabriel River Parkway Corridor
                                3-51
3. Land Use Element
                    Beautification and Intensification
                          • Renovate existing industrial development through façade improvements,
                             upgraded landscaping, consistent signage, screening and buffering.
                          •  Incorporate appropriate standards for industrial uses that are located in
                             close proximity to residential uses in the Zoning Code to eliminate
                             conflicts. These could take the form of standards for provisions of
                             buffers, performance based standards applied to industrial uses with
                             impacts to residential uses, and overlay/special designations for
                             industrial uses located adjacent to residential areas.
                          •  Evaluate current parking standards for industrial uses and the potential
                             to create different standards to better address the parking needs of
                             individual users. The evaluation should also address opportunities for
                             shared parking.
                          •  Ensure that new development and redevelopment of industrial uses
                             incorporates appropriate screening and/or design elements to enhance
                             views of the back side of industrial development for trail users of the San
                             Gabriel River.
                    Mobility and Streetscape
                          • Install parking, curbs and gutters along the corridor.
                          •  Establish a comprehensive streetscape and landscape program for
                             corridors that include right-of-way improvements to street trees, street
                             lighting, streetscape elements (sidewalk/crosswalk paving, street
                             furniture) and public signage.
                          •  Enhance the crossing at Woodford Street to improve safety and access
                             for pedestrians and bicyclists to cross San Gabriel River Parkway from
                             the east and ultimately gain access to the San Gabriel River Trail.
                          •  Preserve and enhance the existing trail along San Gabriel River
                             Parkway.
                    Targeted Planning Areas
                    Other opportunity areas within Pico Rivera are characterized as Targeted
                    Planning Areas. These range from single site specific areas to broader planning
                    areas encompassing multiple properties. Certain areas are anticipated to be
                    developed through more detailed plans such as a Master Plan or Specific Plan.
                    The following section describes the existing conditions of each of these areas as
                    well as the opportunity and special objectives that in addition to those identified in
                    earlier sections will help revitalize and enhance these selected areas within the
                    city.
                                                              3-52

                      October 2014                                                     3. Land Use Element
7 - Sports Arena/Kruse Road Area
Existing Conditions
This opportunity area includes the Bicentennial Park Campground, the Sports
Arena, the Pico Rivera Golf Course, north side of Kruse Road industrial area and
Streamland Park.
The Sports Arena is a major community facility that is physically isolated from the
rest of the community, and has circuitous and somewhat confusing access. Few
amenities are present to enhance the setting of the arena, which has the ability to
attract “A-list” events and entertainers. The Sports Arena is currently undergoing
much needed renovations; including landscape improvements and infrastructure
improvements. Adjacent to the arena is the abandoned Bicentennial Park
Campground. The City of Pico Rivera has a long term lease with the Army Corps
of Engineers for the 120 acres that comprise the Sports Arena and former
Bicentennial Park Campground. The City has developed a Conceptual Site Plan
for rehabilitation of the campground and is in the process of implementing the
next phases of this project. This area is located immediately south of the Whittier        Sports Arena
Narrows Equestrian Center & Horseman Park, a component of the Emerald
Necklace project. The Emerald Necklace is a 17 mile interconnected network of
bikeways, multi-use trails, parks and greenways along the Rio Hondo and San
Gabriel Rivers.
The City has received a grant from the Southern California Association of
Governments to prepare a feasibility study for the relocation, acquisition and
conversion to open space of the legal non-conforming industrial area located
along Kruse Road. The study is intended to develop a long-term strategy to
amortize the existing legally non-conforming uses and allow the area to convert
to open space. The existing industrial uses create land use incompatibilities with
the adjacent residential neighborhood across Kruse Road. While the Whittier
Fertilizer facility is incompatible with adjacent residential uses, it is also a key
component in the City’s efforts to meet the waste diversion requirements of AB
939. Lands along the northwest side of Kruse Road are encumbered with an
existing LADWP transmission line easement, leaving only a 300-foot-strip of land     Sports Arena aerial view
between Kruse Road and the easement unencumbered. The feasibility study is
anticipated to be completed in the winter of 2016.
The Pico Rivera golf course is somewhat isolated from other economic
development uses within the community. In January 2012, the City of Pico Rivera
retained a private concessionaire to oversee renovation of both the Golf Course
and clubhouse facility and to provide professional management. The existing
facility is a nine-hole course and includes a covered driving range and two putting
greens.
The opportunity area also extends to Streamland Park to the west and borders
the Whittier Narrows Dam, located to the north.
                                         3-53

3. Land Use Element
                    Figure 3-10: Sports Arena/Kruse Road Area
                                        3-54
                   October 2014                                                    3. Land Use Element
Opportunity
There is potential to revitalize the Sports Arena/Kruse Road Area to serve as a
regional gathering place, source of pride and economic driver for the community.
The area provides unique opportunities to conserve natural areas, promote
environmental sustainability, provide regional recreational opportunities and
connections, create a gathering place for the community and to stimulate
economic development. Therefore, a comprehensive approach to planning in this
area is needed to ensure that opportunities for trail and open space connections
both within the city and regionally, access issues, environmental protection
issues, and economic development opportunities at the Sports Arena,
Campground, Golf Course, Kruse Road and Streamland Park are carefully
addressed. There is also potential to create a strong connection to the Emerald
Necklace with congruent recreational opportunities adjacent to the Whittier
Narrows Equestrian Center & Horseman Park and the extension of trail
connections to the San Gabriel River trail and open space connections to
Streamland Park.
Objectives
    • Prepare a Comprehensive Sports Arena/Kruse Road Area Open Space
        Plan to ensure the planning area is carefully planned and that the full
        range of opportunities are addressed.
    •   Incorporate appropriate programming and connections to develop the
        area as an extension of the Emerald Necklace Park network.
    •   Provide trail connections from Streamland Park to Bicentennial Park
        Campground and the San Gabriel River trail.
    •   Enhance connectivity from Streamland Park, Kruse Road, the Pico
        Rivera Golf Course, Bicentennial Park Campground, and the Sports
        Arena through the creation of greenways, including landscaped areas,
        passive open space, recreation areas and trails.
    •   Expand opportunities for equestrian-oriented recreational facilities.
    •   Improve vehicular access to the Sports Arena including working with
        Caltrans, Los Angeles County, Army Corps of Engineers, and the City of
        South El Monte to include signage (directional and welcome), provide
        enhancements and proper maintenance of the I-605/Rose Hills Road off-
        ramp and create an entry from Highway 60 to the Sports Arena and
        Bicentennial Park Campground.
    •   Ensure the restoration and protection of natural systems and habitat.
        This includes working with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service on
        future, project-level design alternatives to ensure that those portions of
        the opportunity area that contain designated critical habitat for the
                                         3-55

3. Land Use Element
                      federally threatened California gnatcatcher are protected and allow for
                      continued dispersal of gnatcatchers through the site.
                    • Incorporate water quality and water resource protection measures,
                      including groundwater recharge and stormwater protection measures.
                    • Identify opportunities to capitalize on the Pico Rivera Golf Course as a
                      recreational and economic resource for the City.
                    • Identify funding sources to plan and improve the area including local,
                      state and federal funding.
                                                       3-56

                     October 2014                                                   3. Land Use Element
8 - Rosemead Boulevard and Washington Boulevard Intersection
Existing Conditions
This intersection is one of the most heavily traveled in the city and has a large
concentration of commercial uses. At peak hours, the intersection can be highly
congested. One of the two alternatives for the proposed Gold Line Eastside
Extension would place a station at this intersection. The design of existing uses
at the intersection does not readily provide for parking or access to an
aboveground station, and could result in significant aesthetic impacts. Concurrent
with the General Plan update, Metro is studying development and design
opportunities along the proposed Gold Line extension on Washington Boulevard.
Additionally, sites within this area have been identified in the Housing Element to
accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA by providing opportunities for mixed-
use development, including high density residential uses.
Opportunity
This intersection has potential for a major community identity statement. The
proposed above-grade transit station associated with the Gold Line Eastside
Extension at this intersection creates an opportunity for new transit-oriented
development, and would also require the City to accommodate additional parking
near the planned station. With or without the Gold Line Eastside Extension, this
area provides the opportunity to create a key mixed-use, activity center within the
city.
Objectives
      • Ensure that any new transit-oriented development in this area is carefully
        planned by requiring a Specific Plan or Master Plan to ensure an
        appropriate mix of land uses, high quality design, and that infrastructure,
        amenities and services needed to adequately serve the development are
        provided.
             o    Should the proposed above-grade transit station associated with
                  the Gold Line Eastside Extension be developed, ensure that
                  opportunities to enhance visibility of commercial uses, improved
                  transit connections in the city and improved pedestrian access
                  are addressed. These opportunities could include: providing
                  grade-separated pedestrian access from the station to uses at all
                  four quadrants of the intersection; and
             o    Exploring opportunities to work with the Los Angeles County
                  Metropolitan Transportation Authority and Montebello Bus Lines
                  to relocate the existing terminal from Passons Avenue and
                  Jackson Street and integrate with the proposed Gold Line Light
                  Rail parking station to this intersection; and
             o    Providing a kiosk identifying commercial establishments at this
                  location for Gold Line station users.
                                          3-57

3. Land Use Element
                Figure 3-11: Rosemead Boulevard and Washington Boulevard Intersection
                                               3-58
                October 2014                                                       3. Land Use Element
• Support ongoing improvement of commercial properties in this area
  through programs of financial assistance, code enforcement, business
  investment district and partnerships with local businesses.
• Create an identity statement by providing a strong sense of arrival that
  may incorporate signage, landscaping, special paving, lighting,
  architectural elements, median treatments or other features at the
  intersection.
• Work with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
  to address aesthetic and safety design concerns. Ensure the proposed
  light rail, proposed parking station and surrounding sidewalks along the
  rail are aesthetically pleasing. Encourage usage and a more walkable
  and enjoyable development through appropriate design and
  architectural detailing of the following:
       o     Quality of architectural massing, such as plane moderation,
             façade treatments, setbacks, roof elements and building heights.
       o     Street level elements such as active use areas, parking, plazas,
             architectural fenestration, fences/walls, public art, special paving,
             intersection treatments, trash and loading facilities, sidewalks
             and bikeways.
       o     Landscape elements such as streetscape plantings, screening
             plantings, perimeter landscaping, parking lot landscaping and
             irrigation.
       o     Signage and graphics.
       o     Site furnishings such as bike racks, bollards, benches, tree
             grates, planters, and trash receptacles.
       o     Site lighting such as streetscape lighting, pedestrian lighting and
             landscape lighting.
• Work with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
  to explore the opportunity to underground the catenary system for the
  Gold Line Light Rail to preserve the aesthetics of the street.
• Pursue local, state and federal grants to improve public and private
  property through design guidelines along the proposed light rail corridor.
                                     3-59

3. Land Use Element
                    9 - Smith Park/Pico Rivera Library Area
                    Existing Conditions
                    Smith Park, which includes the community center, is a major recreational activity
                    center and community gathering place. A 16,000 square foot, state of the art
                    Library was completed at the end of 2013. The Library is physically separated
                    from the park by Mines Avenue. Across Rosemead Boulevard to the west of
                    Smith Park is an older, vacant commercial center.
                    Opportunity
                    While Pico Rivera does not contain a traditional “downtown” area, the Smith
                    Park/library/community center complex and adjacent commercial center provide
                    potential for a community focal point, fulfilling the community gathering place
                    functions of a traditional “downtown.” Revitalization of the adjacent commercial
                    center with enhanced design and a mix of new land uses will assist in
                    establishing this major community focal point. Sites within this area have been
                    identified in the Housing Element to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA
                    by providing opportunities for mixed-use development, including high density
                    residential uses.
                    Objectives
                        • Development of a distinct, mixed-use center with careful consideration of
                             the type of uses, intensity, and greater emphasis on pedestrian and
                             transit access.
                        •    New development incorporating building orientations, architectural detail,
                             massing, lighting and other treatments that enhance street frontages,
                             reduce the visual prominence of parking areas and create strong
                             connections to Smith Park and surrounding uses.
                        •    Increase pedestrian connectivity between uses within the Opportunity
                             Area and to adjacent neighborhoods.
                        •    Enhance pedestrian crosswalks to safely accommodate pedestrians and
                             bicyclists through clearly identified markings and/or pavers, signage and
                             traffic controls.
                        •    Incorporate decorative banners and other techniques to create a unique
                             identity for the area.
                        •    Provide enhanced and consistent landscaping, street furnishings, paving
                             materials, public signage and lighting to ensure a consistent theme for
                             the area.
                        •    Consider the potential to relocate the Civic Center to this area subject to
                             an economic benefit analysis and adequate funding.
                        •    Explore the potential to build a Performance Art Center in this area.
                                                              3-60

October 2014                                               3. Land Use Element
          Figure 3-12: Smith Park/Pico Rivera Library Area
                                3-61
3. Land Use Element
                    10 - Northeast Quadrant of the Paramount Boulevard and Slauson
                    Avenue Intersection
                    Existing Conditions
                    This area is a major employment area and is a major truck traffic generator as
                    well. The northeast quadrant of the Paramount Boulevard and Slauson Avenue
                    intersection is developed with a poorly designed building formerly used as an
                    indoor swap meet. A UPS trucking facility is located to the north. The northeast
                    quadrant has been identified in the Housing Element as a potential site for
                    mixed-use development as a means of providing sufficient housing to meet the
                    City’s share of regional housing needs. Slauson Avenue is an active truck route
                    and will potentially experience increased truck activity in the future as industrial
                    uses within the northern portion of the city are encouraged to relocate further
                    south. This area provides a transition/buffer from this truck activity to the adjacent
                    single family residential properties. .
                    Opportunity
                    There is potential to improve linkages to commercial areas located north along
                    Washington Boulevard, where the potential future transit station is planned.
                    There is also potential for increasing vitality of existing development along
                    Paramount Boulevard, including the development of new mixed use or industrial
                    development along the east side of Paramount Avenue, north of Slauson
                    Avenue. There is also an opportunity to create an appropriate buffer from the
                    residential neighborhoods to the more intense industrial areas to the west.
                    Objectives
                         • Convert the former swap meet parcel to a mixed-use or light industrial
                             development.
                         •   Ensure that the development of the former swap meet site serves as a
                             transition from the industrial development to the west of Paramount
                             Boulevard to the adjacent residential neighborhoods to the east. The
                             mixed-use or industrial development should incorporate elements in the
                             site design and building design to soften its impact on the adjacent
                             residential uses and result in a compatible transition.
                         •   Improve sidewalks and eliminate unimproved gaps, particularly on the
                             east side of Paramount Boulevard, south of the rail line.
                         •   Should the proposed above-grade transit station associated with the
                             Gold Line Eastside Extension be developed, identify opportunities to
                             improve pedestrian and bicycle connections from the industrial
                             developments along Paramount Boulevard to the Washington Boulevard
                             and Rosemead Boulevard intersection.
                                                             3-62

 October 2014                                                3. Land Use Element
Figure 3-13: Northeast Quadrant of the Paramount Boulevard and
                  Slauson Avenue Intersection
                             3-63
3. Land Use Element
                    11 - Burke Property
                    Existing Conditions
                    This is a vacant parcel south of Slauson Avenue and adjacent to the San Gabriel
                    River and is considered a brownfield. The site is bordered by the railroad on the
                    south, the San Gabriel River to the east, single family residential neighborhoods
                    to the west and Slauson Avenue to the north. The site has limited access, only
                    having access from the west side of the property along Burke Street which is a
                    residential street through an existing neighborhood. Burke Street provides the
                    only direct access to Passons Boulevard. Directly south of the Burke property is
                    a vacant site with access through Planter Street; however, the property is owned
                    by the Union Pacific Railway. Other than the active rail line, further south of the
                    vacant site, there is no use for the property. There are also contamination
                    concerns on the site. These access constraints and contamination issues would
                    have to be addressed before development could occur.
                    Opportunity
                    There is potential to develop this parcel with open space once access and site
                    contamination issues are resolved.
                    Objectives
                         • Ensure appropriate site remediation prior to initiation of site
                             development.
                         •   Provide for adequate access by exploring access options at both Burke
                             Street and Planter Street and potential access to Slauson Avenue.
                         •   Work with the Union Pacific Railway to split the vacant parcel with
                             access to Planter Street and convey to the City.
                         •   Pursue local, state and federal brownfield grants for the redevelopment
                             of the Burke property.
                                                            3-64

October 2014                             3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-14: Burke Property
                         3-65
3. Land Use Element
                    12 - Passons Grade Separation
                    Existing Conditions
                    With the construction of the Passons grade separation north of Slauson Avenue,
                    some existing land uses were removed, creating a vacant parcel. The vacant
                    parcel is located on the north side of the rail line adjacent to Maizeland
                    Elementary School and single-family residential uses. Maizeland Elementary
                    closed in 2011 due to low enrollment. The El Rancho School District has not
                    determined when and if the school will be opened again.
                    Opportunity
                    The vacant parcels provide an opportunity to create a linear park along the rail
                    line to buffer the residential properties. The City has been working with the El
                    Rancho School District to determine future plans of the site. If the elementary
                    school is permanently closed, then a greater opportunity arises to consolidate the
                    vacant site and the elementary school for a large residential development.
                    Objectives
                         • A new linear park should be included in the redevelopment of the vacant
                             parcel north of the rail line.
                         •   The City should work closely with the school district on future plans for
                             the elementary school property and consolidate the property with the
                             vacant site along Passons Boulevard for a large residential development
                             if the school is not reopened.
                         •   The City should work with the school district to ensure that any
                             opportunities for joint use of recreational facilities are addressed.
                         •   The redevelopment of this area should improve the appearance of the
                             edges facing the rail line through landscaping and other buffering and
                             screening treatments.
                                                              3-66

October 2014                                       3. Land Use Element
             Figure 3-15: Passons Grade Separation
                              3-67
3. Land Use Element
                    13 - Washington Boulevard and Paramount Boulevard Intersection
                    Area
                    Existing Conditions
                    This site includes an apartment complex and gas station in the northwest
                    quadrant and a sit-down restaurant and large apartment complex in the northeast
                    quadrant of this intersection. Existing development is of marginal design
                    contrasted by newer development in the Towne Center located in the southeast
                    quadrant.
                    Opportunity
                    There is potential for remaking this as a key intersection and providing new
                    community entry statements at this location.
                    Objectives
                        • Create a stronger sense of arrival at this intersection by incorporating
                            signage, landscaping, special paving, lighting, architectural elements,
                            median treatments or other features at the intersection.
                        •   Redevelopment of this area should promote a more integrated mix of
                            commercial, office and high density residential development with
                            appropriate parking standards to protect the surrounding single-family
                            residential neighborhood.
                                                          3-68

        October 2014                                               3. Land Use Element
Figure 3-16: Washington Boulevard and Paramount Boulevard Intersection Area
                                    3-69
3. Land Use Element
                    14 - Washington Boulevard and Passons Boulevard Intersection
                    Existing Conditions
                    The intersection of Washington Boulevard and Passons Boulevard is a key entry
                    to the Civic Center, which is located north of, but not visible from this intersection.
                    The City’s Park and Recreation Department is located within this area, but is also
                    not visible from the intersection as it is located directly behind a commercial
                    property on the northwest corner. A small entry monument to City Hall is located
                    within the right-of-way adjacent to the service station in the northeast quadrant of
                    the intersection. Remaining quadrants consist of commercial uses; specifically
                    the southwest quadrant consists of a new strip commercial center. The
                    separation between this key entry, the Civic Center located to the north and other
                    important government uses in the city including Smith Park and the Pico Rivera
                    Library area presents a challenge to create a unified identity and clear
                    association between these important government services.
                    Opportunity
                    As a key entry to the Civic Center, the intersection of Washington Boulevard and
                    Passons Boulevard should be improved through better signage, entry
                    monumentation, landscaping and lighting. Streetscape enhancements and
                    wayfinding signage should also be used to connect the entry to the government
                    uses located along Passons Boulevard to Mines Avenue.
                    Objectives/Policies
                         • Enhance pedestrian connections across Washington Boulevard to create
                             a connection between the buildings and uses on both sides of the street
                             and to encourage pedestrian and bicycle activity.
                         •   Implement Safe Routes to School recommendations to encourage the
                             safety of children attending the schools further north.
                         •   Pursue local, state and federal grants for the implementation of Safe
                             Routes to School strategies.
                         •   Enhance the intersection through special lighting, signage, landscaping,
                             architectural elements, paving and other unique features to reinforce its
                             location as a key entry to the civic center.
                         •   Extend street tree and other streetscape design elements from the
                             intersection, down Passons Boulevard to the Civic Center to create a
                             more cohesive area.
                         •   Strengthen pedestrian and bicycle linkages between businesses at the
                             intersection, to adjacent neighborhoods and to the Civic Center.
                                                             3-70

    October 2014                                               3. Land Use Element
Figure 3-17: Washington Boulevard and Passons Boulevard Intersection
                                3-71
3. Land Use Element
                    15 - San Gabriel River Parkway and Beverly Boulevard Intersection
                    Existing Conditions
                    This opportunity area includes parcels to the north and south of Beverly
                    Boulevard where it intersects San Gabriel River Parkway. A County maintenance
                    yard and a self-storage warehouse are located at the northwest and northeast
                    corners, respectively, while industrial uses are located to the south of Beverly
                    Boulevard. The City’s main maintenance yard is also located within this area,
                    south of Beverly Boulevard, adjacent to the San Gabriel River.
                    This area represents another important entryway into the city from jurisdictions to
                    the east of Pico Rivera. The existing uses are not appropriate for a major entry to
                    the city and are also located adjacent to Pico Park, which is an important park
                    space and recreational asset in the community.
                    Opportunity
                    As a key entry to the city, the intersection of San Gabriel River Parkway and
                    Beverly Boulevard should be enhanced through better signage, entry
                    monumentation, landscaping, lighting and a conversion to more appropriate
                    uses, including mixed-use and light industrial. The parcel at the northwest corner
                    of the intersection has been identified in the Housing Element to accommodate
                    the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA by providing opportunities for mixed-use
                    development in this area. Therefore, there is potential to work with the County’s
                    Public Works Department to relocate the existing maintenance yard to a more
                    appropriate industrial location. Proposed uses at the intersection include mixed-
                    use with residential development and light industrial uses so it will be important to
                    provide screening and design improvements to ensure compatibility, a unified
                    aesthetic theme and the creation of a sense of arrival to the city.
                    Objectives
                         • Promote mixed-use development, including higher density residential in
                             the northwest corner of this intersection.
                         •   Reinforce this location as a key entry to the city by incorporating
                             distinctive and consistent streetscape treatments special lighting,
                             signage, landscaping, architectural elements, paving and other unique
                             features that tie the corners together and enhance the intersection.
                         •   Ensure that potential conflicts with adjacent single-family residential
                             development are appropriately addressed through buffering, screening
                             and or performance standards included in the Zoning Code.
                                                              3-72

     October 2014                                                  3. Land Use Element
Figure 3-18: San Gabriel River Parkway and Beverly Boulevard Intersection
                                   3-73
3. Land Use Element
                    16 - Beverly Boulevard, I-605 Area
                    Existing Conditions
                    This planning area includes two sub-areas. Sub-area 1 is located north of
                    Beverly Boulevard and west of the I-605, along Abbeywood Avenue. It is a large
                    site that currently includes underutilized industrial uses. There is a freight
                    forwarder located on the north parcel and a warehouse/distribution facility on the
                    south parcel. Access to the planning area from Beverly Boulevard is provided at
                    Abbeywood Avenue which runs along the westerly side of the south parcel and
                    ends at the southern boundary of the north parcel. Immediately north of the site
                    is an existing single family development. This development is located within the
                    city, but its only access is provided through the adjacent neighborhood located
                    within Los Angeles County. That neighborhood also has only one point of access
                    at Springland Drive and San Gabriel River Parkway. These access issues and
                    land use incompatibilities between the industrial uses and adjacent residential
                    uses need to be addressed to ensure the health and safety of residents.
                    Sub-area 2 is located south of Beverly Boulevard and includes an approximately
                    19 acre vacant site. This site is one of the largest remaining vacant sites in the
                    city. However, there is limited access to the site. Existing access is provided at
                    Eduardo Avenue through an existing residential neighborhood located outside
                    the city boundaries within an unincorporated area. There is no direct access from
                    within the City of Pico Rivera.
                    Opportunity
                    There is an opportunity to redevelop sub-area 1 with mixed-use or light industrial
                    uses to address incompatibilities between the existing industrial and residential
                    neighborhoods. Redevelopment of the site should also explore opportunities to
                    provide secondary access for the adjacent residential neighborhood. Sub-area 2
                    provides significant opportunities for redevelopment, but the access issues must
                    be resolved in order to do so.
                    Objectives
                         • Promote development of sub-area 1 as mixed-use and/or light industrial
                             to eliminate land use conflicts with the adjacent residential development
                             are. Ensure that potential conflicts with adjacent single-family residential
                             development are appropriately addressed through buffering, screening
                             and or performance standards included in the Zoning Code.
                         •   Require that future redevelopment of sub-area 1 be addressed through a
                             master plan or other similar device including a specific plan or planned
                             development zoning. At a minimum, the Plan shall address access
                             issues and creative site design, buffering, performance standards as
                             appropriate, the desired mix and intensity of development, and potential
                             environmental hazards.
                                                             3-74

             October 2014                                               3. Land Use Element
• Redevelopment of sub-area 2 should be a priority and the City should
  work with potential developers and/or consider conducting independent
  studies to identify potential access solutions.
                                   3-75

3. Land Use Element
                    Figure 3-19: Beverly Boulevard and I-605 Area
                                          3-76
                   	 Adopted October 2013
CHAPTER 4
Housing Element
Introduction
Housing Overview
Historical Perspective
The City of Pico Rivera is a City of almost 62,942 people located in Los Angeles
County. As shown in Figure 4-1, Pico Rivera is located near and adjacent to two
major freeways including Interstates 5 and 605. The City of Pico Rivera traces its
beginning to the 1870’s when the Atchison, Topeka, Santa Fe and Union Pacific
railroads completed rail lines through the area. Newly arrived farmers planted
large groves of citrus, avocado, and walnut trees in the midst of the fertile land
between the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel Rivers. Eventually, two communities,
Pico and Rivera, were established in the area and over the first four decades of
the 20th century these two country towns grew slowly in a rustic agricultural
setting.
The end of World War II resulted in a sudden demand for housing, attracting land
developers to Southern California. During the 1950’s, the large parcels of farm
land were purchased and cleared to be replaced by tract homes, schools, and
churches. Commercial and industrial enterprises were also established in the
surrounding areas. As housing subdivisions quickly developed, young families
quickly filled the area, drawing the established communities of Pico and Rivera
closer together. Local residents developed a stronger sense of civic awareness
as “annexation fever” grew in neighboring cities.
By the mid-1950’s, leaders from both communities began to voice strong support
for incorporation. In an election held January 7, 1958, 56 percent of voters
favored incorporation, approving a Council-Manager form of local government,
confirming the name “Pico Rivera” for the new city, and electing five citizens to
serve as members of the first City Council, thereby creating the 61st city of
Los Angeles County.
Today Pico Rivera is home to a variety of households and offers a range of
employment opportunities. The City’s location and freeway access make it an
ideal location to reside within the region. The City is currently planning for future
growth, specifically new residential development, through identification of
underutilized sites for potential mixed-use development and higher density
housing. The City is also undertaking an update to the General Plan, which will
                                          4-1

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          focus on opportunity areas where potential exists for community enhancement
                          through introduction of new land uses, land use intensification, and establishment
                          of design improvements.
                                        Figure 4-1: City of Pico Rivera Location Map
                                                                  4-2
                    	 Adopted October 2013                                              2014-2021 Housing Element
Demographics
The City’s economic and population growth over the past five decades has been
accompanied by a shift in the demographic characteristics of the population.
Significant changes include an increase in the Hispanic population, an increase
in large households, and a small increase in the average age of residents in the
City. Generally, a large proportion of residents living in Pico Rivera are young
adults that seek a variety of housing options that are affordable and located
strategically to access the amenities and services in the region.
Housing Stock
In 2010, there were a total of 17,109 dwelling units in the City, a 1.1 percent
increase from the 2000 Census. The City’s housing stock is predominately
characterized by single-family detached dwelling units which comprise over 80
percent of the total housing stock. As the City plans for future housing activity it is
important to note that approximately 87 percent of the City’s housing stock is
more than 30 years old and may be in need of repair or rehabilitation.
Despite the limited availability of vacant residentially zoned land in the City, Pico
Rivera has experienced modest housing growth over the past several decades.
The City currently has two adopted specific plans: Specific Plan 301 and Specific
Plan 400.4. Both provided guidance for the development of identified
underutilized sites in the City with residential and commercial uses that
contributes to the revitalization and economic development of Pico Rivera.
As a successfully developed community, the Pico Rivera 2014–2021 Housing
Element will focus on preserving and enhancing existing housing, while
encouraging and facilitating compatible higher density development. Housing
goals, policies and programs will aim to preserve the condition of the existing
housing stock, develop new housing in specific targeted growth districts, provide
affordable housing opportunities for all income groups, and improve the quality of
life in the City’s neighborhoods.
Housing Element State Law
California State Housing Element Law (California Government Code Article 10.6)
establishes the requirements for Housing Elements of the General Plan.
Specifically, California Government Code Section 65588 requires that local
governments review and revise the Housing Element of their Comprehensive
General Plans not less than once every five years. However, with the introduction
of SB 375, cities must now update their Housing Elements every 8 years in order
to align them with the deadline for the regional transportation plan.
The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home
and suitable living environment for every Californian as the State's major housing
                                           4-3

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          goal. Recognizing the important role of local planning programs in the pursuit of
                          this goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a
                          Housing Element as part of their comprehensive General Plans. Table 4-1
                          summarizes these State requirements and identifies the applicable sections in
                          the 2014-2021 Housing Element where these requirements are addressed.
                          Pico Rivera's Housing Element was last updated in 2012 and is currently being
                          updated for the years 2014 to 2021 as part of the new update cycle for
                          jurisdictions within the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
                          region to allow for synchronization with the 2012-2035 Draft Regional
                          Transportation Plan and Sustainable Communities Strategy (RTP/SCS). The
                          Element sets forth an 8-year strategy to address the City’s identified housing
                          needs, including specific implementing programs and activities.
                          Various amendments have been made to Housing Element law since adoption of
                          the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element. These include:
                           AB 162: Requires the City, upon adoption of the Housing Element, to identify
                              specific flood hazard zones in the Land Use Element and specific floodwater
                              and groundwater recharge areas in the Conservation and Safety Elements.
                           SB 244: Requires the City, upon the adoption of a Housing Element, to
                              update the Land Use Element to include data and analysis, goals, and
                              implementation measures regarding unincorporated island, fringe, or legacy
                              communities and their infrastructure needs.
                           SB 812: In addition to the existing special needs groups, the City must include
                              an analysis of the housing needs for persons with developmental disabilities.
                           AB 1867: Under certain conditions, the City can now count multi-unit
                              homeownership units that have been converted to affordable units toward
                              their RHNA allocation.
                           SB375 Implications: For jurisdictions that do not submit their adopted 2014-
                              2021 housing element update within 120 days of the October 2013 deadline,
                              their housing element updates revert to a four-year cycle.
                          The contents of this updated Housing Element comply with these amendments
                          and all other requirements of Housing Element law.
                                                                   4-4

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Regional Housing Needs Assessment
Section 65583 of the Government Code sets forth the specific components to be
contained in a community's housing element. Included in these requirements is
an obligation on the part of local jurisdictions to provide their “fair share” of
regional housing needs. Local governments and Councils of Governments
(COGs) are required to determine existing and future housing need and the
allocation of said need must be approved by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD). Pico Rivera is a member of the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and SCAG is
responsible for preparing the Regional Housing Needs Assessment for the six-
county territory that it represents.
HCD established the planning period for the current Regional Housing Needs
Assessment (RHNA) from January 1, 2014 to September 30, 2021. For the
2014-2021 planning period the City was allocated a total of 850 units, including
217 for very low income, 131 for low income, 140 for moderate income, and 362
for above-moderate income households.
Changes to Housing Element law, specifically, AB 1233 passed in January 2006,
requires “communities that failed to comply with requirements to make available
sufficient sites to meet their regional housing need in the previous planning
period must, within the first year of the new planning period, zone or rezone
enough sites to accommodate the RHNA not accommodated from the previous
planning period.” The Housing Element for the 2006-2014 planning period was
adopted in 2012 and certified by HCD, but the City chose not to complete the
rezoning necessary to provide adequate sites to accommodate the City’s lower
income RHNA because the City recently initiated a General Plan update.
Consequently, the City is required to plan for the current planning period of 2014-
2021 as well as any unaccommodated shortfall identified from the previous
(2006-2014) planning period. The City has provided a strategy in Section 6, to
address AB 1233 as well the current RHNA allocation.
Required Housing Element Contents
State law contains very specific information concerning the content and effect of
programs identified to implement the housing element. The State’s housing
element requirements are summarized in Table 4-1.
                                          4-5

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                          Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-1:
                          Housing Element Requirements
                                                                                      Gov. Code         Reference in
                                        Issues Requiring Analysis
                                                                                        Section       Housing Element
                          Analysis of employment trends.                           Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          Projection and quantification of existing and
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 4, Section 6
                          projected housing needs for all income groups.
                          Analysis and documentation of the City’s housing
                          characteristics, including cost for housing compared
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          to ability to pay, overcrowding, and housing
                          condition.
                          An inventory of land suitable for residential
                          development, including vacant sites and sites            Section 65583.a   Section 6
                          having redevelopment potential.
                          Analysis of existing and potential governmental
                          constraints upon the maintenance, improvement or         Section 65583.a   Section 5
                          development of housing for all income levels.
                          Analysis of existing and potential non-governmental
                          (private sector) constraints upon maintenance,
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 5
                          improvement or development of housing for all
                          income levels.
                          Analysis concerning the needs of the homeless.           Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          Analysis of special housing needs: handicapped,
                          elderly, large families, farm workers, and female-       Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          headed households.
                          Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 6
                          with respect to residential development.
                          Identification of Publicly-Assisted Housing
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          Developments.
                          Identification of Units at Risk of Conversion to
                                                                                   Section 65583.a   Section 4
                          Market Rate Housing.
                          Identification of the City’s goal relative to the
                          maintenance, improvement, and development of             Section 65583.a   Section 2
                          housing.
                          Analysis of quantified objectives and policies relative
                          to the maintenance, improvement, and development         Section 65583.b   Section 3
                          of housing.
                          Identification of adequate sites that will be made
                          available through appropriate action with required       Section
                                                                                                     Section 6
                          public services and facilities for a variety of housing  65583.c(1)
                          types for all income levels.
                          Identification of strategies to assist in the
                                                                                   Section           Section 2 and
                          development of adequate housing to meet the
                                                                                   65583.c(2)        Section 6
                          needs of low and moderate-income households.
                          Description of the Public Participation Program in
                          the formulation of Housing Element Goals, Policies,      Section 65583.d   Section 1
                          and Programs.
                          Description of the Regional Housing Needs
                                                                                                     Section 1, Section 3,
                          Assessment (RHNA) prepared by the Southern               Section 65583.e
                                                                                                     and Section 6
                          California Association of Governments.
                          Review of the effectiveness of the past Element,
                          including the City’s accomplishments during the          Section 65583.f   Section 7
                          previous planning period.
                          Source: State of California, Department of Housing and Community Development.
                                                                               4-6

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
 Public Participation
Section 65583 (c) (7) of the Government Code states that, "The local government
shall make diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments
of the community in the development of the housing element, and the program
shall describe this effort." A discussion of citizen participation is provided below.
Prior to the submittal of the Housing Element for initial review, community
workshops with the Planning Commission were held on March 18, 2013 and April
15, 2013. The community workshops sought to inform the Planning Commission,
residents, and interested stakeholders of the 2014-2021 Housing Element update
process. The goal of the workshops was to receive feedback related to the
current and future housing needs of the City. At the first community workshop,
participants asked clarification questions on how the rezoning of identified sites
would affect their private property. Some residents expressed their concerns
about traffic, infrastructure, and adverse environmental impacts due to increased
residential density and the introduction of mixed-use developments. Planning
Commissioners requested clarification on how the City can ensure that units are
kept affordable to lower income families. Commissioners also expressed the
importance of keeping a balance between residential development and revenue
generating businesses, such as commercial and retail uses. During the second
community workshop, the Planning Commission expressed their satisfaction with
the draft Housing Element. Participants who attended the meeting urged staff to
consider policies that are more sensitive to existing substandard units in order to
help residents comply with the City’s development standards. A representative
from the Southern California Rehabilitation Center attended and spoke about the
importance of encouraging the development of affordable housing for persons
with disabilities, including individuals with developmental disabilities.
Both workshops were advertised at City Hall and the City’s website, and flyers
advertising the meetings were emailed or mailed directly to stakeholders. The
City also proactively mailed copies of the workshop flyer to business owners and
surrounding residents of parcels identified in the sites inventory. At the second
workshop held on April 15, 2013, City staff provided Spanish translation to
workshop participants who requested it during the meeting. Copies of the flyers,
a sample stakeholder letter, and the list of stakeholder groups that received the
mailing are provided in Appendix C.
After the State Department of Housing and Community Development reviewed
the Draft Element, additional hearings before the Planning Commission and City
Council were held. The 2014-2021 Housing Element was reviewed and
recommended for adoption by the Planning Commission on August 5, 2013 and
September 3, 2013. It was formally adopted by City Council on October 8, 2013.
Notification for these hearings were published in the local newspaper, posted at
prominent public facilities, and provided on the City’s website in advance of each
hearing.
                                           4-7

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          General Plan Consistency
                          The City of Pico Rivera is currently updating the General Plan. When adopted,
                          the 2013 General Plan update will be comprised of the following nine elements:
                          1) Land Use; 2) Circulation; 3) Housing; 4) Conservation; 5) Open Space;
                          6) Noise; 7) Safety; 8) Economic Prosperity; and 9) Healthy Communities. The
                          Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan elements and is entirely
                          consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the Plan. As portions of
                          the General Plan are amended in the future, the Pico Rivera General Plan
                          (including the Housing Element) will be reviewed to ensure internal consistency
                          is maintained.
                          Organization of the Element
                          The Housing Element sets forth housing goals and policies for Pico Rivera to
                          address the City’s existing and projected housing needs. Specific housing
                          programs to implement these goals and policies are identified in the Housing
                          Program section of the updated document. The updated Pico Rivera Housing
                          Element is comprised of the following major components:
                               1. Preparation of a Housing Plan to address Pico Rivera's identified
                                   housing needs, including housing goals, policies and programs.
                               2. An analysis of the City's population, household and employment base,
                                   and the characteristics of the City's housing stock.
                               3. An updated evaluation of housing need, including the housing needs of
                                   very low-income households and individuals with disabilities.
                               4. An examination of governmental and non-governmental constraints on
                                   the production, maintenance, and affordability of housing.
                               5. Preparation of an inventory of potential housing sites in the community.
                               6. An assessment of past housing element accomplishments.
                                                                   4-8

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Plan
For the City of Pico Rivera the enduring objective is to facilitate and encourage
housing that fulfills the diverse needs of the community. To achieve this goal the
Housing Plan identifies long-term housing goals and shorter-term policies to
address the identified housing needs. The goals and policies are then
implemented through a series of housing programs. Programs identify specific
actions the City plans to undertake toward achieving each goal and policy.
The goals, policies, and programs within the Housing Plan build upon the
identified housing needs in the community, constraints confronting the City, and
resources available to address the housing needs. This Plan will guide City
housing policy through the 2014-2021 planning period.
The City of Pico Rivera has established the following general housing policies:
         General Housing Policy 1: The City of Pico Rivera will encourage the
         provision of a range of housing types and styles as a means to
         accommodate existing and future needs.
         General Housing Policy 2: The City of Pico Rivera will preserve and
         maintain its existing residential neighborhoods.
         General Housing Policy 3: The City of Pico Rivera will promote the
         development of higher density housing in those areas that can support
         such development without creating land use incompatibilities.
         General Housing Policy 4: The City of Pico Rivera will continue to
         promote safe, sound, and quality housing through rehabilitation
         programs, redevelopment, code enforcement, and development review.
Pico Rivera’s more specific housing goals, policies, and programs address the
following six major areas:
     1.  Housing conservation;
     2.  Opportunities for affordable housing;
     3.  Special needs housing;
     4.  Provision of adequate sites;
     5.  Removal of governmental constraints; and
     6.  Equal housing opportunities.
Pico Rivera’s Housing Plan for addressing unmet needs, removing constraints,
and achieving quantitative objectives is described in this section according to the
above six areas. The housing programs introduced on the following pages
                                           4-9

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          include programs that are currently in operation and new programs which have
                          been added to address the City’s housing needs.
                          Goal 1: Preserve and improve existing housing
                          Policy 1.1: Encourage the maintenance and repair of the City’s housing stock
                          through code enforcement and rehabilitation programs.
                          Policy 1.2: Preserve the integrity of the existing single-family neighborhoods in
                          the community.
                          Program 1 – Owner-Occupied Housing Rehabilitation Programs
                          The Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Programs offer homeowners the
                          opportunity to apply for loans and small grants to complete improvement projects
                          on their properties. The Loan Program provides 0% simple interest, deferred
                          payment loans to seniors, persons with a disability, and families of low and
                          moderate income that own and occupy their homes and need financial
                          assistance to make repairs and improvements. The program is backed by federal
                          funds with loans secured by a Deed of Trust. Payment is typically not due
                          payable until the home is sold, transferred in ownership, refinanced, or the 30th
                          year of the loan. The Grant Program provides a $12,000 grant to very low-
                          income homeowners that occupy their homes and need financial assistance for
                          critical health and safety-related improvements.
                          Program Objective:            Address property, structural, and energy/water
                          conservation improvements for low income homeowners in the City. The City
                          anticipates that 30 projects will be assisted annually through the Grant Program.
                          Funding Source: CDBG, HOME, CalHOME
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Housing Division
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                          Program 2 – Neighborhood Improvement Program
                          The enforcement of existing property maintenance codes is a primary means to
                          preserve housing and the quality of neighborhoods. The Neighborhood
                          Improvement Division is responsible for enforcing certain provisions of the
                          Municipal Code to ensure a safe, orderly, and aesthetically pleasing community.
                          Neighborhood Improvement Officers enforce violations on private property, such
                          as zoning violations, building code violations, and public nuisances. This program
                          is designed to identify properties with violations and bring such properties up to
                          City code requirements and to clean up unsightly and unsafe properties. Under
                          this program, City personnel will refer property owners cited for Code violations
                                                                   4-10

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
to housing rehabilitation assistance programs as a means to prevent further
deterioration of residential properties.
Program Objective: Continue to conduct inspections on a complaint basis
through the City’s Neighborhood Improvement Division.
Funding Source: General Fund, CDBG
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Neighborhood Improvement Division
Time Frame: 2014-2021
Program 3 – Monitor and Preserve Affordable Housing
The City will continue to keep an inventory of affordable housing units and
promote, through the Housing Division, the use of additional affordable housing
assistance programs, as appropriate, to preserve existing affordable units that
are at risk of converting to market-rate. The City will make contact with public
agencies, non-profit organizations, and tenant groups that may be in a position to
purchase and/or manage at-risk projects. When available, the City will utilize
resources such as HUD Section 208/811 loans, HOPE II and III Homeownership
program funds, HOME funds, CDBG funds, Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
Programs, California Housing Finance Agency single-family and multi-family
programs, programs to stimulate private developer and non-profit entity efforts in
the development and financing of housing for lower and moderate-income
households. The City will facilitate discussions between developers and local
banks to meet their obligations pursuant to the California Community
Reinvestment Act (CCRA) providing favorable financing to developers involved in
projects designed to provide lower and moderate-income housing opportunities.
Program Objective: City Staff will maintain a list of affordable units throughout
the City including affordability information to ensure landlords are compliant with
deed restrictions and to preserve affordable units. The Housing Division will
continue to pursue partnership opportunities with non-profits to preserve and
expand affordable housing in the City.
Funding Source: CDBG
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Housing Division
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 4 – Energy Efficient Design
The City will review ordinances and recommend changes where necessary to
encourage energy efficient housing design and practices that are consistent with
State regulations. The City provides information on their website and will
                                         4-11

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          continue to periodically update their literature regarding energy conservation,
                          including solar power, energy efficient insulation, and subsidies available from
                          utility companies, and encourage homeowners and landlords to incorporate
                          these features into construction and remodeling projects. When possible the City
                          will encourage energy conservation devices including, but not limited to lighting,
                          water heater treatments, and solar energy systems for all new and existing
                          residential projects. The City will encourage maximum utilization of Federal,
                          State, and local government programs, including the County of Los Angeles
                          Home Weatherization Program that are intended to help homeowners implement
                          energy conservation measures.
                          Program Objective: Maintain and distribute literature on energy conservation,
                          including solar power, additional insulation, and subsidies available from utility
                          companies, and encourage homeowners and landlords to incorporate these
                          features into construction and remodeling projects. Encourage energy
                          conservation devices, including but not limited to lighting, water heater
                          treatments, and solar energy systems for all residential projects. Encourage
                          maximum utilization of Federal, State, and local government programs, such as
                          the County of Los Angeles Home Weatherization Program, that assist
                          homeowners in providing energy conservation measures. Continue to provide
                          information on home loan programs available through the City and encourage
                          residents to use the programs to implement energy efficient design.
                          Funding Source: General Plan
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Planning Division
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                          Goal 2: Encourage access to opportunities for affordable housing
                          Policy 2.1: Support and promote the creation of new opportunities for affordable
                          housing.
                          Policy 2.2: Cooperate with private and public sector entities in identifying
                          strategies that will be effective in the development of new affordable housing.
                          Policy 2.3: Promote and support those programs that will assist lower-income
                          households in the purchase of their homes.
                          Program 5 – Developer Consultation
                          The City will continue to promote and encourage early consultation with
                          developers to assist in expanding housing opportunities in order to streamline the
                          process involved in development of affordable housing. This early consultation
                                                                     4-12

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                          2014-2021 Housing Element
will also provide developers with information needed to assist them in applying
for funding to develop affordable and assisted housing. City staff will provide
information in the form of handouts and on the City’s website indicating the
benefits of early consultation for the development community.
Program Objective: City staff will offer early consultation with developers on an
as needed basis
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 6 – Partnerships for Affordable Housing Programs
As a means of further leveraging housing assistance, the City will continue to
cooperate with other agencies and organizations that offer lower income
households homeownership assistance. These agencies and organizations may
include, but are not limited to:
 Los Angeles County- Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) Program
 Neighborhood Housing Services of Los Angeles County- Homeownership
    Promotion and Preservation Program, Affordable Mortgage Lending Program
As the City has little control over how these programs are administered by each
responsible agency or organization, the City will be responsible for providing
information on the City website and at City Hall.
Program Objective: Increase resident awareness about housing programs
offered by other agencies and organizations by advertising them on the City’s
website and by offering Staff assistance at City Hall.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Housing Division
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 7 - Section 8 Rental Assistance
The Section 8 program provides rent subsidies to very low income households
who overpay for housing. Prospective renters secure housing from HUD-
registered apartments that accept the certificates. HUD then pays the landlords
the difference between what the tenant can afford (30 percent of their income)
and the payment standard negotiated for the community. The City manages the
Section 8 program with HUD. The City’s Housing Division keeps record on the
number of households in Pico Rivera that participate in the Section 8 program.
                                         4-13

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          On average, there are approximately 500 households that participate in this
                          program annually. The Housing Division regularly refers and provides general
                          qualification and program information to interested individuals.
                          Program Objective: Continue to provide assistance to households through the
                          Section 8 program and encourage rental property owners to register their units
                          with the City. The Housing Division will continue to monitor the number of
                          residents accessing the program and units available for rent.
                          Funding Source: Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Housing Division
                          Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
                          Goal 3: Ensure an adequate supply of housing for households with
                          special needs
                          Policy 3.1: Cooperate with housing providers and developers to promote the
                          development of housing to accommodate those households with special needs.
                          Policy 3.2: Pursue the feasibility of providing additional senior housing
                          opportunities in the City.
                          Policy 3.3: Recognize the basic shelter needs of homeless persons.
                          Program 8 – Senior Housing
                          The City currently permits the development of senior housing in the R-M (Multiple
                          Family Residential Variable Density) zone, subject to the approval of a
                          Conditional Use Permit, with an incentive of reduced unit size (500 square feet).
                          The City requires one parking space per three dwelling units for senior housing
                          developments, which is a reduced parking standard from Zoning Code
                          requirements. To assist and facilitate the development of affordable senior
                          housing, the City will review the Zoning Code, and amend as necessary, to
                          develop additional incentives, including, but not limited to reduced height
                          standard and increased maximum lot coverage. The City will work with potential
                          senior housing developers to explore additional incentives.
                          Program Objective: Review the Zoning Code, and amend as necessary, to offer
                          incentives to developers to facilitate the development of alternative housing
                          models that are favorable to senior residents. Throughout the planning period,
                          the City will inform eligible property owners of the incentives to develop senior
                          housing through updated handouts and information on the City’s website.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                                                                  4-14

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 9 – Community Based Transitional Housing Program
Historically, the City has provided funding for a community-based transitional
housing provider in the Pico Rivera. The following organizations provide services
to the City: The Whole Child Family Housing and the Salvation Army Housing
Services. The City anticipates that the transitional housing provider will provide
temporary housing and offer services including, child care, healthcare, and
employment training. The City will continue to allocate funding, when available, to
a community-based transitional housing provider.
Program Objective: Continue to allocate funding, when available, to a
community based transitional housing provider. The City anticipates funding
assistance for up to 70 individuals.
Funding Source: CDBG
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Housing Division
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 10 – Women’s and Children’s Crisis Shelter Program
The City will continue to allocate funding, when available, to the Women’s and
Children’s Crisis Shelter. The Women’s and Children’s Crisis Shelter operate
several facilities in southeast Los Angeles County. Services provided include
medical services, legal services, counseling and housing services.
Program Objective: Continue to allocate funding, when available, to the
Women’s and Children’s Crisis Shelter. The City anticipates funding assistance
for up to 250 individuals.
Funding Source: CDBG
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 11 – Emergency Shelters, Transitional and Supportive Housing
Program
Extremely low-income households and households with special needs have
limited housing options. Housing types appropriate for these groups include:
emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing, and single-room
occupancy (SRO) units. To accommodate this population group the City has
                                         4-15

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          amended the Zoning Code so that transitional and supportive housing are
                          permitted in all residential zones by right without a Conditional Use Permit or
                          other discretionary action, subject only to those regulations that apply to other
                          residential dwelling units of the same type in the same zone. The City has also
                          amended the Zoning Code to allow single-room occupancy units (SROs) in at
                          least one zone, along with applicable objective management and development
                          standards.
                          The City has also revised the Zoning Code to permit emergency shelters by right
                          without a Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary action in a newly
                          established Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone. This area was selected due to its
                          proximity to bus service along Beverly Boulevard, the proximity of other services
                          (parks, schools, etc.), and the proximity of the area to employment. This area is
                          bounded by Beverly Boulevard on the north, Tobias Avenue on the west, the San
                          Gabriel River channel on the east, and the BNSF railroad right-of-way on the
                          south. Other than a personal storage business located along the south side of
                          Beverly Boulevard, light industrial uses are located in the remaining portion of the
                          Overlay Zone’s geographic boundaries. The total land area of the properties that
                          could feasibly accommodate such uses is 9.21 acres. Within these properties, a
                          total of 13 vacant and/or underutilized buildings totaling approximately 124,000
                          square feet were identified, which is more than sufficient to accommodate at
                          least one emergency shelter.
                          The City will continue to monitor the inventory of sites appropriate to
                          accommodate emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing and
                          will work with the appropriate organizations to ensure the needs of homeless and
                          extremely low income residents are met. The City is committed to prioritizing
                          funding and other available incentives for projects that provide housing for
                          extremely low income residents whenever possible.
                          Program Objective: Ensure that the housing need of all residents is met by
                          providing opportunities for transitional and supportive housing, emergency
                          shelters, and SRO units to be accommodated within the City. Prioritize available
                          incentives for extremely low income households.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
                          Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
                          Program 12 – Development of Housing for Large Households
                          The City understands that appropriately sized housing units for families is an
                          important means to improve livability, reduce incidence of overcrowding, and
                          minimize deferred maintenance issues. To support the development of rental and
                          for-sale housing for larger households, especially lower income large
                                                                  4-16

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
households, the City encourages developers/builders to incorporate larger
bedroom counts in future housing developments, as appropriate, to
accommodate the needs of larger households. The City will encourage
development of housing for large households through a variety of activities such
as outreach to housing developers, providing technical assistance, providing
expedited processing, fee reductions, waiving of specific development standards,
etc.
Program Objective: Ensure that the housing need for large households is met
by prioritizing available incentives for large households.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Planning Division
Time Frame: 2014 – 2021
Program 13 – Development of Second Units
Development of second units provides lower-income households an affordable
housing opportunity typically within a single-family neighborhood setting.
Therefore, the City will continue to allow for second units in the Zoning Code.
Recently adopted amendments to the Zoning Code include allowing second units
administerially and permitting a reduction in the required lot size to qualify for a
second unit, thus increasing opportunities to construct second units in the City.
Second units, also known as “granny flats,” are a practical method for a family to
maximize the available land on their own lot. By utilizing land and utilities, a
family minimizes construction costs. The City is capitalizing on the Zoning Code
by increasing the stock of affordable units while maintaining the existing single-
family neighborhoods. To ensure greater participation on behalf of Pico Rivera
residents in the development of second units, the City will provide information on
second unit development opportunities on the City’s website and at City Hall.
Program Objective: Encourage the development of second units
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Planning Division
Time Frame: 2014-2021
Program 14 – Housing for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
The housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities are typically not
addressed by Title 24 Regulations, and requires in addition to basic affordability,
slight modifications to existing units, and in some instances, a varying range of
supportive housing facilities. To accommodate residents with developmental
disabilities, the City will seek State and Federal monies, as funding becomes
                                           4-17

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                Adopted October 2013
                          available, in support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for
                          persons with developmental disabilities. Pico Rivera will also provide regulatory
                          incentives, such as expedited permit processing, and fee waivers and deferrals,
                          to projects targeted for persons with developmental disabilities. To further
                          facilitate the development of units to accommodate persons with developmental
                          disabilities, the City shall reach out annually to developers of supportive housing
                          to encourage development of projects targeted for special needs groups. Finally,
                          as housing is developed or identified, Pico Rivera will work with the Eastern Los
                          Angeles Regional Center to implement an outreach program informing families
                          within the City of housing and services available for persons with developmental
                          disabilities. Information will be made available on the City’s website.
                          Program Objective: Continue to offer specific regulatory incentives throughout
                          the planning period; apply for funding to encourage development of units
                          specifically for persons with developmental disabilities, when funding is available;
                          outreach to potential developers; and initiate a cooperative outreach program
                          with the Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center within 1-year of Housing Element
                          adoption.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Housing Division
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                          Goal 4: Provide adequate sites to meet the existing and future
                          housing needs of the City
                          Policy 4.1: Support the development of higher density housing along selected
                          arterial corridors as a means to accommodate the City’s projected housing need.
                          Policy 4.2: Establish a mixed-use overlay zone and increase minimum density in
                          identified areas to meet the City’s housing need.
                          Program 15 – Provision of Adequate Sites for Housing Development
                          As shown in Section 6, Housing Resources, of the Housing Element the City has
                          vacant land zoned R-E, R-I, S-F, PUD, or R-M and has identified a number of
                          appropriately zoned sites that are currently underutilized and ideal for
                          redevelopment. To ensure the continued availability of adequate sites to
                          accommodate estimated future housing need by income category, the City shall
                          update and revise the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to establish and
                          codify land use designations/classifications that will meet the projected need for
                          the 2014-2021 planning period. Specifically, the City will amend the Zoning
                          Ordinance to establish a mixed use overlay zone and rezone identified sites in
                                                                   4-18

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
Section 6 of this Housing Element. The mixed-use overlay zone will permit by-
right residential development at a minimum density of 30 du/ac. To comply with
AB 2348, at least 50 percent of the remaining lower income need (693 units) will
be accommodated on sites designated for exclusively residential uses. Identified
sites to be rezoned exclusively residential will permit by-right residential
development to accommodate a minimum 20 du/ac to at least 30 du/ac as
indicated in Section 6.
To ensure the availability of adequate sites to meet the 2014-2021 RHNA and
by-right residential development in identified sites, the City will amend the Zoning
Ordinance to remove the CUP requirement for all multi-family developments
within the City. This ordinance will be adopted concurrent with Housing Element
adoption and will be revised prior to the start of the new planning period.
To encourage and facilitate the development of a variety of housing types, the
City offers development incentives including, but not limited to; (1) Regulatory
concessions/waivers; (2) Fee waivers/financial assistance; (3) Streamlined
entitlement review/approvals; (4) Technical assistance for financing/funding of
development projects. Assistance is prioritized for developments that provide
units for special needs groups including: large households, the elderly,
individuals with disabilities, including those with developmental disabilities, and
extremely low income residents. During the planning period the City will provide
information on housing opportunity sites identified in the Housing Element and
any additional areas of the City to interested developers.
The City will monitor the supply of underutilized sites annually and evaluate
whether the incentives described above are providing the necessary catalyst to
ensure development is occurring consistent with the intent of the program. As
necessary, the City will revise or add incentives and strategies to ensure infill
development remains a realistic and viable development strategy.
Program Objective: Provide appropriate land use designations/classifications
and maintain an inventory of suitable sites for residential development. Make the
vacant and underutilized residential sites inventory available on the City’s
website to non-profit and for-profit housing developers.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
Time Frame: Prior to October 2014; The City will monitor these sites annually
and report on outcomes in the Annual Report.
Program 16 - Lot Consolidation
A number of infill parcels especially those that are identified as opportunity sites
for mixed use development are smaller and would benefit from lot consolidation.
                                          4-19

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Adopted October 2013
                          Individually, some of these smaller lots may not support the development
                          densities that would facilitate mixed-use development. Through the joining (or
                          consolidation) of multiple parcels, more efficient development will be possible.
                          The City will provide technical assistance to property owners and developers in
                          support of lot consolidation including identifying opportunities for potential
                          consolidation and providing available funding and incentives to encourage
                          consolidation of parcels as appropriate. For example, the Planning Division will
                          utilize development, impact fee, processing and streamlining incentives, such as
                          reduction in setbacks, parking requirements, and other standards, deferral or
                          lowering of development fees to encourage densities, residential uses and lot
                          consolidation to promote more intense residential development in the Mixed-Use
                          Overlay Zone. The City will utilize its current initial pre-consultation meeting with
                          developers in order to further streamline projects that include lot consolidation.
                          Information on these financial and regulatory incentives will be made available on
                          the City’s website and at City Hall.
                          Program Objective: Encourage lot consolidation of smaller parcels to
                          accommodate projects at a minimum of 16 units per site.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
                          Time Frame: Following Housing Element certification
                          Goal 5: Remove Governmental Constraints
                          Policy 5.1: Continue to support changes to the City’s Zoning Ordinance as a
                          means to streamline the development process.
                          Policy 5.2: Continue to support reduced fees and/or development standards for
                          those developments that meet the criteria for being affordable.
                          Policy 5.2: Continue to encourage the use of energy-saving technology in the
                          design and construction of new housing.
                          Program 17 – Remove Development Constraints
                          City Staff will periodically review the development standards for the residential
                          zones to identify standards that may constrain the development of affordable
                          housing and housing for special groups, such as individuals with disabilities. The
                          City of Pico Rivera is flexible and is committed to working with developers to
                          build affordable units, which may require modifications to constraining standards.
                          The City will work with the developer through density bonuses or a PUD if
                                                                   4-20

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
necessary and will further review any standards identified in the Housing Element
as a constraint and alter them as necessary to ensure that the development of
affordable housing is feasible. In the interim, Staff will continue to, on a case by
case basis, identify ways that standards can be relaxed if it is determined that
such requirements are in any way impeding the development of affordable
housing or housing for residents with disabilities. The City will also continue to
provide development standard modifications, streamlined processing for
applications related to the creation of affordable housing, and will offer fee
modifications for projects proposing affordable units that are required to apply for
variations to the existing development standards. Incentives for extremely low
income housing will be encouraged to prioritize the development of units for this
income group.
Program Objective: On a bi-annual basis, the City will review development
standards, to ensure that the development of lower income housing can occur.
Revise the development code to address all constraints identified in Section 5 of
the Housing Element. Staff will continue to use flexible development standards to
facilitate the development of affordable housing through promotion of maximum
development densities.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development
Time Frame: 2014-2021
Program 18 - Density Bonus
To facilitate development, the City offers developers the opportunity of a Density
Bonus Program which is a density increase of 35 percent plus development
incentives for qualified affordable projects. To be eligible for the Program, the
affordable project must contain: (1) at least 10 percent of the units reserved for
low income households; or (2) at least 5 percent reserved for very low income
households; or (3) units reserved for senior households. The units must remain
affordable for at least 30 years if the density bonus is granted. Developers are
informed of the Density Bonus Program through contact with Community and
Economic Development Department staff members and handouts.
Program Objective: Inform and encourage developers to utilize the density
bonus program by promoting the program on the City’s website and by offering
Staff assistance at City Hall.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department
Time Frame: 2014-2021
                                         4-21

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          Program 19 - Streamline Processing
                          The City continues to monitor permit processing times to ensure the fastest
                          possible turnaround for applications. The City will modify the application packet,
                          as appropriate, to simplify and streamline the application process. Through the
                          current update of the City’s General Plan, the City's will computerize its
                          comprehensive zoning map and general plan land use map using enhanced
                          geographic information systems technology.
                          Program Objective: Continue to monitor permit processing times and
                          investigate ways to streamline the process. Continue to digitize information
                          including building permits and the Zoning Code.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Planning Division
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                          Program 20 – Prioritize Housing Program Activities
                          The City prioritizes housing program activities to address identified housing
                          needs. Specifically, priority has been given to use of rehabilitation loans and
                          grant monies to maintain Pico Rivera’s stable yet aging housing stock. In
                          addition, the City uses CDBG funding sources to assist in improvements and
                          expansions to the City’s existing housing stock. Similarly, funds are made
                          available (through the Section 8 program) to address renter over payment issues.
                          The City recognizes that housing priorities shift over time as housing needs
                          change. The characteristics of the City’s current housing need have been
                          identified through the Housing Needs Assessment specifically the analysis of the
                          special needs groups. Based on the needs analysis in this Housing Element,
                          there is a need to provide affordable rental units for large families. The City will
                          also prioritize its program activities to meet the needs of other special needs
                          groups, including extremely-low income households, and people with disabilities
                          including developmental disabilities.
                          Program Objective: Identify housing needs and prioritize housing program
                          activities to meet those needs through annual updates to the City’s Consolidated
                          Plan.
                          Funding Source: Section 8, CDBG
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Housing Division
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                                                                   4-22

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                          2014-2021 Housing Element
Program 21 - Planning and Development Fees
The City conducts periodic internal reviews of planning and development fees to
ensure that the fees are not excessive and are appropriate to cover the cost of
services provided. The City conducts regular internal reviews of planning and
development fees to ensure that the fees are not excessive and are appropriate
to cover the cost of services provided. To further reduce development costs, Pico
Rivera, offers a streamlined permitting process for residential projects, to
minimize the holding and labor costs assumed by the project applicant.
Program Objective: Continue to conduct annual reviews of planning and
development fees.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Planning Division
Time Frame: 2014-2021
Program 22 - Water & Sewer Service Providers
Pursuant to Chapter 727, Statues of 2005 (SB 1087), the City of Pico Rivera is
required to deliver its adopted housing element and any amendments thereto to
local water and sewer service providers. This legislation allows for coordination
between the City and water and sewer providers when considering approval of
new residential projects, to ensure that the providers have an opportunity to
provide input on the Element. Additionally, review of the Housing Element
ensures that priority for water and sewer services is granted to projects that
include units affordable to lower-income households.
Program Objective: Submit the adopted Housing Element to local water and
sewer providers for their review and input.
Funding Source: General Fund
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Planning Division; Public Works Department
Time Frame: 2014-2021
Goal 6: Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
Policy 6.1: Continue to promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless
of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color or the
presence of persons with disabilities.
Policy 6.2: Continue to promote greater awareness of tenant and landlord rights.
                                         4-23
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Adopted October 2013
                          Program 23 – Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities
                          Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583, the City of Pico Rivera is
                          obligated to remove potential and actual governmental constraints upon the
                          maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels and
                          for persons with disabilities. The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires
                          that cities and counties provide reasonable accommodation to rules, policies,
                          practices, and procedures where such accommodation may be necessary to
                          afford individuals with disabilities equal housing opportunities. Reasonable
                          accommodation provides a basis for residents with disabilities to request
                          flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations or, in some
                          instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or requirements from the local
                          government to ensure equal access to housing opportunities. Cities and counties
                          are required to consider requests for accommodations related to housing for
                          people with disabilities and provide the accommodation when it is determined to
                          be “reasonable” based on fair housing laws and case law interpreting the
                          statutes. The City of Pico Rivera encourages and promotes accessible housing
                          for persons with disabilities. This includes the retrofitting of existing dwelling units
                          and enforcement of the State accessibility standards for new residential
                          construction.
                          The City is committed to assisting residents in need of reasonable
                          accommodation and offers financial assistance through the Housing
                          Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Program, and will continue to direct eligible
                          residents to apply for funds. Applicants can apply for grants or a loan to complete
                          improvement projects that remove constraints to their living facilities. In general,
                          City Staff takes into consideration the provisions of the California Americans with
                          Disabilities Act (Cal ADA) in the review and approval of housing projects and
                          grants modifications and deviations from the Municipal Code to accommodate
                          the needs of persons with disabilities. The City has amended the Zoning Code to
                          provide formal reasonable accommodation procedures.
                          Program Objective: Administer the Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant
                          Program to assist households with persons with disabilities with architectural
                          modifications to their homes and continue to implement the provisions of the
                          California Americans with Disabilities Act (Cal ADA). Provide information in public
                          places regarding the City’s reasonable accommodation ordinance and the
                          Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Program.
                          Funding Source: General Fund
                          Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
                          Housing, Planning, and Building Divisions
                          Time Frame: 2014-2021
                                                                    4-24

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                        2014-2021 Housing Element
Program 24 – Fair Housing
The City will continue to contract with the Southern California Housing Rights
Center to provide residents with fair housing services using Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. The organization’s Fair Housing
Program is designed to raise awareness of fair housing laws that protect
individuals and families against housing discrimination. The organization
develops and distributes educational literature and resources that describe ways
to prevent housing injustices and applicable laws, and also offers free fair
housing law workshops for landlords, tenants, nonprofit organizations, and city
employees. The City will refer fair housing complaints to the Housing Rights
Center as appropriate. The City will assist in program outreach through
placement of fair housing program multilingual brochures at the public counter,
City library, post office, and other community locations.
Program Objective: Continue to assist households and refer fair housing
complaints to the Southern California Housing Rights Center
Funding Source: CDBG
Responsible Agency: Community and Economic Development Department,
Housing Division
Time Frame: 2014-2021
                                          4-25

2014-2021 Housing Element                                     Adopted October 2013
                          This page intentionally left blank.
                                        4-26
                    	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
Quantified Objectives
Affordable Housing Objectives
California Housing Element Law requires jurisdictions to estimate the number of
affordable housing opportunities that will be created over the planning period.
The quantified objectives for the 2014-2021 Housing Element presents the
anticipated and potential affordable housing development for the planning period
starting on January 1, 2014 and ending September 30, 2021.
It is important to note that while the goal of the quantified objectives section is to
show how the City will meet its remaining RHNA allocation, and based on the
premise that the City intends to make every effort to achieve these goals, Pico
Rivera cannot guarantee that these needs will be met given limited financial and
staff resources, and the increasing gap in affordability of housing resources and
incomes. Satisfaction of the City’s regional housing needs will partially depend on
the cooperation of private funding sources and resources of the State, Federal
and County programs that are used to support the needs of the extremely low-,
very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Additionally, outside
economic forces heavily influence the housing market. State law recognizes that
a locality may not be able to accommodate its regional fair share housing need.
Table 4-2 presents the City’s quantified objectives in three categories:
construction of new affordable units, substantial rehabilitation of substandard
units and the conservation of affordable housing. New construction of affordable
units focuses on the City’s ability to accommodate its combined remaining RHNA
allocation of 1,639 units (see Table 4-39) on land identified in the sites inventory.
It is important to note that this subcategory assumes optimum conditions for the
production of housing and does not take into account how environmental,
physical and market conditions influences the timing, type and cost of housing
production in a community.
In addition to new construction, the City anticipates that approximately 30 units
will be assisted annually through the Housing Rehabilitation Grant Program as
outlined in Section 2. As indicated in Table 4-27 there are 216 housing units at
risk of transitioning to market rate prices that the City is monitoring.
                                           4-27

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-2:
                          Quantified Objectives
                                                           Extremely        Very                               Above
                                                                                      Low      Moderate                       Total
                                                             Low (d)        Low                               Moderate
                          New Construction (a)                  214          214       265        283            663          1,639
                          Rehabilitation (b)                     0                       240                       0           240
                          Conservation/Preservation
                                                                 0            0               216                  0           216
                          (c)
                          Notes:
                          (a) Construction objectives represent the City’s combined RHNA need including the 2014-2021
                          allocation and AB 1233 carryover.
                          (b) Average 30 units per year (multiplied by 8 years) per the City’s 2010-2015 Consolidated Plan. Any
                          CDBG funding received during the planning period will be used to fund projects that improve and
                          maintain the quality of the City’s housing stock and residential infrastructure.       The rehabilitation
                          objective is consistent with the City’s Housing Plan.
                          (c) The conservation/ preservation objective is consistent with the City’s total count of affordable units
                          that could potentially be at-risk of converting to market rate (see Table 4-25).
                          (d) 50% of Very Low-Income Category
                                                                              4-28

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Profile
Assuring the availability of adequate housing for all social and economic sectors
of the present and future population is an important goal for Pico Rivera. To
achieve this goal requires an assessment of the housing needs of the community
and region. This section discusses the demographic, socio-economic, and
housing characteristics of the City of Pico Rivera in an effort to determine the
specific housing needs of the City and its residents.
Population Trends and Characteristics
Population Growth Trends
The 1990 U.S. Census reported that the City of Pico Rivera had a population of
59,177 persons. The number of residents grew to 63,428 by the year 2000,
marking an increase of 4,251 people in ten years. This was a 7.2 percent
increase. During the same period, Los Angeles County’s population grew
7.4 percent from 8,863,164 to 9,519,338. The City’s population growth rate was
similar to the County’s population growth rate between 1990 and 2000 in
comparison to the cities surrounding Pico Rivera (including Bellflower, Downey,
Montebello, Norwalk, and Whittier). The surrounding cities experienced
population growth rates ranging from a low of 2.6 percent in Bellflower to a high
of 17.4 in Downey with an average growth rate of 9.8 and a median average
population growth rate of 9.6 percent.
Based on the U.S. Census, in 2010 the City's population was 62,942, a
0.7 percent decrease from the population reported in 2000. In comparison to
Los Angeles County, the City’s growth rate was lower than the countywide
growth rate of 3.1 percent.
Overall, between 1990 and 2010, the total population growth in Pico Rivera was
6.3 percent. During this same period, the growth rate for Los Angeles County
was 10.7 percent. The growth rate for Pico Rivera was lower than the County’s
growth rate. The cities surrounding Pico Rivera experienced population growth
rates during this period ranging from a low of 4.9 percent in Montebello to a high
of 24 percent in Bellflower. Table 4-3 indicates population growth trends for
Pico Rivera and surrounding communities.
                                         4-29

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-3:
                          Population Growth Trends
                                                                                                    Percent
                                 Jurisdiction           1990               2000      2010        Change 1990-
                                                                                                      2010
                            Pico Rivera                59,177             63,428    62,942            6.3%
                            Bellflower                 61,815             63,428    76,616           23.9%
                            Downey                     91,444            107,323   111,772           22.2%
                            Montebello                 59,564             62,150    62,500            4.9%
                            Norwalk                    94,279            103,298   105,549           11.9%
                            Whittier                   77,671             83,680    85,331            9.9%
                            Los Angeles County       8,863,164          9,519,338 9,818,605          10.7%
                          Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
                          Age Characteristics
                          Age distribution is an important indicator for determining the future demand for
                          housing types in the City. Traditional assumptions are that the young adult
                          population (20 to 34 years old) has a propensity for choosing apartments, low to
                          moderate priced condominiums, and smaller single-family units. The adult
                          population (35 to 65 years old) is the primary market for moderate to high-end
                          apartments, condominiums, and larger single-family homes. This age group
                          traditionally has higher incomes and larger household sizes. The senior
                          population (65 years and older) generates demand for low to moderate cost
                          apartments and condominiums, group quarters, and mobile homes. Table 4-4
                          shows the age distribution of the population of the City of Pico Rivera in 2010,
                          and the proportionate age distribution of Los Angeles County residents in 2010.
                          According to the 2010 Census, Los Angeles County, as a whole, can be
                          characterized as having a young population (median age of 34.8 years in 2010).
                          Pico Rivera follows this trend with a median age of 34 years in 2010. In
                          Pico Rivera, preschool and school age residents comprised 30 percent of the
                          population in 2010. Young adults between the ages of 25 and 44 comprised
                          35 percent of the population. Finally, senior residents, ages 65 years and older,
                          comprised 12.1 percent of the total population. As the majority of the population
                          is school age or considered to be a young adult, it is evident that Pico Rivera is
                          predominately made up of families.
                                                                       4-30
                      	 Adopted October 2013                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-4:
Age Distribution
                                                             2010
           Age Group                   Los Angeles County                Pico Rivera
                                     Population      Percent      Population       Percent
  Preschool, under 5 years             645,793         6.6%          4,262           6.8%
  School Age, 5-19 years              2,066,165       21.1%         14,702          23.4%
  College Age, 20 to 24 years          752,788         7.7%          4,799           7.6%
  Young Adults, 25 to 44 years        2,906,057       29.6%         17,225          27.4%
  Middle Age, 45 to 64 years          2,382,103       24.2%         14,323          22.7%
  Senior Citizens, 65 and over        1,065,699       10.9%          7,631          12.1%
  Total                               9,818,605       100%          62,942          100%
  Median Age                                    34.8                         34.0
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 Demographic Profile Data.
Race and Ethnicity
The racial and ethnic composition of a community affects housing needs due to
the particular household characteristics of different groups. Table 4-5 shows the
changes in the racial/ethnic composition of Pico Rivera residents between 2000
and 2010.
In Pico Rivera, between 2000 and 2010, there was a major and continuing shift in
the racial/ethnic composition of the population. The greatest shift, reflecting a
regional trend, has been the growth and predominance of the Hispanic
population group. In 2010, the Hispanic population made up 91.2 percent of the
total population, a 2.9 percent increase from 2000.
In addition to this trend, between 2000 and 2010, the Black (African-American)
population increased by 0.3 percent, and the Asian/Pacific Islander population
decreased by 0.1 percent. The 2010 Census identified 602 Black, and 1,656
Asian/Pacific Islander residents in the City. In 2010 the U.S Census also reports
that 871 people identified as American Indian a small increase from 859 persons
in 2000.
                                               4-31
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                               Adopted October 2013
                           Table 4-5:
                           Racial and Ethnic Change
                                                                            2000                                2010
                                  Race/Ethnicity
                                                                 Persons            Percent          Persons             Percent
                          Hispanic or Latino (a)                   56,000            88.3%            57,400              91.2%
                          White Alone                              31,360            49.4%            37,411              59.4%
                          Black or African American
                                                                    450               0.7%              602                1.0%
                          Alone
                          American Indian and Alaska
                                                                    859               1.4%              871                1.4%
                          Native Alone
                          Asian/Pacific Islander Alone             1,759              2.7%             1,656               2.6%
                          Some Other Race Alone                    25,551            40.3%            20,069              31.9%
                           Source: U.S. Census 2000 Summary File 1 (SF 1) - Sample Data and U.S. Census Bureau 2010
                           Summary File 2 (SF 2) – Sample Data.
                           Notes:
                           (a)
                               Those reporting that they are of Hispanic origin may be of any race and are, therefore, included in
                               one of the race categories.
                           Employment
                           The 2010 U.S. Census reports that there were 29,562 people in the Pico Rivera
                           labor force. As shown in Table 4-6, there were 27,480 Pico Rivera residents
                           employed, indicating an unemployment rate of 7.0 percent. Out of the six
                           occupational categories listed in Table 4-6, 17.6 percent of the employed worked
                           in educational services, and health care and social assistance occupations. The
                           next highest category (with 11.8 percent of the employed) is manufacturing.
                           Generally, pay compensation for managerial, professional and related
                           occupations are significantly higher than all of the other occupation categories.
                           However, because the categories listed below are so broad, it is difficult to draw
                           more specific conclusions.
                           The construction industry has a 6.0 percent share of the employed labor force for
                           the City. Current industry trends in Southern California suggest a significant drop
                           in construction industry employment. The residential construction industry,
                           although recently booming, has stalled and shrunk due to the contracting of the
                           housing market as of the writing of this document. The education, health and
                           social services industry, however, has been growing and is expected to continue
                           to grow as long as the State population continues to grow and the aging “baby
                           boomer” population continues to grow.
                                                                               4-32

                        	 Adopted October 2013                                   2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-6:
Employment by Sector
                             Industry Sector                       Jobs  Percent
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining              114    0.4%
Construction                                                      1,785    6.0%
Educational services, and health care and social assistance       5,216   17.6%
Manufacturing                                                     3,496   11.8%
Wholesale trade                                                   1,444    4.9%
Retail trade                                                      3,224   10.9%
Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                     2,554    8.6%
Information                                                         557    1.9%
Finance and insurance, real estate and rental leasing             1,617    5.5%
Professional, scientific, management, and administrative services 1,963    6.6%
Arts, entertainment and recreation                                2,468    8.3%
Public administration                                             1,222    4.1%
Other professions                                                 1,820    6.2%
Total (civilian employed population)                              27,480  93.0%
Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates.
Household Characteristics
An analysis of household characteristics provides important information on the
housing needs of the community. Income and affordability are best measured at
the household level, as are the special needs of certain groups, such as large
families, female-headed households or very low-income households. For
example, if a City has a substantial number of young families whose incomes
preclude the option of buying a home due to local housing costs; it may wish to
initiate a homebuyer assistance program.
Household Composition and Size
The Bureau of the Census defines a "household" as all persons who occupy a
housing unit, which may include single persons living alone, families related
through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons sharing living quarters. Persons
living in retirement or convalescent homes, dormitories, or other group living
situations are not considered households. The characteristics of the households
in a City are important indicators of the type of housing needed in that
community.
According to the 2010 U.S. Census, there were 16,566 households in the City of
Pico Rivera with an average household size of 3.77 persons. Of these
households, 13,647 (approximately 82 percent) were families. Generally, Pico
                                                   4-33
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Rivera was among the leading cities in the region with an overwhelming majority
                          of family households. In comparison, in 2010, the Los Angeles County family
                          households comprised 67.7 percent of all households. Single-person households
                          also had a significant presence in the City. In 2010, 13.7 percent of all
                          households in Pico Rivera were single-person households. The remaining
                          3.9 percent of households were unrelated non-family households, which consist
                          of households with unrelated persons living together. Household characteristics
                          are shown in Table 4-7.
                          Table 4-7:
                          Pico Rivera Household Characteristics
                                                              2000                   2010             Percent
                               Household Type
                                                    Households      Percent Households    Percent     Change
                            Families                   13,872        84.2%    13,647       82.4%        -1.6%
                               With children            7,167        43.5%    6,115        36.9%       -14.7%
                               Without children         6,705        40.7%    7,532        45.5%        12.3%
                            Singles                     2,109        12.8%    2,276        13.7%         7.9%
                            Other non-families           487          3.0%     643          3.9%        32.0%
                            Total Households           16,468        100%     16,566       100%          0.6%
                            Average Household
                                                               3.83                  3.77
                            Size
                            Average Family Size                4.12                  4.10
                          Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2000 and 2010.
                          Household size is an important indicator of a source of population growth. A
                          City's average household size is also an indicator of the character and size of
                          households, which represent the most basic unit of demand for housing.
                          Although there can be more than one household in a housing unit, which is a
                          trend that is increasing regionally, the measure of persons per household
                          provides not only an indication of the number of persons residing in a household
                          organizing unit, but the number of persons living in a housing unit. Average
                          household size can be both a result and indicator of housing affordability and
                          other household economic conditions.
                          As indicated in Table 4-7, between 2000 and 2010, the average household size
                          in Pico Rivera decreased from 3.83 to 3.77 persons per household. However, as
                          noted in Table 4-8, among neighboring cities, Pico Rivera had the highest
                          persons per household compared to its neighboring cities. The persons per
                          household among neighboring cities range from a low of 2.96 persons per
                          household in the City of Whittier to a high of 3.73 persons per household in the
                          City of Norwalk. The County of Los Angeles had 2.97 persons per household in
                          2010.
                                                                     4-34
                    	 Adopted October 2013                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-8:
Average Household Size
                   City                                    Persons Per Household
                   Pico Rivera                                      3.77
                   Bellflower                                       3.13
                   Downey                                           3.27
                   Montebello                                       3.27
                   Norwalk                                          3.73
                   Whittier                                         2.96
                   Los Angeles County                               2.97
Source: U.S. Census Bureau: State and County QuickFacts, 2010.
Overcrowding
The federal government defines an overcrowded household as one with more
than one occupant per room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and
porches. An overcrowded household results from either a lack of affordable
housing (which forces more than one household to live together) and/or a lack of
available housing units of adequate size.
According to the 2010 American Community Survey, 2,559 households, or 15.5
percent of all households in Pico Rivera were overcrowded. Of this total
approximately 1,193 were renter households, representing 46.6 percent of all
overcrowded households and 23.3 percent of all renter households. The incident
of overcrowded households can lead to neighborhood deterioration due to the
intensive use of individual housing units leading to excessive wear and tear, and
the potential cumulative overburdening of community infrastructure and service
capacity. Furthermore, overcrowding in neighborhoods can lead to an overall
decline in social cohesion and environmental quality. Such decline can often
spread geographically and impact the quality of life and the economic value of
property and the vitality of commerce within a City.
Table 4-9:
Overcrowding by Tenure
                Total                                            Severely
                             Overcrowded
  Tenure      Housing                         Percentage       Overcrowded     Percentage
                              Households
                Units                                          Households
  Renters       5,122            849             16.6%             344             6.7%
  Owners       11,355            980             8.6%              386             3.4%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates.
                                            4-35
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                             Adopted October 2013
                          Household Income and Income Distribution
                          Assessing income groups is a major component of evaluating housing
                          affordability. According to the 2010 Census, the median household income in
                          Pico Rivera was $57,594 per year. The median household income for the County
                          of Los Angeles was less but close to the City median at $55,476 per year.
                          Among neighboring cities, the median household income ranged from a low of
                          $39,167 in Bell Gardens to a high of $60,488 in Norwalk.
                          The State Department of Housing and Community Development developed the
                          following income categories based on the Median Family Income (MFI) of a
                          Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) established by the U.S. Department of
                          Housing and Urban Development:
                             Very Low-Income: 50 percent or less of the area MFI;
                             Low-Income: between 51 and 80 percent of the area MFI;
                             Moderate-Income: between 81 and 120 percent of the area MFI;
                             Upper-Income: greater than 120 percent of the area MFI.
                          The 2010 MFI for the Los Angeles County MSA ($63,000) was used to
                          interpolate the City's income distribution from the Census according to the above
                          categories. The income distribution of the City of Pico Rivera, based on 2010
                          Census data, is presented in Table 4-10. In 2010, it is estimated that:
                          8.8 percent of the households earned less than $14,999 annually; 21.6 percent
                          earned between $15,000 and $34,999 annually; 13.5 percent earned between
                          $35,000 and $49,999 annually; 20.8 percent earned between $50,000 and
                          $74,999 annually; and 35.3 percent earned above $75,000 annually.
                          Table 4-10:
                          Pico Rivera Household Income – 2010
                            Income Level                         No. of Households        % of Total
                            < $10,000                                  639                   3.9%
                            $10,000 - $14,999                          816                   4.9%
                            $15,000 - $24,999                        1,797                  10.9%
                            $25,000 - $34,999                        1,755                  10.7%
                            $35,000 - $49,999                        2,227                  13.5%
                            $50,000 - $74,999                        3,431                  20.8%
                            $75,000 - $99,999                        2,785                  16.9%
                            $100,000 - $149,000                      2,283                  13.9%
                            $150,000 +                                 744                   4.5%
                            Total Reporting                         16,477                   100%
                                                                   4-36

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates.
Housing Overpayment
State and Federal standards indicate that a household paying more than
30 percent of its income for housing is overpaying. Overpayment for housing can
cause an imbalance on the remainder of a household’s budget. In 2010, there
were 16,477 total households paying mortgage or rent, of those households
45.5 percent were overpaying for housing according to the Census. Of these
overpaying households, 4,474 (59.6 percent) were households with a mortgage,
while the remaining 3,031 households (40.4 percent) were in renter-occupied
units. Table 4-11 summarizes housing overpayment statistics by tenure for the
City of Pico Rivera and also LA County.
Table 4-11:
Summary of Housing Overpayment in Pico Rivera
                                                                              LA County
  Overpayment                                 Households       Percent
                                                                               Percent
  Owners with mortgage                           11,355           --               --
    Overpayment (>30% income on housing)         4,474          39.4%           55.1%
  Occupied units paying rent                      5,122           --               --
    Overpayment (>30% income on housing)         3,031          59.2%           56.5%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates.
Special Needs Groups
State law recognizes that certain households have more difficulty in finding
adequate and affordable housing due to special circumstances. Special needs
populations include the elderly, persons with disabilities, female headed
households, large households and farm workers. In addition, many often have
lower incomes as a result of their condition. Table 4-12 summarizes the special
needs populations in Pico Rivera. Each of these population groups, as well as
their housing needs is described below.
Table 4-12:
Special Needs Groups
  Special Needs Group                       Persons       Households         Percent (a)
  TOTAL Persons or Households in
                                             62,517          16,328
  City
  Large Households (5+ persons)                               4,676             28.6%
  Renter                                                      1,347            (28.8%)
  Owner                                                       3,329            (71.2%)
                                            4-37

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                               Adopted October 2013
                             Special Needs Group                              Persons         Households           Percent (a)
                             Seniors (65+)                                       7,481                                12.0%
                             With a Disability                                   2,582                               (34.0%)
                             Senior Households                                                    4,089               25.0%
                             Renter                                                                723               (17.7%)
                             Owner                                                                3,366              (82.3%)
                             Persons with Disability                             6,481                                10.4%
                             Female-Headed Households                                             2,944               18.0%
                             with Related Children                                                1,246              (42.3%)
                             Farm workers (b)                                     154                                 0.24%
                            Source: 2008-2010 American Community Survey Three-Year Estimates.
                          Notes:
                          (a)
                              Numbers in ( ) reflect the percent of the special needs group and not the percent of the total City
                              population/ households. For example, the City’s large households the number of renter versus owner
                              households is divided by the total number of large households in the City.
                          (b)
                              Persons employed in Agriculture, Farming, Forestry or Fishing Occupations.
                          Elderly
                          The special housing needs of the elderly are an important concern in
                          Pico Rivera. Many of the elderly residents in the City are retired and living on a
                          fixed low-income, which puts them at greater risk of impaction, or housing
                          overpayment. In addition, the elderly maintain special needs related to housing
                          construction and location. The elderly often require ramps, handrails, lower
                          cupboards and counters to allow greater access and mobility. In terms of
                          location, because of limited mobility, the elderly typically need access to service
                          facilities (i.e., medical and shopping) and public transit facilities.
                          As reported in the 2008-2010 American Community Survey Three-Year
                          Estimates, 7,481 City residents, or 12 percent of the total population, were
                          65 years old or older. In terms of tenure, 3,366 owner-occupied and 723 renter-
                          occupied units were headed by occupants 65 years old or older. Many elderly
                          persons have limited income potential, as they are most often retired and have
                          fixed incomes. While the vast majority of seniors are homeowners, the number
                          of lower income senior renters who are overpaying for housing remains a general
                          concern moving into the 2014-2021 planning period. The City is aware of this
                          issue and has worked with developers in the past to provide affordable rental
                          housing specifically for seniors. There are multiple senior housing developments
                          and health care centers in Pico Rivera that offer affordable units and special
                          services for the elderly including, the El Rancho Vista Health Care Center, the
                          Riviera Health Care Center, and the Colonial Gardens Nursing Home. Two
                          senior housing developments, Verner Villa (75 units) and Telacu Del Rio
                                                                              4-38

                     	 Adopted October 2013                                         2014-2021 Housing Element
(69 units) receive federal assistance through the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD).
The City will continue to work with developers to provide affordable housing
opportunities for senior residents and will continue to offer funding for home
modifications through the Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Program.
Persons with Disabilities
Physical and mental disabilities can hinder access to traditionally designed
housing units as well as potentially limit the ability to earn adequate income. As
shown in Table 4-13, the 2008-2010 American Community Survey Estimates
indicates that 15 percent of Pico Rivera’s population age 18 years and older has
some form of work or mobility/self-care disability. A total of 12.8 percent of the
City’s population age 18 years and over has one or more disabilities.
Although no current comparisons of disability with income, household size, or
race/ethnicity are available, it is reasonable to assume that a substantial portion
of persons with disabilities would have annual incomes within Federal Section 8
income limits, especially those households not in the labor force. Furthermore,
many lower-income persons with disabilities are likely to require housing
assistance. Their housing needs are further compounded by design issues and
location requirements, which can often be costly. For example, special needs of
households with wheelchair-bound or semi-ambulatory individuals may require
ramps, holding bars, special bathroom designs, wider doorways, lower cabinets,
elevators, and other interior and exterior design features.
Housing opportunities for individuals with disabilities can be addressed through
the provision of affordable, barrier-free housing. Rehabilitation assistance can be
targeted toward renters and homeowners with disabilities for unit modification to
improve accessibility.
Table 4-13:
Disability Status of Non-Institutionalized Persons
  Age and Disability Status                        Number           Percent(d)
  Persons 18-64 Years Old with Disability           3,319               8.6%
   With Employment Disability (a)                   1,329               3.4%
   Mobility/Self-Care (b)                           2,763               7.1%
   Sensory, Physical & Mental (c)                   1,161               3.0%
  Persons 65 Years and Over with Disability         2,582              34.5%
   With Employment Disability (a)                     935              12.5%
   Mobility/Self-Care(b)                            1,912              25.6%
   Sensory, Physical & Mental (c)                   1,397              18.7%
                                             4-39

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                             Adopted October 2013
                              Age and Disability Status                                Number                Percent(d)
                              Total Persons, 18 Years and Over with
                                                                                         5,901
                              Disability
                                                                                         2,264
                               With Employment Disability (a)
                                                                                         4,675
                               Mobility/Self-Care (b)
                                                                                         2,558
                               Sensory, Physical & Mental (c)
                          Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2008 - 2010 American Community Survey.
                          Notes:
                          (a)
                               Census data that represents persons with cognitive disability.
                          (b)
                              Census data that represents persons with self-care and an independent living difficulty.
                          (c)
                              Census data that represents persons with hearing and vision difficulty.
                          (d)
                              Percent of persons with disabilities of the represented population.
                          Persons with Developmental Disabilities
                          According to Section 4512 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code a
                          "Developmental disability" means a disability that originates before an individual
                          attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
                          constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental
                          retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include
                          disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require
                          treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall
                          not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
                          Many persons with developmental disabilities can live and work independently
                          within a conventional housing environment. Individuals who have more severe
                          developmental disabilities may require a group living environment where
                          supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an
                          institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are
                          provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first
                          issue in supportive housing for individuals with developmental disabilities is the
                          transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
                          independence as an adult.
                          The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides
                          community based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental
                          disabilities and their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers,
                          four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The Eastern
                          Los Angeles Regional Center is one of 21 regional centers in the State of
                          California that provides point of entry to services for people with developmental
                          disabilities in Pico Rivera. The center is a private, non-profit community agency
                          that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to
                          individuals with developmental disabilities and their families.
                                                                              4-40

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-14 provides information from the Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center
on the number of individuals with developmental disabilities in the City of
Pico Rivera. In 2013, there were approximately 549 individuals actively utilizing
services at the Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center for a developmental
disability.
Table 4-14:
Residents with Developmental Disabilities by Age
                   0-14         15-22          23-54 55-65       65 +
  Age Group                                                                  Total
                  Years         Years          Years Years      Years
                    203          124            204    15          3          549
Source: Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center, 2013.
To assist with any housing needs for persons with developmental disabilities, the
City will implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with
the Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center and encourage housing providers to
designate a portion of new affordable housing developments for persons with
disabilities, especially persons with developmental disabilities, and pursue
funding sources designated for persons with special needs and disabilities.
Large Households
The 2010 Census reports that 4,676 households (28.6 percent) in the City of Pico
Rivera are large households. Large households are defined as those with five or
more members. The special needs of this household type are based on the
potential limited availability of adequately sized, affordable housing units. The
2010 Census also indicates that 1,347 large households are renter households,
representing 28.8 percent of all large households and 26.0 percent of all renter
households in the City.
There are approximately 14,097 housing units in the City with four or more
bedrooms. There are an additional 1,467 3-bedroom housing units.
Cumulatively, over two-thirds of the City’s housing stock has three bedrooms or
more. However, due to the fact that some large families often have limited
financial resources, these households may be more vulnerable to overcrowded
living conditions. The housing needs of large households can be addressed
through the expansion of existing smaller units, and the provision of new,
affordably-priced larger units. The fact that the majority of unit overcrowding
occurs in the City's rental housing stock indicates the need for larger rental units
and/or rental subsidies to allow for large households to afford adequately sized
units. The City has included a housing program to specifically address the needs
of this group in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan.
                                              4-41

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                Adopted October 2013
                          Female-Headed Households
                          Single-parent households often require special consideration and assistance due
                          to their greater need for affordable and accessible day care, health care, and
                          other supportive services. In particular, many female-headed households with
                          children are susceptible to having lower incomes than similar two-parent
                          households. Single, female mothers also face social marginalization pressures
                          that often limit their occupational choices, housing options and access to
                          supportive services.
                          The 2008–2010 American Community Survey indicates that there are
                          2,944 female-headed households in the City of Pico Rivera, of which 1,246 have
                          children under the age of 18. These numbers account for approximately 18
                          percent and 7.6 percent, respectively, of all households in the City. In the County,
                          there are 491,428 female – headed households with no husband present, of
                          which 261,586 have children under the age of 18. These numbers account for
                          approximately 22 percent and 12 percent, respectively, of all households in the
                          County. The percentage of female-headed households within the City is lower
                          than that of County as a whole.
                          Farm Workers
                          Farm workers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are
                          earned through seasonal agricultural work. Farm workers have special housing
                          needs because they earn lower incomes than many other workers and move
                          throughout the year from one harvest location to the next.
                          The 2008–2010 American Community Survey reported that less than one
                          percent of the City of Pico Rivera’s residents (154 persons) were employed in
                          Agriculture, Farming, Forestry, and Fishing occupations. Due to Pico Rivera’s
                          urban setting, the non-existence of agricultural activities in the City, and nominal
                          farm worker population, the special housing needs of this group can generally be
                          addressed through overall programs for housing affordability.
                          Extremely Low-Income Households
                          According to 2005–2009 CHAS data generated for the City, there were
                          approximately 2,525 very low-income households living in Pico Rivera. Very low-
                          income households are those households that earn 50 percent or less of the
                          median family income (MFI) for the statistical region in which they are located.
                          Extremely low-income households are those households which earn less than
                          30 percent of the MFI. There are approximately 2,400 extremely low income
                          households in Pico Rivera (renters and owners). Table 4-15, below, includes
                          data characterizing affordability and other housing problems in Pico Rivera for
                          various income groups.
                                                                 4-42

                       	 Adopted October 2013                                     2014-2021 Housing Element
There are limited opportunities to address the housing needs of extremely low-
income households in Pico Rivera. However, the needs of this special needs
group are taken into consideration and are generally addressed through the
City’s overall programs for housing affordability.
Table 4-15:
Housing Problems for All Households
     Household by Type, Income & Housing            Total   Total        Total
                      Problem                      Renters Owners     Households
   Extremely Low-Income (0-30% MFI)                 1,415    985         2,400
   # with any housing problems                      1,110    765         1,875
   # with cost burden > 30%                          150     175          325
   # with cost burden > 50%                          935     565         1,500
   Very Low-Income (31-50% MFI)                     1,235   1,290        2.525
   # with any housing problems                      1,075    700         1,775
   # with cost burden > 30%                          670     145          815
   # with cost burden > 50%                          330     545          875
   Low-Income (51-80% MFI)                          1,150   2,050        3,200
   # with any housing problems                       745    1,030        1,775
   # with cost burden > 30%                          550     455         1,005
   # with cost burden > 50%                           25     445          470
   Moderate-Income (81% + MFI)                      1,335   6,780        8,115
   # with any housing problems (a)                   N/A     N/A          N/A
   # with cost burden > 30%                            4     535          539
   # with cost burden > 50%                            0     205          205
   Total Households                                 5,135  11,105       16,240
   # with any housing problems                      2,930   2,495        5,425
   # with cost burden > 30%                         1,374   1,310        2,684
   # with cost burden > 50%                         1,290   1,760        3,050
Source: CHAS Data Book, 2005 - 2009.
Notes:
(e)
    Data Not Available.
Homeless Persons
During the 2013 Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count volunteers observed
24 homeless individuals along with 34 vehicles/tents/make-shift shelters that may
have sheltered homeless persons in the City of Pico Rivera. Based on these
numbers, City staff estimates the number of homeless within Pico Rivera to be
58 to 92 persons. The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) is
currently in the process of generating the average number of homeless persons
that reside in cars, vans, campers/RVs, tents and make-shift shelters, which will
be multiplied by the number of the subject vehicles/shelters observed within the
                                              4-43

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                       Adopted October 2013
                          City during the night of the Homeless Count (January 29, 2013 from 8:45 p.m. to
                          1:00 a.m.). The full homeless count report will be released in May or June 2013.
                          Emergency Shelters and Transitional and Supportive
                          Housing
                          There are currently no emergency shelters or transitional housing facilities in the
                          City of Pico Rivera. The additional emergency shelters and transitional housing
                          facilities are available in the nearby Cities of Bell, Long Beach, Santa Ana and
                          Downtown Los Angeles. These facilities provide temporary shelter and some
                          services for individuals to help them prepare for re-entering market rate rental
                          housing. Table 4-16 lists homeless services and facilities in the region.
                          Table 4-16:
                          Inventory of Homeless Services and Facilities in the Region
                             Organization                    Services Provided
                             American Red Cross              Provides emergency shelters in an event of a disaster.
                             6706 Friends Avenue
                             Whittier, CA 90601
                             Southern California Alcohol and Emergency shelter for battered, substance abusing
                               Drug Programs, Inc.           women and women with children.
                             Angel Step Inn
                             Address: Confidential Site
                             Downey, CA 90239
                             Salvation Army Bell Shelter     Temporary emergency housing and support services for
                             5600 Rickenbacker Rd. #2d       individuals. Services include; general program referral
                                                             and counseling, emergency shelter vouchers,
                             Bell, CA 90201
                                                             transportation assistance, mental health services, food
                             (323) 262-1804                  and clothing distribution, and rental and utility payment
                                                             assistance.
                             Christian Outreach Appeal       Provides programs and informational resources for
                             515 E. Third Street             women and single mothers of jobs, training, and housing
                                                             opportunities.
                             Long Beach, CA 90802
                             (562) 436-9877
                             Catholic Charities –            Provides transitional housing for homeless men, women
                               Family Shelter                and children. Single residents must be elderly or have a
                             123 East 14th.                  disability. Stays of up to 45 days are permitted.
                             Long Beach, CA 90813
                             (562) 591-1351
                             County of Los Angeles,          Program offers short-term assistance to individuals that
                               Department of                 are soon to lose their homes or are recently homeless.
                               Consumer Affairs              This program is not designed to assist chronically
                             The Homelessness Prevention     homeless individuals.
                               and Rapid Re-Housing
                               Program (HPRP)
                             500 W. Temple Street,
                               Room B-96
                             Los Angeles, CA 90012
                                                                     4-44

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                                     2014-2021 Housing Element
Organization                          Services Provided
Family Crisis Center                  Provides beds for up to 15 women with children under
Confidential Location                 18 who are victims of domestic violence. Shelter for
                                      adolescents at risk of becoming homeless is also
Redondo Beach
                                      provided. Services include referrals to homeless
(310) 792-5900                        shelters and outpatient counseling. Stays of up to 6
                                      months are permitted.
Harbor Interfaith Shelter             Provides 20 single-bedroom units for families and
670 W 9th Street                      children for up to 90 days. Provides food services to
                                      the public.
San Pedro, CA 90732
(310) 831-0589
House of Yahweh                       Provides transitional housing with 10 trailer units for
4430 West 147th Street                families with children for up to 2 years. Provides food
                                      services to public.
Lawndale, CA 90260
(310) 675-1384
Interfaith Food Center                Programs provide supportive services to tackle the root
14545 Leffingwell Road                causes of homelessness through counseling, education
                                      and job training and support. Also, provides food
Whittier, CA 90604
                                      services consisting of bags of groceries, sack lunches,
                                      prepared meals and food distribution to low-income
                                      individuals and families.
Long Beach Rescue Mission             Provides shelter and a 12-month substance abuse
1335 Pacific Avenue                   program for men and women. Up to 120 beds are
                                      provided. The length of stay varies. Provides food
Long Beach, CA 90801
                                      services to the public.
(562) 591-1292
L.A. Center for Alcohol & Drug        Offers New Vision Program, a six month residential
  Abuse                               substance abuse treatment program for men and
11015 Bloomfield Avenue               women on parole, which includes a 60-day transitional
                                      phase and aftercare.
Santa Fe Springs, CA 90670
Los Angeles Homeless Services         Provides direct emergency services and transportation,
  Authority (LAHSA)                   emergency services and shelter referrals to homeless
811 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite         families and unaccompanied adults and youth,
  600                                 emergency assistance and referrals to social services
                                      agencies, and outreach services to homeless
Los Angeles, CA 90017
                                      encampment dwellers or homeless persons reported
                                      through their hotline.
PATH (People Assisting the            PATH Partners provides leadership and support to four
  Homeless) Partners                  partner organizations in the implementation of the
340 North Madison Avenue              Gateway Connections program, which is outlined in the
                                      Gateway Cities Homeless Action Plan.
Los Angeles, CA 90004
Presbyterian Intercommunity           A non-profit hospital providing health/medical services
  Hospital (PIH)                      through their Community Benefit initiative throughout
12401 Washington Boulevard            Service Planning Area 7 (SPA 7), of which Pico Rivera
                                      is a part. Included programs are their Charity Care
Whittier, CA 90602
                                      Program allowing for free and/or partial-pay care for
                                      those who qualify (includes those without insurance),
                                      Health Insurance Enrollment Assistance, Care Force
                                      One Mobile Health Unit Services bringing free to low-
                                      cost basic/preventative healthcare directly to those in
                                      need and Community Health Education courses/classes.
Salvation Army/                       A 124-bed facility that provides comprehensive services
  Transitional Living Center          for families in transition, most of whom are single
12000 E. Washington Boulevard         parents or victims of domestic violence and substance
                                      abuse.
Whittier, CA
Salvation Army                        Provides 286 beds for men and women for up to a stay
809 E. 5th St.                        of one year. Provides food services to the public.
Los Angeles, CA 90013
(213) 626-4786
                                             4-45
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                              Adopted October 2013
                             Organization                          Services Provided
                             Santa Fe Springs                      Provides 124 beds for women and children dealing with
                               Transitional Living Center          domestic violence and substance abuse. Services
                             Santa Fe Springs, CA                  provided include meals, child care, educational services,
                                                                   housing services, case management, and counseling.
                             Southern California Alcohol and       Provides addiction counseling and life skills education
                               Drug Programs, Inc.                 for mothers living in shelter plus care and permanent
                             The Women’s Council                   housing.
                             11500 Paramount Boulevard
                             Downey, CA 90241
                             Southern California Alcohol and       Residential treatment for pregnant and parenting women
                               Drug Programs, Inc.                 and their children.
                             La Casita
                             10603 Downey Avenue
                             Downey, CA 90241
                             Southern California Alcohol and       Alcohol/Drug addiction prevention counseling and
                               Drug Programs, Inc.                 recovery.
                             Positive Steps
                             11501 Dolan
                             Downey, CA 90241
                             Southern California Alcohol and       Alcohol/Drug addiction prevention counseling and
                               Drug Programs, Inc.                 recovery.
                             Los Angeles Area
                             11500 Paramount Boulevard
                             Downey, CA 90241
                             Southern California                   Provides direct referrals to housing shelters and
                               Rehabilitation Center               transitional housing services.
                             7830 Quill Drive, Suite D
                             Downey, CA 90242
                             Southern California Alcohol &         Focuses on prevention and treatment of substance
                               Drug Program                        abuse and related problems among underserved and
                             7348 Painter Avenue                   disadvantaged populations. Services also target co-
                                                                   occurring issues of homelessness, long-term welfare
                             Whittier, CA 90602
                                                                   dependence, criminality, HIV/AIDS, and domestic
                                                                   violence for the purposes of increasing the success of
                                                                   their treatment interventions.
                             Transitional Living Centers           Provides residential stay for up to 12 persons for
                             16119 Prairie Avenue                  chronically mentally ill persons.
                             Lawndale, CA 90260
                             (310) 542-4825
                             Whittier Area First Day Coalition     Provides 45 beds and includes education, employment
                             12426 Whittier Boulevard              training, healthcare, and counseling services.
                             Whittier, CA 90602
                             The Whole Child                       The Whole Child Housing Program provides community-
                             10155 Colima Road                     based housing and supportive services to eligible
                             Whittier, CA 90603                    homeless families with dependent children.
                             Women’s and Children’s                Provides medical services, legal services, counseling,
                               Crisis Shelter                      and housing services.
                             Women-In-Transition
                               Walk-In Center
                             Pico Rivera, CA
                          Source:    California Department of Housing and Community Development, City of Pico Rivera, 2013
                                                                           4-46

                     	 Adopted October 2013                                         2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Characteristics
A housing unit is defined as a house, apartment, or single-room occupied unit as
separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living
quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live and eat
separately from any other person in the building and which have direct access
from the outside of the building or through a common hall. A community's
housing stock is the compilation of all its housing units.
Housing Growth
According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, there are 17,000
dwelling units in Pico Rivera, an increase of 193 units (1.1 percent) since 2000.
The growth rate for the City is lower than the growth rate for the County overall
(5.4 percent). Compared to neighboring jurisdictions, Pico Rivera had a low
growth rate for the time period of 2000 to 2012. A comparison of housing growth
trends for Pico Rivera and neighboring jurisdictions is provided in Table 4-17.
Table 4-17:
Housing Growth Trends
                                          Housing Units             Change
  City or Jurisdiction
                                      2000              2010       2000-2010
  Pico Rivera                        16,807            17,000        1.1%
  Bellflower                        24,247             25,446        4.9%
  Downey                             34,749            34,836         0.3%
  Montebello                         19,416            19,980        2.9%
  Norwalk                            27,554            28,492         3.4%
  Whittier                           28,977            28,670        -1.0%
  Los Angeles County               3,270,909         3,449,489       5.4%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
Housing Type and Tenure
Table 4-18 provides characterization of the City's housing stock in 2000 and
2010 by unit type. The 2010 Census indicates that single-family detached
homes continue to be the predominant housing type in the City; however there is
growth occurring in condominium and apartment complexes with two to four
units. As the City is largely built out, most new housing development is occurring
as infill on underutilized parcels. According to the 2010 Census, the proportion of
owner-occupied households in Pico Rivera was 68.9 percent which is higher than
that of renter-occupied households at 31.1 percent.
                                             4-47

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-18:
                          Comparative Housing Unit Mix in 2000-2010
                                                                            2000                              2010
                            Housing Type                          Number         Percent of       Number of        Percent of
                                                                  of Units          Total             Units           Total
                            Single-Family
                            Detached                               12,634          93.1%             13,029           95.3%
                            Attached                                 934            6.9%               642             4.7%
                            Total                                  13,568          80.7%             13,671           80.4%
                            Multi-Family
                            2-4 Units                                337           12.7%               434            15.3%
                            5+ Units                               2,312           87.3%              2,399           84.7%
                            Total                                   2,649          15.8%              2,833           16.7%
                            Mobile Homes                             590            3.5%               496             2.9%
                            Total Housing Units                            16,807                            17,000
                            Total Occupied                         16,468           100%             16,477           100%
                            Owner-occupied                         11,587          70.4%             11,355           68.9%
                            Renter-occupied                         4,881          29.6%              5,122           31.1%
                            Vacancies                                339            2.0%               523            3.2%
                          Source: U.S. Census, 2000; U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
                          Notes:
                          (a)
                              The 2000 census includes recreational vehicles (RVs) and other non-permanent mobile homes in
                              its definition of "mobile homes - other." Department of Finance also includes manufactured housing
                              under the count of mobile homes.
                          Age and Condition of Housing Stock
                          Table 4-19 shows the age of the housing stock in Pico Rivera. In general,
                          housing over 30 years old is usually in need of some major rehabilitation, such as
                          a new roof, plumbing, etc.                     As indicated in Table 4-17, approximately
                          87.2 percent of Pico Rivera’s housing units were constructed prior to 1980 with a
                          significant portion (49.2 percent) constructed between 1950 and 1960. Typically,
                          units that are more than 30 years old, require preventative maintenance to avoid
                          major housing deterioration. Some households, such as senior households, who
                          are long time homeowners living on limited income, may not be able to afford the
                          cost of major repairs or renovations needed to maintain their property.
                          Assistance, however, is available through the City’s housing rehabilitation
                          assistance programs, including the Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant
                          Programs. These existing programs can help preserve the City's existing
                          affordable housing stock.
                                                                              4-48

                      	 Adopted October 2013                                       2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-19:
Age of Housing Stock
        Structures Built                            Number        Percent
        Total Housing Units(a)                       17,000        100%
        2005 or later                                  75           0.4%
        2000 to 2004                                  280          1.7%
        1990 to 1999                                  675          4.0%
        1980 to 1989                                 1,138         6.7%
        1970 to 1979                                 1,372         8.1%
        1960 to 1969                                 2,179         12.8%
        1950 to 1959                                 8,378         49.2%
        1940 to 1949                                 1,836         10.8%
        1939 or earlier                              1,067          6.3%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
Notes:
(b)
    Does not include mobile homes or manufactured housing units.
The Neighborhood Improvement Division is responsible for enforcing certain
provisions of the Municipal Code to ensure a safe, orderly, and aesthetically
pleasing community. Neighborhood Improvement Officers enforce violations on
private property, such as zoning violations, building code violations and public
nuisances. They focus on obtaining expeditious voluntary compliance in a fair
and impartial manner through continuous case monitoring and by providing
information and options to comply. The most common violations encountered
include, but are not limited to garage conversions, overgrown/dead vegetation,
junk/trash/debris, outdoor storage, canopy on driveway, trash cans in public view,
non-permitted construction or conversions, non-permitted signage, excessive
animals/illegal animals, non-permitted businesses, boats/trailers/RVs parked in
the front yard, and inoperable vehicles not stored in the garage. According to the
Division, there were approximately 3,780 residential property cases since 2006,
for an average of 630 cases per year. Per data from the U.S. Census, the City
estimates that units built between 1950-1960 (approximately 49 percent of the
City’s housing stock) are in need of minor rehabilitation, which may include new
interior and exterior paint job, weatherstripping, and minor roofing repairs. The
City estimates that housing units built prior to 1950 (approximately 17 percent of
the City’s housing stock) are in need of major rehabilitation, which may include
plumbing and electrical repairs, installing a new roof, or addressing structural
damage. The Housing Plan includes program to continue the implementation of
the City’s housing rehabilitation programs and code enforcement activities in
order to ensure the preservation of Pico Rivera’s housing stock.
                                               4-49

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                   Adopted October 2013
                          Housing Costs
                          Affordability is determined by comparing the cost of housing to the income of
                          local households. HUD defines affordable housing costs as contract rents or
                          mortgage payments, including taxes and insurance, but not utilities, that are
                          equal to or less than 30 percent of the gross income of very low-, low-, and
                          moderate-income households.
                          Households spending more than 30 percent of gross annual income on housing
                          experience a housing cost burden, which occurs when housing costs increase
                          faster than household income. When a household spends more than 30 percent
                          of its income on housing costs, it has less disposable income for other
                          necessities such as health care. Lower income households with a burdensome
                          housing cost are more likely to become homeless or experience overcrowding.
                          Homeowners with a housing cost burden have the option of selling the homes
                          and becoming renters. Renters, however, are vulnerable and subject to constant
                          changes in the housing market.
                          For purposes of determining housing affordability, the California Health and
                          Safety Code Section 50052.5 provides the following definition of affordable
                          housing cost based on the area median income (AMI), which is adjusted by
                          family size and income level for each multi-family income (MFI) range.
                          Table 4-20:
                          Affordable Housing Costs by Tenure
                           Income Level                                          Owner              Renters
                           Extremely Low-Income(0-30% MFI)                   30% of 30% AMI      30% of 30% AMI
                           Very Low-Income (0-50% MFI)                       30% of 50% AMI      30% of 50% AMI
                           Low-Income (51-80% MFI)                           30% of 70% AMI      30% of 60% AMI
                           Moderate-Income (81-120% MFI)                    35% of 110% AMI     30% of 110% AMI
                          Source: California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5
                          For Sale Housing
                          The 2010 Census documents a median housing unit value of $271,000 in Pico
                          Rivera. Table 4-21 compares single-family and condominium sales prices during
                          December 2012 in Pico Rivera and nearby communities by ZIP code, and
                          contrasts this with the sale prices during December 2011. A total of 36 units
                          were sold in the City during 2012, commanding a median sales price of
                          $271,000. Median sale prices in Pico Rivera were lower than all neighboring
                          communities listed below. The year to year price increase was comparable to
                          that experienced among all the neighboring jurisdictions, the majority of which
                          experienced an increase in single-family median home prices.
                                                                         4-50
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-21:
2010 Median Housing Unit Values
                                                %       No. of      Median           %
                      No. of    Median
              Zip                          Change      Condos       Condo       Change
City                  Home       Home
             Code                             from      Sold         Price         from
                      s Sold     Price
                                             2011                                 2011
Pico Rivera  90660      36      $271,000     5.2%         7        $215,000      -25.9%
Bellflower   90706      25      $320,000     4.9%        11        $210,000       0.5%
             90240       15     $425,000     1.0%         1        $225,000         N/A
Downey       90241       11     $400,000    -13.0%        4        $184,000         N/A
             90242       24     $325,000     3.2%         3        $160,000        0.0%
Montebello   90640      23      $330,000     1.5%         8        $200,000       2.6%
Norwalk      90650       72     $294,000     7.7%         5        $220,000       11.4%
             90601       21     $355,000     1.7%         4        $204,000       47.8%
             90602       17     $340,000     11.3%       N/A           N/A          N/A
             90603       25     $437,000    36.6%         4        $365,000         N/A
Whittier
             90604       31     $340,000     1.2%         5        $145,000      -18.2%
             90605       26     $328,000     15.3%       N/A           N/A          N/A
             90606       20     $303,000    21.3%         1        $177,000         N/A
Los
Angeles                5,082    $365,000     17.7%      1,669      $300,000       19.0%
County
Source: DQNEWS – December 2012 Los Angeles Times ZIP Code Chart, http://dqnews.com
According to Trulia.com, in January 2013, there were 15 less housing listings in
Pico Rivera than in December 2012. A sample of 82 sold homes (single-family
residences and condominiums/townhouses) sold in late 2012, showed that the
majority (53.7 percent) had 3 bedrooms. The second most sold type (28 percent)
had 2 bedrooms. Four-bedroom homes were 18.3 percent of the total homes
sold. In comparison, Table 4-22, below, indicates that two and three-bedroom
homes still constitute the greatest proportion of housing units within the City.
Three-bedroom homes make up the most significant part (45.3 percent) of the
City’s housing stock. Four or more bedroom homes were approximately 15
                                         4-51

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                    Adopted October 2013
                          percent of the housing stock. Most of these larger homes were built during or
                          after the 1980s.
                          Table 4-22:
                          Number of Bedrooms
                                 Bedrooms                                   Number                   Percent
                                 Occupied Housing Units                      16,477                   96.9%
                                 No Bedroom                                   563                      3.3%
                                 1-bedroom                                   1,644                     9.7%
                                 2-bedrooms                                  4,598                    27.0%
                                 3-bedrooms                                  7,695                    45.3%
                                 4-bedrooms                                  2,003                    11.8%
                                 5 or more bedrooms                           497                      2.9%
                          Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
                          Housing Rental Rates
                          According to the 2006-2010 American Community Survey Estimates, there were
                          16,477 total occupied units in Pico Rivera. Approximately 48.6 percent of the
                          renter-occupied units were in buildings with 2 or more units. The median gross
                          rent for Pico Rivera was $1,123 per month between 2006 and 2010. This was the
                          third highest median rent level among all neighboring cities, which had a median
                          rental range from $1,045 in Montebello to a high of $1,207 in Norwalk. The
                          median rent for the County overall was approximately $1,117. Table 4-23
                          provides a comparison of median rental rates for Pico Rivera and its neighboring
                          jurisdictions.
                          Table 4-23:
                          Median Housing Rental Rates
                                                                                           Median
                                  Jurisdiction
                                                                                        Gross Rent
                                  Pico Rivera                                              $1,123
                                  Bellflower                                               $1,094
                                  Downey                                                   $1,139
                                  Montebello                                               $1,045
                                  Norwalk                                                  $1,207
                                  Whittier                                                 $1,091
                                  County of Los Angeles                                    $1,117
                          Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
                          Rental information for Pico Rivera was obtained from internet rental listings on
                          Craig’s List and Trulia. Table 4-24 presents results of the rental survey by unit
                          type, including apartments, condominiums/townhomes, and single-family homes.
                                                                      4-52

                     	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-24:
Inventory of Rental Units
     Unit Type and
                             Units Advertised           Rental Range      Median Rent
        Bedrooms
  Apartments
            1                        6                   $850 - $1,250       $1,050
            2                        2                  $1,350 - $1,600      $1,475
            3                        4                  $1,800 - $2,100      $1,950
  Condominiums/Townhomes
            2                        0                        N/A              N/A
            3                        5                   $1,800-$2,350       $2,075
  Single-Family Homes
            1                        0                        N/A              N/A
            2                        1                   $1,500-$1,600       $1,550
            3                        4                  $1,800 – $2,100      $1,950
Source: Trulia.com and Craigslist.com January 2013.
Tenure and Housing Size
As indicated in Table 4-25, The City had a total of 16,477 occupied housing units
in 2010. The majority of these units were owner-occupied (69 percent). In
comparison, renter-occupied units constituted approximately 31 percent of all
occupied units in the City. About 95 percent of the owner-occupant units were
single-family attached and detached dwellings. Approximately 1.6 percent of all
owner-occupied units were in buildings with 2 or more units. Overall, owner-
occupied units were primarily single family dwellings while renter-occupied units
were found in almost equally found in single family and multiple family buildings.
Table 4-25:
Tenure by Number of Units in Structure
  Tenure by Units in Structure                  Number                  Percent
  Total Occupied Housing Units                   16,477                  100%
     Owner-Occupied                              11,355                  69.0%
         1-detached or attached                  10,792                  95.0%
         2 – 4 units                               150                   1.3%
         5 or more units                            35                    0.3%
         Other Unit Types                          369                    3.2%
     Renter-Occupied                              5,122                  31.0%
         1-detached or attached                   2,507                  48.9%
         2 – 4 units                               284                   5.5%
         5 or more units                          2,204                  43.1%
         Other Unit Types                          127                    2.5%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Community Survey
                                              4-53

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          A review of recent Craig’s List listings for Los Angeles, a regional internet
                          classified ad website, show that rental rates in Pico Rivera are comparable to
                          those in the immediate neighboring Cities of Montebello and Whittier.
                          Housing Costs and Affordability
                          The costs of home ownership and rent can be compared to a household's ability
                          to pay for housing, using the 2012 HUD-established Area Median Family Income
                          (MFI) limit for Los Angeles County of $64,800. Table 4-26 illustrates maximum
                          affordable mortgage payments and rents for a four-person household in Los
                          Angeles County. Affordable housing cost is based on a maximum of 30 percent
                          of gross household income devoted to mortgage or rental costs. These
                          maximum affordable costs would be adjusted downward for smaller households,
                          or upward for larger households.
                          Comparison of these maximum affordable housing costs with the sales price data
                          of housing units sold in Pico Rivera indicates that moderate income households
                          (81 to 120 percent MFI) would be able to afford some single-family homes in the
                          City.
                          According to the data in Table 4-26, very low-income households would not be
                          able to afford rental apartments in the City given the current market trends. The
                          lowest priced rental unit offered, according to the data collected, was a one-
                          bedroom apartment for $850/month. The maximum rent affordable to very low-
                          income households is $810 (for a four-person household). Some low-income
                          households are also priced out of the rental market in Pico Rivera. The maximum
                          rental rate affordable to a low- income household (four-person) is $1,134. This
                          would make only studios and some one-bedroom apartments available to the
                          highest earning low-income households.
                          Moderate-income households could afford rental units within the City. However,
                          they would be limited to mostly one and two-bedroom apartment units. The range
                          of affordability for moderate-income rental housing is $696 to $2,138 per month.
                          Rental rates for one and two-bedroom units range from $850 to $1,600. Some 3-
                          bedroom apartments would also be affordable to the moderate-income
                          household with a rent cost of 1,750 and below.
                          As previously indicated, there are condominiums, townhouses and single-family
                          residences for rent in the City but in limited numbers. Their rental rates range
                          from a low of $1,500 to a high of $2,350 per month. Within this range, there are
                          limited rental opportunities for some moderate-income households.
                                                                  4-54

                          	 Adopted October 2013                                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
    Table 4-26:
    Housing Affordability by Income Group
                                                            Affordable                                       Maximum
                                                                                   Housing Costs
                                                             Payment                                      Affordable Price
    Income Group
                                 AMI adjusted by                                            Taxes &
                                                        Renter     Owner     Utilities                  Owner(b)     Renter
                                       Size                                              Insurance(a)
    Extremely Low
                                     30% AMI
    (0-30% MFI)
    Two Person (1
                                      $13,293             $332      $332       $50             $80       $47,112      $282
    bedroom)
    Three Person (2
                                      $15,192             $380      $380       $75             $90       $50,017      $305
    bedrooms)
    Four Person (3
                                      $17,091             $427      $427      $100             $95       $54,086      $327
    bedrooms)
    Five Person (4
                                      $23,325             $583      $583      $125            $100       $83,390      $458
    bedrooms)
    Very Low
                                     50% AMI
    (30-50% MFI)
    One Person (Studio)               $12,650             $316      $316       $50            $115       $35,219      $266
    Two Person (1
                                      $21,075             $527      $527       $50            $115       $84,263      $477
    bedroom)
    Three Person (2
                                      $33,725             $843      $843      $100            $130      $142,767      $743
    bedrooms)
    Four Person (3
                                      $32,400             $810      $810      $125            $140      $126,904      $685
    bedrooms)
    Five Person (4
                                      $38,875             $972      $972      $175            $145      $151,790      $797
    bedrooms)
    Low
                               60% AMI     70% AMI
    (50-80% MFI)
    One Person (Studio)         $15,180     $17,710       $443      $443       $48            $150       $57,107      $395
    Two Person (1
                                $25,290     $29,505       $738      $738       $85            $165      $113,544      $653
    bedroom)
    Three Person (2
                                $40,470     $47,215      $1,180    $1,180     $125            $190      $201,504     $1,055
    bedrooms)
    Four Person (3
                                $38,880     $45,360      $1,134    $1,134     $175            $210      $174,406      $959
    bedrooms)
    Five Person (4
                                $46,650     $54,425      $1,361    $1,361     $200            $220      $219,026     $1,161
    bedrooms)
    Moderate Income
                                     110% AMI
    (81-120% MFI)
    One Person (Studio)               $27,830             $696      $812      $135            $405       $63,268      $561
    Two Person (1
                                      $46,365            $1,159    $1,352     $135            $405      $189,149     $1,024
    bedroom)
    Three Person (2
                                      $74,195            $1,855    $2,164     $157            $475      $356,734     $1,698
    bedrooms)
    Four Person (3
                                      $71,280            $1,782    $2,079     $211            $571      $302,009     $1,571
    bedrooms)
    Five Person (4
                                      $85,525            $2,138    $2,494     $238            $628      $379,195     $1,900
    bedrooms)
    Source: Compiled by ESA.
    Notes:
(a)
    Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region.
(b)
    Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 20%, annual interest rate of
    5%, 30-year mortgage, and monthly payment 30% of gross household income. 3. Based on 2012 Los
    Angeles County MFI $64,800 and 2012 HCD State Income Limits 4. Monthly affordable rent based
    on payments of no more than 30% of household income.
                                                    4-55
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Adopted October 2013
                          Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion
                          State Housing Element law requires an analysis of the potential for currently rent-
                          restricted low-income housing units to convert to market rate housing, and to
                          propose programs to preserve or replace any units “at risk” of conversion. This
                          section presents an inventory of all assisted rental housing in Pico Rivera , and
                          evaluate those units at risk of conversion during the next ten years (2014-2024).
                          As shown in Table 4-27, there are currently 302 rental properties with
                          affordability covenants’; 216 are at risk of converting to market rate during the
                          2014-2021 planning period and 16 units are at-risk of converting to market rate
                          during 2022-2024 period. Consistent with the requirement to analyze the impacts
                          of the potential conversion of these units to market-rate units, an analysis of
                          preservation of assisted housing at-risk of conversion is presented below.
                          Table 4-27:
                          Affordable Housing At-Risk of Conversion to Market Rate
                                                  Total              Terminatio      Types of        Risk Status
                                                            Year
                          Project               Affordabl                n of      Government          (2014-
                                                            Built
                                                 e Units              Covenant      Assistance          2024)
                          Verner Villa
                                                    75      1980         2015      HUD Sec 8 NC        At-Risk
                          9220 Verner St.
                          Telacu Pico Rivera
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          9036 Washington           69      2004         2042                         Not At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                          Blvd.
                          Pavilion Apartments                                       Federal Low-
                                                   129      1964         2015     Income Housing       At-Risk
                          8731 Telegraph Rd.                                         Tax Credit
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7026 Camellia Ln.         1       2002         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                          4004 Rosemead                                           Redevelopment
                                                    1       1998         2019                          At-Risk
                          Blvd., Unit 2                                           Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7038 Camellia Ln.         1       2001         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7038 Blossom Ct.          1       1996         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          9029 Grove Terrace        1       1998         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          9050 Primrose Dr.         1       2002         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7105 Blossom Ct.          1       1996         2019                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                          4317 Paramount                                          Redevelopment
                                                    1       1993         2019                          At-Risk
                          Blvd., Unit E                                           Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          9011 Grove Terrace        1       1998         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7118 Blossom Ct.          1       1996         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          9030 Primrose Dr.         1       1998         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                                  Redevelopment
                          7043 Camellia Ln.         1       2001         2023                          At-Risk
                                                                                  Low-Mod Funds
                                                                    4-56

                     	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
                            Total            Terminatio      Types of     Risk Status
                                      Year
Project                  Affordabl               n of       Government      (2014-
                                      Built
                          e Units             Covenant      Assistance       2024)
                                                           Redevelopment
9019 Grove Terrace            1       1998       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
7038 Orchid Ln.               1       1998       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
7126 Blossom Ct.              1       1996       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
4313 Paramount                                             Redevelopment
                              1       1993       2019                       At-Risk
Blvd., Unit B                                             Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
9041 Grove Terrace            1       2001       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
7010 Camellia Ln.             1       2001       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
7104 Camellia Ln.             1       2001       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
7018 Camellia Ln.             1       2001       2023                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
9285 Sierra Vista                                          Redevelopment
                              1       1997       2019                       At-Risk
Circle                                                    Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8238 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8308 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
4639 Myrtle St.               1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8230 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2057                      Not At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8234 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8312 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
8314 San Luis Potosi          1       2004       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                           Redevelopment
5029 Cord Ave.                1       1999       2019                       At-Risk
                                                          Low-Mod Funds
                                                          TOTAL AT-RISK
TOTAL                        302                                              232
                                                            (2014-2024)
Source: City of Pico Rivera, 2013.
In general, the cost for new land in the City ranges from $10/square foot up to
$15/square foot. The actual construction cost for residential development ranges
from $100/square foot up to $130/square foot. The total replacement cost for the
at-risk units identified in Table 4-27 are summarized below:
          The cost for replacing the 75-unit Verner Villa Apartments would total
           more than $7,856,040. This cost assumes that 3.4 acres of land will be
           required and each unit will have a total floor area of 850 square feet
           (two-bedroom units). The land cost will be approximately $1,481,040
           (assuming $10/square foot) while the construction cost will be
                                            4-57

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                                   approximately $6,375,000 (assuming $100/square foot for an 850-square
                                   foot unit= $85,000/unit).
                                  The cost of replacing the Pavilion Apartments would total more than
                                   $12,620,250. This cost assumes that 3.8 acres of land will be required
                                   and each unit will have a total floor area of 850 square feet (two-
                                   bedroom). The land cost will be approximately $1,655,200 (assuming
                                   $10/square foot) while the construction cost will be approximately
                                   $10,965,000 (assuming $100/square foot for an 850-square foot unit=
                                   $85,000/unit).
                                  The cost of replacing the 28 single-family dwelling units would total more
                                   than $6,860,000. This cost assumes that 2.9 acres of land (average
                                   4,500 square feet per dwelling unit) will be required and each unit will
                                   have a total floor area of 2,000 square feet (three bedroom units). The
                                   land cost will be approximately $1,260,000 (assuming $10/square foot)
                                   while the construction cost will be approximately $5,6000,000 (assuming
                                   $100/square foot for an 2,000-square foot unit= $200,000/unit).
                          To address at-risk units, Program 3 in the Housing Plan commits the City to
                          monitor these units, ensure compliance with noticing requirements, establish
                          partnerships with entities qualified to acquire and manage at-risk units to have a
                          team and action plan ready to move forward upon notice of conversion, and
                          provide assistance and education to tenants (see Program 3 for more details).
                          Further, the City of Pico Rivera is strongly committed to the preservation of
                          affordable housing units and therefore has identified the following resources in an
                          effort to save such at-risk units. Table 4-44 lists a menu of funding programs
                          available for various housing activities, including programs that may be utilized to
                          purchase covenants or deed restrictions to maintain affordability of units. Funding
                          programs that can be used for new construction includes the following:
                            State and Federal Home Investment Partnership Act (HOME) Funds
                            Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly
                            Section 207 Multifamily Rental Housing
                            Section 207 Manufactured Home Parks
                            Section 213 Cooperative Housing
                            Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities
                            Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)
                            California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) Multiple Rental Housing Program
                            Redevelopment Housing Fund
                            Tax Exempt Housing Revenue Bond
                            California Community Reinvestment Corporation
                            Federal Home Loan Bank Affordable Housing Program
                          The City has an ongoing housing program to facilitate the preservation of at-risk
                          housing units. The City has provided funding assistance in the past, through
                                                                   4-58

                 	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Redevelopment Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Funds, to assist in the
development of affordable housing projects. The City will actively work to create
programs and seek additional funding in which the focus is to preserve these
units beyond the expiration of the covenant so that the owners are able to have
affordable housing options.
The following non-profit corporations are potential organizations with the
experience and capacity to assist in preserving at-risk units:
  Los Angeles Center for Affordable Tenant Housing
  BUILD Leadership Development Inc.
  Century Housing Corporation
  Century Pacific Equity Corporation
  Community Partnership Development Corporation
  DML & Associates Foundation
  East Los Angeles Community Corporation
  Foundation for Quality Housing Opportunities Inc.
  Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles
  Housing Corporation of America
  Jamboree Housing Corporation
  Keller & Company
  Los Angeles Housing Partnership Inc.
  Los Angeles Low Income Housing Corporation (LALIH)
  National Community Renaissance
  Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire Inc.
  Nexus for Affordable Housing
  Orange Housing Development Corporation
  Southern California Housing Development Corporation
  Southern California Presbyterian Homes
  The East Los Angeles Community Union (TELACU)
                                        4-59

2014-2021 Housing Element                                     Adopted October 2013
                          This page intentionally left blank.
                                        4-60
                   	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Constraints
This section of the Housing Element examines constraints that could hinder the
City’s achievement of its objectives and the resources that are available to assist
in the production, maintenance and improvement of the City’s housing stock.
Constraints to the provision of housing may be governmental, such as
development standards and zoning regulations or non-governmental which may
include market and environmental factors. State law requires that Housing
Elements analyze potential and actual governmental and non-governmental
constraints to the production, maintenance, and improvements of housing for all
persons of all income levels and disabilities. The constraints analysis must also
demonstrate efforts by the local jurisdiction to remove governmental constraints
that hinder achievement of housing goals.
Governmental Constraints
Governmental constraints are policies, development regulations, standards,
requirements or other actions imposed by the various levels of government upon
land and housing ownership and development. Although Federal and State
agencies play a role in the imposition of governmental constraints, the actions of
these agencies are, for the most part, beyond the influence of local government
and are therefore not addressed in this document. Apart from federally
determined interest rates and State Building Codes, most governmental
constraints are local. Land use controls, building codes, processing procedures,
and development fees are all factors that may constrain the maintenance,
improvement and/or development of housing in the City.
State and federal regulations, which the City has no control over, can also add to
governmental constraints. Regulations related to environmental protection,
building codes, and other topics have significant, often adverse, impacts on
housing costs and availability. While constraints exist at other levels of
government, this section emphasizes policies and regulations that can be
mitigated by the City.
Land Use Controls
The Land Use Element of the City of Pico Rivera’s 1993 General Plan sets forth
the City's policies for guiding local development. These policies, together with
existing zoning regulations, establish the amount and distribution of land to be
allocated for different uses within the City. The City of Pico Rivera 1993 General
Plan and Zoning Ordinance provide for a range of different intensities of
residential land use, including the following:
                                          4-61

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                           Rural Residential Land Use Designation: 1-2 dwelling units per acre
                           Low Density Residential Land Use Designation: 1-8 dwelling units per acre
                           Medium Density Residential Land Use Designation: 6-14 dwelling units per
                              acre
                           Highest Density Residential Land Use Designation: 14-30 dwelling units per
                              acre
                          Housing supply and cost are greatly affected by the amount of land designated
                          for residential use and the density at which development is permitted. According
                          to the 1993 General Plan, approximately 40 percent of the City’s land area is
                          designated for residential use. Single-family residential neighborhoods are by far
                          the most common residential use in Pico Rivera, accounting for 33 percent of all
                          City acreage, and 89 percent of residential acreage in the City. The Final EIR for
                          the Pico Rivera 1993 General Plan documents a residential “build out” of 18,583
                          dwelling units, or 1,474 units above the City’s existing (2010) housing stock of
                          17,109 units. This figure includes all vacant and developed residential land.
                          The City of Pico Rivera is currently in the process of updating the General Plan
                          and corresponding sections of the Zoning Code, which will implement new land
                          use policies and development standards. The City anticipates that all new
                          housing units are likely to come from underutilized commercial, industrial, and
                          residential properties. This will occur through the expansion of the existing
                          housing supply through recycling of lower density development or underutilized
                          land to higher densities. The updated General Plan is anticipated for adoption in
                          2014. Residential densities in the General Plan update are:
                           Rural Residential Land Use Designation: 0-2 dwelling units per acre
                           Low Density Residential Land Use Designation: 2-6 dwelling units per acre
                           Medium Density Residential Land Use Designation: 6-14 dwelling units per
                              acre
                           High Density Residential Land Use Designation: 14-30 dwelling units per acre
                          Residential Development Standards
                          The City's current residential development standards are similar to the cities
                          immediately surrounding Pico Rivera. The surrounding cities developed and
                          matured during the same period. The density permitted, yard setback
                          requirements, and other standards regulating residential development in the City
                          are in concert with those being used by other surrounding communities and to a
                          great extent, throughout the suburbs of Los Angeles and Orange Counties.
                          As previously mentioned, the City is currently updating the General Plan, which
                          will introduce new land use designations. Concurrently, the City will update
                          current residential standards in order to implement new mixed-use designations
                          and allow the development of higher density residential projects to meet the
                                                                  4-62

                      	 Adopted October 2013                                                         2014-2021 Housing Element
City’s current RHNA need. The current residential development standards for
residential development are shown in Table 4-28.
Table 4-28:
Residential Development Standards
                                                                Zone
 Development
 Standard                       R-E          S-F           R-I       PUD-A     PUD-B       R-M
 Lot Frontage and                      (a)                              (b)               (a), (c)
 Access
 Lot Area                   15,000 sq. ft.  6,500     4,200 sq.       1,500   2,600 sq.   12,500
                                            sq. ft.      ft. (d)      sq. ft.    ft. (d) sq. ft. (e)
                                                                        (d)
 Dwelling Unit Density     One per lot (f)   One       One per         1-30       1-30      30
                                           per lot          lot      DU/Acre   DU/Acre   DU/Acre
                                              (g)                     (h),(i)                (j)
 Floor Area per              Not listed       Not     Not listed        Not   Not listed
 Dwelling Unit                              listed                    listed              500 sq.
   Senior Citizen                                                                            ft.
 Housing
 Lot Size
   Lot Width
 Corner or Reverse             100 ft.      70 ft.    Not listed        N/A      40 ft.     (k)
 Corner Lot                    100 ft.      60 ft.                    25 ft.     40 ft.     (k)
 Interior Lot                  150 ft.     100 ft.                      N/A      65 ft.     (k)
   Lot Depth                                   (l)
 Yard Setbacks
   Front                        30 ft.      20 ft.     20 ft. to        N/A    18 ft. to   25 ft.
                                                        garage                  garage
                                                       15 ft. to               15 ft. to
                                                      residence               residence
                                                          (any                    (any
                                                       portion)                portion)
                                                      Minimum
                                                        50% of
                                                          front
                                                       setback
                                                         20 ft.
 Side Interior                  10 ft.        5 ft.    4 ft. (m)        N/A    4 ft. (m)    5 ft.
 Street Rear                    20 ft.      10 ft.     8 ft. (m)        N/A    8 ft. (m)   10 ft.
 Case I (no door or             10 ft.        5 ft.   50% min.          N/A   50% min.     10 ft.
 window openings in                                   20 ft. and
 the rear wall of                                     50% min.
 dwelling)                                               15 ft.
 Case II (with door or          15 ft.      10 ft.    Not listed       N/A    20 ft. and   15 ft.
 window openings in                                                           50% min.
 rear wall of dwelling)
 Building Heights               24 ft.      24 ft.       26 ft.       26 ft.     26 ft.    28 ft.
 Lot Coverage               35% lot area     40%          50%        80% lot      50%     50% lot
                                 (n)           lot                   area (n)            area (n)
                                             area
                                              (n)
Source: City of Pico Rivera Zoning Ordinance accessed January 2013.
Notes:
                                                 4-63

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                    Adopted October 2013
                          (a)
                               Every lot shall have and maintain frontage along a publicly dedicated and improved street, and
                              shall have unobstructed access to such street or to a publicly dedicated and improved alley.
                          (b)
                               Every lot shall be provided with a means of access to a publicly dedicated and improved street. For
                              purposes of the R-1 and PUD zoned districts, the front property line shall be considered that portion
                              of property from which vehicular access is taken.
                          (c)
                               In the case when development occurs on a corner or reverse corner lot that has frontage along a
                              major, secondary, collector or local street, or any combination thereof, as designated and defined in
                              the Circulation Element of the General Plan, the front lot line and permitted vehicular access to such
                              lot shall be determined by that portion of the lot congruent with the right-of-way of the street
                              designated as having the highest classification of traffic-generating capacity. All other lot lines shall
                              be relative to such determined front lot as set forth herein.
                          (d)
                               This requirement shall apply only to an individually owned lot upon which a single-family dwelling
                              unit is located.
                          (e)
                               Except in selected areas of the community where it has been clearly demonstrated and established
                              through the zone reclassification process that such areas possess those characteristics more
                              closely associated with single family residential neighborhoods, lots may contain less than twelve
                              thousand five hundred square feet of lot area, but in no case shall the lot area be less than six
                              thousand square feet.
                          (f)
                               Any lot having a lot area greater than the minimum required herein may be developed with more
                              than one detached single-family dwelling unit. A lot qualifying for such additional dwelling unit
                              development shall contain not less than fifteen thousand square feet of lot area for each such
                              dwelling unit thereafter. In no case shall there be more than a total of four such dwelling units, and
                              such development thereof shall be subject to a precise plan of design.
                          (g)
                               Any lot having a lot area greater than the minimum required herein may be developed with more
                              than one detached single-family dwelling unit. A lot qualifying for such additional dwelling unit
                              development shall contain not less than six thousand square feet of lot area for the first single-family
                              dwelling unit and not less than five thousand square feet of lot area for each such dwelling unit
                              thereafter. In no case shall there be more than a total of four such dwelling units, and such
                              development thereof shall be subject to a precise plan of design.
                          (h)
                               The total number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed or be less than the following
                          distribution of dwelling unit densities:
                                        Not less than fifteen percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be
                                         developed at a density of eight dwelling units per acre;
                                        Not less than twenty-five percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be
                                         developed at a density of fourteen dwelling units per acre; and
                                        Not more than sixty percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be
                                         developed at a density of twenty dwelling units per acre.
                          (i)
                               When implementing the dwelling unit densities as hereinabove provided, such densities shall be
                          distributed throughout the planned residential unit development project in order to obtain the
                          maximum amount of dispersion. In no case shall there be more than twenty dwelling units grouped or
                          clustered on any given acre of land within the project. Contiguous lots and/or attached dwelling units
                          which are grouped or clustered in any manner so as to form or appear to form a single building or
                          dwelling structure may be permitted; provided, however, that such grouping or clustering shall not
                          contain more than six dwelling units and/or lots, nor shall the horizontal dimension of such building or
                          dwelling structure exceed eighty feet.
                          (j)
                               The number of dwelling units permitted shall be subject to the following distribution of dwelling unit
                          densities:
                                        Lots containing six thousand square feet but not more than eight thousand five hundred
                                         square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for each
                                         three thousand square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated by the zone
                                         classification symbol “R-M-3000.”
                                        Lots containing eight thousand five hundred square feet but not exceeding twelve thousand
                                         five hundred square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit
                                         for each two thousand five hundred square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated
                                         by the zone classification symbol “R-M-2500.”
                                        Lots containing twelve thousand five hundred square feet but not exceeding twenty
                                         thousand square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for
                                         each two thousand square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated by the zone
                                         classification symbol “R-M-2000.”
                                        Lots containing twenty thousand square feet of lot area or more may be developed with any
                                         combination of dwelling unit densities as hereinabove set forth in paragraphs a, b and c of
                                         this subsection, and may also include but shall not be developed with more than one
                                         dwelling unit for each one thousand four hundred fifty square feet of lot area. Any such lot
                                                                                  4-64

                          	 Adopted October 2013                                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
             qualifying or approved for the exclusive development of one dwelling unit for each one
             thousand four hundred fifty square feet of lot area shall be designated by the zone
             classification symbol “R-M-1450.”
            Apartment or residential complex designed, built, maintained for and occupied exclusively
             by senior citizens and/or physically handicapped persons may be developed to a greater
             density than otherwise permitted herein, such maximum density to be determined and
             prescribed by conditional use permit
(k)
    Every lot shall have a lot width and depth as hereinafter required:
            Lots containing six thousand to eight thousand five hundred square feet of lot area shall
             have a lot width of not less than sixty feet, and a lot depth of not less than one hundred
             feet. Corner or reverse corner lots shall have a lot width of not less than sixty-five feet. Lots
             fronting on or backing up to a major or secondary highway, or railroad or flood control right-
             of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred twenty feet.
            Lots containing more than eight thousand five hundred up to twelve thousand five hundred
             square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of not less than eighty-five feet and a lot depth
             of not less than one hundred feet. Corner or reverse corner lots shall have a lot width of not
             less than ninety-five feet. Lots fronting on or backing up to a major or secondary highway,
             or railroad or flood control right-of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred
             thirty feet.
            Lots containing more than twelve thousand five hundred to twenty thousand square feet of
             lot area shall have a lot width of not less than one hundred feet and a lot depth of not less
             than one hundred twenty-five feet.
            Lots containing more than twenty thousand square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of
             not less than one hundred twenty-five feet and a lot depth of not less than one hundred
             sixty feet
(l)
    Lots fronting on and/or backing up to a major or secondary highway, railroad or flood control right-
of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred thirty feet.
(m)
     Zero lot line development permitted on one interior lot line, with a minimum eight-foot opposite side
yard setback.
(n)
    Development on any lot shall not exceed this maximum amount of aggregate total building
coverage except as indicated below:
            Forty-five percent lot coverage allowed for single-family residential zoned lots containing
             five thousand five hundred square feet or less
Table 4-29 summarizes the City’s parking requirements for residential uses.
Parking requirements are determined by the housing type (single-family versus
multi-family), the zone, and the number of dwelling units. The City has found that
these parking standards do not negatively impact the supply and affordability of
housing. Along with the development standards listed in Table 5-1, the parking
standards will be updated through the General Plan update in order to implement
new mixed-use designations and higher density residential projects.
Table 4-29:
Off-Street Parking Requirements
                                                 R-E, S-F, R-I, and PUD
Residential Use                                                                           R-M Zone
                                                           Zones
Single-family dwelling units, duplexes         Two parking spaces in a garage for each dwelling unit with
and garage conversions                         the exception of nonconforming dwelling units.
      Guesthouse                              One garage or carport
                                               attached to the guesthouse
Multiple-family dwelling units                 Two parking spaces in a garage or carport for each dwelling
                                               unit
      Apartment developments                                                    One open guest parking
       containing eight or more dwelling                                         space for each eight
       units                                                                     dwelling units or fraction
                                                                                 thereof
                                                       4-65

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                 Adopted October 2013
                                                                      R-E, S-F, R-I, and PUD
                          Residential Use                                                                        R-M Zone
                                                                                Zones
                             Roominghouses and                                                         Two parking space in a
                               boardinghouses, and other                                                garage or carport for each
                               similar uses having guestrooms                                           three guestrooms. In
                                                                                                        dormitories, each
                                                                                                        100 square feet of habitable
                                                                                                        floor area shall be
                                                                                                        considered equivalent to
                                                                                                        one guestroom
                          Other uses permitted in residential zones
                             Childcare centers, day nurseries      One open parking space for each 300 square feet of net
                               and other similar uses               building floor area, or for each 10 children the facility is
                                                                    designed and/or licensed for, whichever is greater
                             Convalescent, nursing and/or          One open parking space for each two beds and/or residents
                               resthomes                            for which the facility’s capacity is licensed
                             Mobilehome parks                                                          Two open parking spaces
                                                                                                        on each mobilehome site,
                                                                                                        and one open guest parking
                                                                                                        space for each four
                                                                                                        mobilehome sites
                             Senior citizen housing                                                    One parking space for each
                                                                                                        three dwelling units
                          Source: Pico Rivera Municipal Code, accessed May 2013.
                          Density Bonus
                          State law mandates that all cities and counties shall adopt an ordinance that
                          specifies how the city/county intends to comply with Government Code Sections
                          65915-65918 regarding density bonus opportunities. The City has amended the
                          Zoning Code to address density bonus incentives.
                          Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
                          Housing Element Law requires jurisdictions to identify available sites in
                          appropriate zone districts with development standards that encourage the
                          development of a variety of housing types for all income levels, including multi-
                          family rental housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters,
                          and transitional housing. The following paragraphs describe how the City makes
                          provisions for these types of housing.
                          Multi-Family Rental Housing
                          Multiple-family housing is the second most predominant dwelling type in the City,
                          comprising about 17 percent of the total housing units. The number of multi-
                          family units has increased in recent years as underdeveloped multi-family zoned
                          lots with only one unit located on them are recycled and redeveloped with higher
                          density uses. The City’s Zoning Ordinance provides for multiple-family units in
                          the Residential Infill (R-I), Multiple Family Residential Variable Density (R-M),
                          and the Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning districts.
                                                                            4-66

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing
The 2006-2010 American Community Survey Estimates, report there were 496
mobile homes in the City in 2010. A more recent mobile home survey conducted
by the Planning Division Staff found, however, that there are actually 405 mobile
homes in the City. The City of Pico Rivera provides for mobile homes within
existing mobile home parks, and manufactured homes in residential established
neighborhoods provided they meet the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Manufactured units must be
installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building
regulations and Title 25 of the California Health and Safety Code.
Existing mobile home parks in Pico Rivera are show in Table 4-30.
Table 4-30:
Pico Rivera Mobile Home Parks
             Name                          Address                   Number of Units
Citrus Drive                    4731 Citrus Dr
                                                                             28
                                Pico Rivera, CA 90660
Elms Mobile Estates             8527 Whittier Blvd
                                                                             25
                                Pico Rvera, CA 90660
Rio Vista                       4101 Paramount Blvd
                                                                            119
                                Pico Rivera, CA 90660
Shamrock                        4850 Durfee Ave
                                                                             11
                                Pico Rivera, CA 90660
Villa Nova Mobile Home Park     8509 Beverly Blvd #3
                                                                            155
                                Pico Rivera, CA 90660
Westland Estates Mobil e        4139 Paramount Blvd
Home Park                                                                    67
                                Pico Rivera, CA 90660
                                Total:                                      405
Source: Pico Rivera Community and Economic Development Department, January, 2013.
Second Units
The City amended the Zoning Code to incorporate a Second Unit Ordinance that
conforms to state requirements. The amendment includes development
standards and procedures for review.
Transitional and Supportive Housing and Emergency
Shelters
The City amended the Zoning Code to allow emergency shelters in a newly
established Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone by right without any other
discretionary permit required. A map of the Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone is
provided in Appendix B. Pursuant to State law, the City has also amended the
Zoning Ordinance for transitional and supportive housing to be considered a
residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other
residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
                                              4-67
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Adopted October 2013
                          Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing
                          The City amended the Zoning Code to treat SRO’s as a type of transitional
                          housing and to be considered a residential use only subject to those restrictions
                          that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone, along with
                          applicable development and operational standards.
                          Housing for Persons with Disabilities
                          Physical disabilities can hinder access to housing units of traditional design as
                          well as limit the ability to earn adequate income. In 2010, approximately
                          12.8 percent of Pico Rivera’s population (18 years and over) was reported to be
                          living with a disability. This count includes age-related as well as other
                          disabilities. Housing opportunities for individuals with physical disabilities are
                          maximized through the provision of affordable, barrier-free housing. Special
                          modifications include units with access ramps, wider doorways, assist bars in
                          bathrooms, lower cabinets, and elevators. This is accomplished through the
                          City’s compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the
                          2007 Title 24 Part 2, California Building Code regulations. In addition, the City
                          administers the Housing Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Program that provides
                          financial assistance to households with person with disabilities to perform
                          modifications such as those described above.
                          Per state law, cities must develop reasonable accommodation procedures to
                          provide relief to Code regulations and permitting procedures that have a
                          discriminatory effect on housing for individuals with disabilities. The City has
                          amended the Zoning Code to incorporate a Reasonable Accommodation
                          Ordinance that conforms to state requirements. The process for reasonable
                          accommodation includes submittal of an application form to the City’s Planning
                          Division, an administrative review by City staff, and a decision within 30 days
                          after the application is submitted. An application for a reasonable
                          accommodation is granted if all of the following findings are made:
                               1. The housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an
                                    individual with a disability as defined under the Fair Housing Acts.
                               2. The requested reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific
                                    housing available to an individual with a disability under the Fair Housing
                                    Acts.
                               3. The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue
                                    financial or administrative burden on the City.
                               4. The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a
                                    fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including
                                    but not limited to land use and zoning.
                                                                     4-68

                       	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
      5. The requested reasonable accommodation would not adversely impact
           surrounding properties or uses.
      6. There are no reasonable alternatives that would provide an equivalent
           level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to the City’s
           applicable rules, standards and practices.
The City of Pico Rivera defines a “family” as one or more persons related by
blood or marriage, or not more than five persons not related by blood or
marriage, excluding servants, but living together as a single household in a
dwelling unit.” The City has found that this definition is a constraint and has
amended the Zoning Ordinance to update the definition of “family” in compliance
with State law.
Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
Table 4-31 summarizes housing types permitted by zoning district in the City of
Pico Rivera.
Table 4-31:
Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
              Use                 R-E         S-F      R-I   PUD       R-M      ESO(a)
Single-family                       P          P        P     C         P
Multi-family (2-4 units)            C          C        X      X        C
Multi-family (5+ units)             X          X        X     C         C
Community care facility
                                    P          P        P      P        P
 (≤6 persons)
Community care facility
                                    C          C       C      C         C
(7+ persons)
Emergency shelter (up to 30
                                                                                  P
occupants)
Emergency shelter (more
                                                                                  C
than 30 occupants)
 Single-room occupancy
                                                        P               P
units
Manufactured homes                  P          P        P      P        P
Mobilehomes                                                             C
Transitional housing                P          P        P      P        P
Supportive housing                  P          P        P      P        P
Second units                        P          P               P
Source: Pico Rivera Municipal Code, accessed May 2013.
           (a)
Notes:         Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone
                                               4-69

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                    Adopted October 2013
                          Development Impact and Planning Entitlement
                          Fees
                          The City collects development impact fees and planning entitlement fees from
                          developers to cover the costs of processing permits and providing necessary
                          services and infrastructure. Fees are usually collected upon filing of an
                          application for development projects that require discretionary approval or at the
                          time building permits are issued.
                          Development Impact Fees
                          Development impact fees collected from developers include school fees
                          ($2.63/square foot) and a Public Image Enhancement Fee (applies to residential
                          units valued at >$100,000) which is 0.05 percent of the building valuation. In
                          addition, a park fee is required for each multi-family residential unit built if the
                          land requires subdivision. The parkland fees are adjusted annually for the CPI-U.
                          Additional development impact fees include the General Plan Maintenance Fee,
                          the Maintenance of Building Plans Fee, and the Automated Building Permit and
                          System Maintenance Fee, which are minimal fees. Additionally, residents pay
                          taxes for public utilities, which are fees charged to provide revenues to enhance
                          services, facilities and infrastructure serving residents, businesses, employees
                          and visitors in the City.
                          Planning Entitlement Fees
                          Table 4-32 provides a listing of planning entitlement fees the City of Pico Rivera
                          charges for residential development. These fees are typically collected at the
                          time a development entitlement application is filed with the City. In addition,
                          there may be other fees assessed depending upon the circumstances of the
                          development. For example, the builder may need to pay an inspection fee for
                          sidewalks, curbs, and gutters if installation is required or the builder may need a
                          variance, conditional use permit, or site plan review for special entitlement
                          issues. The planning entitlement fees listed in Table 4-32 show those which are
                          typically charged for a standard residential development.
                          Table 4-32:
                          Fees Charged For Residential Development
                             Fee Type                                Fee
                             Zoning Consistency Review               $95- per application (SFD) Fences, water
                                                                     heaters, ground mounted HVAC
                                                                     $70 Residential-Minor (Double for code
                                                                     enforcement violations)
                                                                     $345 Residential- New structure (Double for
                                                                     code enforcement violations)
                             Precise Plan of Design                  $210
                                                                     1 unit-$920
                                                                     2 to 4 units-$1,835
                                                                   4-70
                     	 Adopted October 2013                                                      2014-2021 Housing Element
  Fee Type                                     Fee
                                               5 or more residential units-$1,945
  Conditional Use Permit Review                $2,270
  Conditional Use Permit Minor Modification    $925-Zoning Administrator
                                               $1,875-Planning Commission
  Variance                                     $1,640
  Minor Variance                               $200 (S-F zone, owner occupied), $1,875 (all
                                               others)
  Zone Reclassification                        $2,220
  Zone Code Amendment                          $5,285
  Environmental Categorical Exemption          $125 per application
  Environmental Initial Study                  $530
  Negative Declaration                         $825 (plus Los Angeles County Clerk/Recorder
                                               Fee)
  Mitigated Negative Declaration               $1,465 (plus Los Angeles County
                                               Clerk/Recorder Fee)
  Environmental Impact Report                  Deposit with charges at the fully burdened costs
                                               and 100% of contracted services, plus Los
                                               Angeles
  Tentative Parcel Map                         $2,605
  Tentative Tract Map                          $3,795
  Certificate of Compliance                    $570
  Lot Line Adjustment                          $1,140
  Final Parcel Maps- Map Analysis              $2,795 per map (Includes up to three
                                               submittals) plus $900 for each submittal after
                                               the 3rd submittal.
  Final Tract Map- Maps Analysis               5-10 lots-$3,520
                                               11-25 lots- $5,715
                                               26-50 lots-$8,060
                                               51-100 lots-$10,985
                                               101-150 lots-$16,550
                                               151 or more lots-$21,525
                                               (Includes up to three submittals) plus $1,300 for
                                               each submittal after the 3rd submittal
Source: City of Pico River Community and Economic Development Department
As a means of assessing the cost that fees contribute to development in Pico
Rivera, the City has updated and calculated the total Building, Planning, and
Engineering fees associated with single family and multi-family development
prototypes. Table 4-33 presents the development fees for a 1,500-square-foot,
two-bedroom/two-bathroom single-family unit as well as the development fees for
a 1,000-square-foot, two bedroom/one-bathroom multiple-family unit. For a single
family residential unit, the amount of the development fee is approximately
$17,811.75. Furthermore, the development fee for a multiple-family unit is
approximately $12,521.75.
                                             4-71
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                  Adopted October 2013
                          The development processing fees and school fees are largely determined by
                          square footage, valuation and a number of other factors including the number or
                          bedrooms, bathrooms, outlets, etc. This makes it difficult to accurately determine
                          the average and actual fees charged to a developer for residential development.
                          In summary, Pico Rivera development fees represent a small portion of overall
                          cost of residential development, and are comparable to other Los Angeles
                          jurisdictions. The City has worked hard to keep fees low and will continue to do
                          so, utilizing allocated funds to promote development of affordable housing,
                          housing for extremely low income and residents with disabilities.
                          Table 4-33:
                          Total Typical Fees Per Type of Unit
                                                                                                           Multi-Family (per unit)
                            Fees                                        Single Family Unit (a)
                                                                                                                      (b)
                            Planning ZCR                                         $345.00                            $345.00
                            Building Plan Check                                 $1,771.00                         $1,296.75
                                                                       $9,000.00 (3% valuation-           $6,000.00 (3% valuation-
                            Waste Management Deposit
                                                                             Not a City Fee)                    Not a City Fee)
                            Park Fees                                              N/A                             $1,250.00
                                                                      $3,945.00 ($2.63 per sq.ft.-       $2,630.00 ($2.63 per sq.ft.-
                            School Fees
                                                                             Not a City Fee)                    Not a City Fee)
                                                                          $1,500.00 (0.5% of                  $1,000.00 (0.5% of
                            Public Image Enhancement Fee
                                                                        valuation over 150,000)            valuation over 150,000)
                            Building Permit with Mechanical,
                                                                                $2,082.75                          $1,595.75
                            Electrical and Plumbing
                            TOTAL                                              $17,811.75                         $12,521.75
                          Source: City of Pico Rivera, 2013.
                          Notes:
                             (a)
                                 Calculations based on a. single-family unit 1,500 sq ft of living area with 400 sq. ft. garage space.
                                 b. Building Valuation per unit of $300,000.
                             (b)
                                 Calculations based on a multi-unit 1,000 sq ft of living area with 400 sq ft garage space with a
                                 building valuation of $200,000 per unit.
                          Building Codes and Enforcement
                           In addition to land use controls, local building codes also affect the cost of
                          housing. Pico Rivera has adopted the California Building Code (2010) which
                          establishes minimum construction standards. As required of all jurisdictions in
                          California, Pico Rivera, has adopted the latest (2010) California Green Building
                          Code establishes construction standards necessary to protect public health,
                          safety, and welfare. The provision of the California Building Code is to ensure
                          that barrier-free design is incorporated in all buildings, facilities, site work and
                          other developments to which this code applies and to ensure that they are
                          accessible to and usable persons with disabilities.
                                                                              4-72
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
The following are local amendments to the Building code (Chapter 15.08)
adopted by Pico Rivera to protect public health and safety from hazards
indigenous by the City:
 The City amended the definition for emergency helicopter landing facilities on
   high-rises references applicable fire code provisions and reads: A landing
   area on the roof of a high-rise building that is not intended to function as a
   helicopter or helistop but is capable of accommodating fire or medical
   helicopters engaged in emergency operations, in accordance with California
   Fire Code Section 1107.
 The City included more specific standards for maximum height and number of
   stories for buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic
   sprinkler system.
 The City amended exceptions for automatic sprinkler system standards.
 The City amended minimum roof covering classifications for types of
   construction.
 The City added the following to Section 1505.1.3 of Volume 1: The entire roof
   covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total
   roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of
   every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alternation, repair or
   replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be fire-retardant roof
   covering that is at least Class A, unless approved by the building official.
 The City added the following exception to Section 3109.1 of Volume 2:
   Exemption of public bodies of water. Where bodies of water are located on
   public land within the City of Pico Rivera, this section need not be complied
   with where is has been determined by the Building Official that dispensing
   with any or all of the provisions of this section will adequately protect the
   public health, safety and welfare. This section shall not apply to public bodies
   of water located on land owned, possessed or under control of the State,
   County, Municipal or other governmental entities or their lessees or assigns.
 The City added the following definition: Private pool, is any constructed pool
   or spa, permanent or portable, and over 18 inches deep, which is intended for
   non-commercial use as a swimming pool by not more than three owner
   families and their guests.
 The City added requirements for new safety features for construction of new
   private pools.
 The City added a Construction and Maintenance of Parking Areas chapter.
 The City added a Relocation of Buildings chapter.
 The City added a Grading and Excavations chapter.
 The City amended general requirements for patio covers.
These local amendments do not constrain the development of housing, but rather
ensure that applicants adhere to the proper process to obtain permits and that
the health and safety of residents is considered.
                                         4-73

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Adopted October 2013
                          Local Processing and Permit Procedures
                           The processing time needed to obtain development permits and required
                          approvals is often cited as a prime contributor to the high cost of housing.
                          Additional time may be necessary for environmental review, depending on the
                          location and nature of a project. The time required to process a project varies
                          greatly from one project to another and is directly related to the size and
                          complexity of the proposal and the number of actions or approvals needed to
                          complete the process. Table 4-34 identifies the typical processing time most
                          common in the entitlement process. It is important to note that each project is not
                          required to complete every step in the process (i.e. small scale projects
                          consistent with General Plan designations and zoning districts do not generally
                          require General Plan amendments, rezoning, or variances), and certain review
                          and approval procedures may run concurrently. For example, a ministerial review
                          for a single-family home may be processed concurrently with the design review.
                          The City encourages the joint processing of related applications for a single
                          project. As an example, a rezone petition may be reviewed in conjunction with
                          the required site plan, a tentative tract map, and any necessary variances. Such
                          procedures save time, money, and effort for both public and private sector
                          developers.
                          Table 4-34:
                          Permit Review Timelines
                                                                  Typical
                            Type of Approval or Permit                          Approval Body
                                                             Processing Time
                            Zoning Consistency Review             1 week        City Staff
                            Minor Conditional Use Permit          4 weeks       Zoning Administrator
                            Conditional Use Permit              8-12 weeks      Planning Commission
                            Variance                            8-12 weeks      Planning Commission
                            Zone Change                         8-12 weeks      City Council
                            General Plan Amendment              8-16 weeks      City Council
                            Design Review (Appeal)               4-8 weeks      Planning Commission
                            Final Subdivision Map               8-12 weeks      Community Development Director
                            Subdivision Maps                    8-12 weeks      City Council
                            Parcel Maps                         8-12 weeks      City Council
                                                                                Community Development Director
                            Negative Declaration (Mitigated)    8-12 weeks      or Planning Commission
                            Environmental Impact Report         4-6 months      City Council
                          Source: City of Pico Rivera, 2013.
                          In response to State law, California cities have been working to improve the
                          efficiency of permit and review processes by providing 'one-stop processing,'
                          thereby eliminating duplication of effort. The City works closely with developers to
                          expedite approval procedures in order to diminish unnecessary timing constraints
                          on development. For larger projects, an initial pre-consultation meeting with the
                                                                     4-74
                  	  Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
Community and Economic Development Department, Public Works Department,
and the Fire Department is arranged to discuss the development proposal. The
application along with the site plan is first reviewed by the City’s Planning
Division and other agencies such as Public Works for consistency with the
General Plan and Zoning Code. Concurrently, the Planning Division staff also
provides an administrative design review of projects. There is no formal design
review committee or adopted design review criteria in the City of Pico Rivera.
Projects are reviewed for design on a case-by-case basis. Depending on the
complexity of a project, a single-family development is approved in four to six
weeks from date of plan submission, and a multi-family development is approved
in 4-8 weeks in R-E and S-F zones, and 8-16 weeks in PUD and R-M zones. The
difference in processing times is due to the City’s current requirement of a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for multi-family developments in the City. The City
will amend the Zoning Ordinance to remove the CUP requirement for multi-family
developments prior to the adoption of 2014-2021 Housing Element. This revision
will reduce the processing time for multi-family developments. Once the project is
approved, the Building Division performs plan checks and issues building
permits, and larger projects requiring minor use permits are sent to the Zoning
Administrator.
To encourage and facilitate the development of a variety of housing types, the
City continues to monitor permit processing times to ensure the fastest possible
turnaround for applications. Through the City’s streamlined processing, a 42-unit
condominium development was completed in the City in 2008.
On and Off-Site Improvement Requirements
On and off-site improvements may be required in conjunction with development
based on the location of the project and existing infrastructure. Dedication and
construction of streets, alleys, and other public easements and improvements
may be required to maintain public safety and convenience. In general, full street
width dedication and construction is required in the City along with proper
drainage facilities and street signs. The typical residential street in Pico Rivera
has a 58-foot width, which includes a minimum roadway width of 36 feet.
Sidewalks are required to be at a minimum four feet wide running along both
sides of the street.
The on and off-site improvements required by the City are necessary to
adequately provide the infrastructure and public facilities that support housing
development. These on and off site improvements have not been determined to
be a constraint to the development of affordable housing.
                                          4-75

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Adopted October 2013
                          Non-Governmental Constraints
                          Construction Costs
                          The cost of building materials for residential construction has risen dramatically in
                          recent years. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the overall cost of
                          residential construction materials rose by 2 percent between 2011 and 2012, with
                          steel costs increasing 0.4 percent and the cost of cement increasing 1.5 percent.
                          With the slowdown of the real estate market from 2008 until 2012, the price of
                          construction materials has shown a significant decrease compared to the
                          construction boom. The 2 percent increase in overall construction costs
                          experienced over the past year is primarily due to the cost of labor.
                          Together, the cost of building material and construction labor are the most
                          significant cost components of developing residential units. In the current
                          southern California market, construction costs are estimated to account for
                          upwards of 50 percent of the sales price of a new home. Typical construction
                          costs for high-density apartment (20 units per acre) development run around
                          $150,000 per unit including $10,000 per unit for structured parking. Hard
                          construction costs for development of medium-density (15 units per acre)
                          condominiums over podium parking run approximately $200,000 per unit,
                          including $35,000 per unit for the parking structure.
                          Variations in the quality of materials, type of amenities, labor costs and the
                          quality of building materials could result in higher or lower construction costs for a
                          new home. Pre-fabricated factory built housing, with variation on the quality of
                          materials and amenities may also affect the final construction cost per square
                          foot of a housing project. Furthermore, the unit volume - that is the number of
                          units being built at one time - can change the cost of a housing project by varying
                          the economies of scale. Generally, as the number of units under construction at
                          one time increases, the overall costs decrease. With a greater number of units
                          under construction, the builder is often able to benefit by making larger orders of
                          construction materials and pay lower costs per material unit.
                          Density bonuses granted to a project, can also impact construction costs.
                          Municipalities often grant density bonuses as an incentive for the builder to
                          provide affordable units at the project site. The granting of a density bonus
                          provides the builder with the opportunity to create more housing units and
                          therefore more units for sale or lease than would otherwise be allowed without
                          the bonus. Since greater units can potentially increase the economy of scale, the
                          bonus units could potentially reduce the construction costs per unit. This type of
                          cost reduction is of particular benefit when density bonuses are used to provide
                          affordable housing.
                                                                   4-76
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                              2014-2021 Housing Element
Land Availability and Cost
There is very little vacant residential land available in the City. This is a
significant constraint to the development of new housing within the City. Another
constraint to the development of additional residential units can occur on
underdeveloped properties. The economy of land value and the cost of new
construction can limit what a property owner can expect to achieve on an
underdeveloped property. Even with an allowable 30 units per acre, as permitted
by the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, recycling and redevelopment can be difficult.
Section 6, Housing Resources, includes an analysis and discussion of vacant
and underutilized residentially-zoned parcels in the City that can accommodate
new housing. Aside from the residential zones in the City that accommodate
residential development (R-E, R-I, S-F, PUD, and R-M zones), the City has also
identified opportunities in which commercial and industrial properties can be
“recycled” for residential purposes and has specifically identified sites which will
support the development of housing in a mixed-used configuration and higher
densities. The land resources analysis indicates that there is sufficient capacity at
these sites for new units to accommodate the City’s RHNA allocation.
The price of raw land and any necessary improvements is a key component of
the total cost of housing. The diminishing supply of land available for residential
construction combined with a fairly steady demand for such development has
served to keep the cost of land high and rising in southern California. In addition,
the two factors which most influence land holding costs are the interest rate on
acquisition and development loans, and government processing times for plans
and permits. The time it takes to hold land for development increase the overall
cost of the project. This cost increase is primarily due to the accruement of
interest on the loan, the preparation of the site for construction and processing
applications for entitlements and permits.
Availability of Financing
The availability of financing in a community depends on a number of factors,
including the type of lending institutions active in the community, lending
practices, rates and fees charged, laws and regulations governing financial
institutions, and equal access to those institutions. Through analysis of Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HDMA) data on the disposition of residential loan
applications, an assessment can be made of the availability of residential
financing within a community.
According to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data for Pico Rivera, residential
lending activity in the City consisted of 121 applications for conventional home
purchase loans in 2010, reflecting one percent of the ownership housing stock.
Table 4-35 provides the status of home purchase loan applications in both Pico
Rivera and Los Angeles County. As illustrated by this table, the 63 percent loan
                                         4-77

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                             Adopted October 2013
                          approval rate in Pico Rivera was lower than the 71 percent approval rate
                          Countywide.
                          Table 4-35:
                          Disposition of Loans
                                                                                                         Loans Withdrawn/
                                                  Loans Approved(a)             Loans Denied
                                                                                                             Incomplete
                                                    Pico           LA         Pico           LA           Pico        LA
                                                   Rivera       County       Rivera       County        Rivera      County
                             Number of
                             Conventional
                                                     76          38,827         19         8,054           26        7,601
                             Loan
                             Applications
                             Percent of Total
                             Conventional
                                                    63%           71%         27%           16%           21%        14%
                             Loan
                             Applications
                          Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 2010. Compiled by ESA.
                          Notes:
                          (a)
                              Approved loans include: loans originated and applications approved, but not accepted
                          The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) also provides data on the total
                          number of applications for home improvement loans made to lending institutions
                          in Pico Rivera. Home improvement loans generally have lower approval rates
                          than loans used to purchase homes.                         In 2010, for example, 55 home
                          improvement loans were made in the City of Pico Rivera. Approximately
                          36 percent were approved and 51 percent denied, indicating a significant gap
                          differential between those who were actually able to obtain the financing to
                          complete home improvements and those that were not. It is important to note
                          that the number of home improvement loans specified here does not include
                          loans made available to residents through the City’s Housing Rehabilitation
                          Program.
                          Environmental Constraints
                          Environmental hazards affecting housing units include geologic and seismic
                          conditions that provide the greatest threat to the built environment. The City has
                          identified areas where land development should be carefully controlled. The
                          following hazards may impact future development of residential units in the City.
                          Seismic and Geologic Hazards
                          Pico Rivera’s topography is relatively flat, ranging from approximately 200 feet
                          above sea level in the northern portion of the City to 140 feet above sea level in
                          the southern portion. Several soil types can be found in the City, the majority of
                          which have low potential for shrink-swell or erosion hazards.
                                                                            4-78

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
The Los Angeles Basin is crisscrossed by numerous regional earthquake faults,
several of which lay in the vicinity of Pico Rivera. While most of these faults are
inactive, a few result in occasional earthquakes. Those faults most likely to
impact the City as a result of seismic activity include the San Andreas, the Sierra
Madre, and the Raymond Hills Faults. The primary seismic hazards associated
with earthquakes are ground rupture and ground shaking. The extent of both and
accompanying levels of damage are dependent upon a number of factors
including magnitude of the event, distance from the epicenter, and underlying soil
conditions. In addition, ground shaking can induce several seismic hazards that
may result in damage. These include liquefaction, differential settlement,
landslides, and seiching. The central portion of the City and the Whittier Narrows
Dam area has medium liquefaction potential, while the remainder of the City has
low local liquefaction potential. While the potential for differential settlement,
landslides, and seiches exist within Pico Rivera, given soil, topographic and other
conditions, their likelihood and potential severity are generally limited.
The California Building Standards Code, adopted by the City, regulates the
design and construction of foundations, building frames, retaining walls,
excavation, and other building elements. A key objective of this code is to
mitigate the effects of seismic shaking and adverse soil conditions.
Flooding
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) publishes maps that
identify areas of the City subject to flooding in the event of a major storm. These
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) indicate areas that may be inundated in the
event of a 100-year or a 500-year storm. In addition, the maps indicate the base
flood elevations at selected intervals of the floodway. The City in its entirety had
at one time been located within a designated “AR” Flood Zone, which indicated
that there was a flood risk from the San Gabriel and Rio Hondo rivers. This flood
zone designation resulted in higher flood insurance rates for property owners.
However, upstream flood control measures were implemented and
improvements to local river and dam areas have been accomplished. As a result,
the City is now designated as an “X” Flood Risk Zone indicating that the area is
outside of the 500-year flood and that flood insurance is no longer mandated.
The entire City lies within the flood inundation area of the Whittier Narrows Dam.
Flood risk for this structure under normal operations or as a consequence of an
event such as an earthquake is classified as high by both the Corps of Engineers
Dam Safety Action Classification System, and the FEMA HAZUS program.
However, because of current design and construction practices and ongoing
programs of reviews and modification, catastrophic dam failure is considered
unlikely.
                                          4-79

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Fire Hazards
                          The most serious fire threat within the City is building and structure fires. Like
                          most southern California cities on the urban fringe, the late summer fires that
                          result from the accumulation of this brush have the potential to spread into the
                          City proper. Since the City center is largely developed, there is less potential for
                          fire in central City communities. Other fire hazards within the City may be
                          associated with heavy industrial uses, older commercial and residential
                          structures, the presence of hazardous materials, and arson.
                          Noise
                          Primary noise sources in Pico Rivera is and will continue to be transportation
                          related. Existing and future traffic noises are greatest along the City’s major
                          roadways. Both the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) and Union Pacific
                          railroads maintain lines through the City. Future transit facilities to be located in
                          the City are being considered and include the Metro Gold Line Eastside
                          Extension, which would run along Washington Boulevard. The California High
                          Speed Rail Authority is also considering an east-west alignment of the High
                          Speed Rail line through the City, to be located north of Slauson Avenue.
                          Implementation of either transit facility would result in substantially higher,
                          although intermittent noise levels along those transit corridors and within
                          adjacent sources.
                                                                  4-80

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                                  2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Resources
This section summarizes the land, financial, and administrative resources
available for the development and preservation of housing in Pico Rivera. The
analysis includes an evaluation of the availability of land resources for future
housing development; the City’s ability to satisfy its share of the region’s future
housing needs, the financial resources available to support housing activities,
and the administrative resources available to assist in implementing the City’s
housing programs and policies.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
Pico Rivera’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2014-2021
planning period has been determined by SCAG to be 850 housing units,
including 217 units for very low-income households, 131 units for low-income
households, 140 units for moderate-income households, and 362 units for above
moderate-income households.
The housing allocation for each jurisdiction is divided into four household income
categories used in Federal and State programs: Very Low (50 percent of AMI);
Low (50-80 percent of AMI); Moderate (80-120 percent of AMI); and Above-
Moderate Income (over 120 percent of AMI). The allocations are further adjusted
to avoid an over-concentration of lower income households in any one
jurisdiction. The City must also plan for the needs of extremely low-income
households, which is assumed to be 50 percent of the very low-income share.
The 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs Allocation for the City of Pico Rivera is
shown in Table4-36.
Table 4-36:
Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2014-2021
         Income Group                  Number of Units                Percent of Total
                (a)
  Extremely Low                              109                               --
  Very Low                                   217                            25.5%
  Low                                        131                            15.4%
  Moderate                                   140                            16.5%
  Above Moderate                             362                            42.6%
  Total                                      850                            100%
Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG October 2012.
Notes:
          (a) Extremely Low-Income households are assumed to be 50 percent of the Very Low-
              Income housing need
                                            4-81

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          AB 1233 Compliance
                          In January 2006, changes to Housing Element law, including Assembly Bill 1233,
                          created additional incentive for jurisdictions to achieve a compliant Element. AB
                          1233 requires “communities that failed to comply with requirements to make
                          available sufficient sites to meet their regional housing need in the previous
                          planning period must, within the first year of the new planning period, zone or
                          rezone enough sites to accommodate the RHNA not accommodated from the
                          previous planning period.”
                          The Housing Element for the 2006-2014 planning period was adopted in 2012
                          and certified by HCD, but the City chose not to complete the rezoning necessary
                          to provide adequate sites to accommodate the City’s lower income RHNA.
                          Rezoning did not occur because the City embarked on a comprehensive General
                          Plan Update. Through that work effort, more appropriate opportunity sites were
                          identified for redevelopment and consistency with the General Plan and Zoning
                          Code updates. Specifically per Program 3.3.4.1, Housing Sites/Underutilized
                          Sites Inventory Program and Program 3.3.4.2, General Plan/Zoning Ordinance
                          Provision. Consequently, the City is required to plan for the current planning
                          period of 2014-2021 as well as any unaccommodated shortfall identified from the
                          previous (2006-2014) planning period. The 2006-2014 RHNA for Pico Rivera is
                          shown in Table 4-37.
                          Table 4-37:
                          Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2006-2014
                                   Income Group                Number of Units           Percent of Total
                            Very Low                                   211                    24.7%
                            Low                                        134                    15.7%
                            Moderate                                   143                    16.7%
                            Above Moderate                             367                    42.9%
                            Total                                      855                     100%
                          Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG July 2007.
                          The two planning period allocations combined result in a final housing needs
                          allocation as shown in Table 4-38. The total fair share allocation for Pico Rivera
                          for the combined planning periods is 1,705 units.
                                                                      4-82

                   	 Adopted October 2013                                          2014-2021 Housing Element
Table 4-38:
Combined 2006-2014 and 2014-2021 RHNA
                                                                  Above
                        Very Low        Low         Moderate                 Total
                                                                 Moderate
 2006-2014 RHNA            211          134           143          367        855
 2014-2021 RHNA            217          131           140          362        850
 Total                     428          265           283          729       1,705
Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG July 2007.
As Pico Rivera’s 2006-2014 Housing Element was adopted, but not fully
implemented the City must evaluate two key factors to determine their exact
shortfall, in compliance with AB 1233. First, as the RHNA process establishes
January 1, 2006 as the baseline for growth projections for the Housing Element
planning period of 2006-2014, jurisdictions may count any new units built or
approved since January 1, 2006 toward their 2006-2014 RHNA allocation. As
Pico Rivera’s Housing Element was adopted and certified, but not fully
implemented, any units built or approved from 2006 to the present may be
credited toward the City’s 2006-2014 RHNA allocation of 855 units. Second, as
AB 1233 focuses on units that are accommodated specifically on rezoned sites,
the shortfall will primarily include lower income units that were to be
accommodated on mixed-use and higher density residential sites identified in the
2006-2014 Housing Element. Table 4-39 below, presents the number of units
that the City must address in their 2014-2021 sites inventory, including any
shortfall from the 2006-2014 planning period.
Table 4-39:
2014-2021 RHNA Including AB 1233 Shortfall
                                                                    Above
                                  Very Low      Low     Moderate            Total
                                                                   Moderate
 2006-2014 RHNA                      211         134       143       367     855
 2006-2014 Units
 Accommodated by Credits of           0           0         0         66      66
 Units Constructed
 Subtotal                            211         134       143       301     789
 2014-2021 RHNA                      217         131       140       362     850
 TOTAL                               428         265       283       663    1,639
Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG July 2007.
As shown in Table 4-39, between 2006 and 2012 the City approved and
developed 66 above moderate-income units. Units constructed within the 2006-
2014 planning period are listed in Table 4-40.
                                            4-83

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-40:
                          Units Constructed 2006-2014
                                                          Number of
                            Address                                    Year Built        Affordability
                                                             Units
                            3916 Rosemead Blvd.               9          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            9003–9083 Catherine St.           42         2008        Above Moderate-Income
                            9044 Burma Rd.                     1         2007        Above Moderate-Income
                            8630 Elba St.                     1          2007        Above Moderate-Income
                            8928 Ibsen St.                    1          2008        Above Moderate-Income
                            8717 West Blvd.                   1          2008        Above Moderate-Income
                            8719 West Blvd.                   1          2008        Above Moderate-Income
                            9749 Myron St.                     1         2009        Above Moderate-Income
                            8737 Beverly Blvd.                1          2009        Above Moderate-Income
                            9718 Planter St.                   1         2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            8510 Manzanar Ave.                1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            3923 Durfee Ave.                  1          2013        Above Moderate-Income
                            3919 Durfee Ave.                  1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            9217 Salma Ln.                    1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            8345 Whitier Blvd.                1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            8349 Whittier Blvd.               1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            9235 Salma Ln.                    1          2012        Above Moderate-Income
                            TOTAL                             66
                          Source: City of Pico Rivera, 2013.
                          Based on the requirements of AB 1233, as shown in Table 4-39, for the 2014-
                          2021 planning period the City must make available sites to accommodate a total
                          of 1,639 units, including 428 units for very low income, 265 units for low income
                          (a total of 693 lower income units), 283 units for moderate income, and 663 units
                          for above moderate income.
                          Densities to Accommodate Lower Income
                          Housing
                          Density is a critical factor in the development of affordable housing. Maintaining
                          low densities typically increases the cost of construction per unit, while higher
                                                                    4-84

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
density development lowers the per-unit land cost and facilitates construction in
an economy of scale. In addition to the potential for density bonus provisions,
more intense residential development is achieved through a number of
mechanisms, including clustering of residential development and zero lot line
development, subject to City development standards. Clustering of housing can
produce higher densities on a portion of land while creating space for amenities,
and retaining the overall density assignment of the entire property. This method
is effective when portions of the property not utilized for residential development
can be developed with compatible uses, such as open space/recreation, parks,
schools and public facilities.
Affordability is typically correlated with density. The State Housing and
Community Development Department (HCD) has established “default densities”
that by definition are considered sufficient to provide market-based incentives for
the development of housing for lower-income households. For jurisdictions with
a population greater than 25,000 and located within a Metropolitan Statistical
Area (MSA) with a population of more than 2 million, the default density is 30
dwelling units per acre (or higher). Pico Rivera has a population greater than
25,000 and is within the Long Beach-Los Angeles-Ontario MSA; consequently
the default density for the City is 30 dwelling units per acre.
To facilitate and encourage the development of housing units affordable to very
low- and low-income residents, the City has identified zones with densities
appropriate to accommodate the development of a variety of housing types.
Residentially Zoned Land
The Land Use Element of the City of Pico Rivera’s General Plan sets forth the
City's policies for guiding local development. These policies, together with
existing zoning regulations, establish the amount and distribution of land to be
allocated for different uses within the City. The City of Pico Rivera’s General
Plan and Zoning Ordinance provides for a range of different intensities of
residential land use, including the following:
   Rural Residential Land Use Designation (0-2 du/ac)
   Low Density Residential Land Use Designation (2-6 du/ac)
   Medium Density Residential Land Use Designation (6-14 du/ac)
   Highest Density Residential Land Use Designation (14-30 du/ac)
Within the City there are a number of vacant or underutilized sites currently
zoned residential that are appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s
remaining RHNA. A parcel specific inventory and map are provided in
Appendix A.
                                         4-85

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                   Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-41 provides a summary of land designated for residential uses in the
                          General Plan and is currently available to accommodate a portion of the City’s
                          remaining RHNA allocation.
                          Table 4-41:
                          Summary of Unit Capacity for Current Residentially Zoned Sites
                                Proposed
                                              Number of                   Total    Potential
                             General Plan                  Density                                 Income Group
                                               Parcels                  Acreage       Units
                              Designation
                            Low Density
                                                   1       2-6 du/ac      0.42          2          Above Moderate
                            Residential
                            High Density                     14-30
                                                   8                      1.71         36             Moderate
                            Residential                      du/ac
                            TOTAL                 12                                   38
                          Rezoning for Adequate Sites
                          After accounting for construction achievements and vacant and underutilized
                          residentially-zoned sites, the City has a shortfall of sites to accommodate its
                          growth needs. Pursuant to AB 2348, jurisdictions with a shortfall of vacant and
                          underutilized residential land to meet its RHNA needs must commit to a rezoning
                          program to provide adequate sites to meet its remaining needs. The program
                          must adhere to the following parameters:
                           Sites must be rezoned to accommodate 100 percent of the RHNA shortfall for
                              lower income units;
                           Rezoned sites must accommodate owner-occupied and rental multifamily
                              residential uses by-right; and
                           At least 50 percent of the very low- and low-income housing need shall be
                              accommodated on sites designated for residential use and for which
                              nonresidential use or mixed uses are not permitted.
                          Pico Rivera’s rezoning program must provide for adequate sites to accommodate
                          the remaining RHNA need of 1,639 units. To accommodate these units, the City
                          has provided Program 15 in Section 2, Housing Plan to rezone the identified sites
                          in Table 4-42.
                          The City has evaluated the development capacity of each area based on the
                          existing land uses and other site characteristics. The majority of the sites
                          identified are along the City’s older commercial and industrial thoroughfares
                          containing underutilized buildings surrounded or adjacent to parking lots that are
                          minimally used during peak business hours. Older commercial and retail
                          businesses are located in buildings needing major rehabilitation, often adjacent
                          to small vacant lots or vacant buildings. Identified parcels that are currently
                                                                     4-86

                    	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
zoned industrial are in areas where the City would like to discourage such uses
in the future. Many of the warehouses and truck yards located in these areas are
underutilized or vacant, and some property owners have expressed interest in
developing their sites with residential uses. The City also considered market
conditions and development trends while identifying the suitable and feasible
sites. With the potential introduction of an LA Metro Gold Line station in Pico
Rivera, the City would like to encourage more mixed-use transit-oriented
development and higher density housing in the community. The City has recently
completed newer commercial developments that are now thriving retail centers
for both residents and visitors. These commercial centers can serve to support
future residential growth in identified parcels. Pico Rivera and other communities
in the Gateway Cities Council of Governments subregion have experienced
market trends towards both horizontal and vertical mixed uses. Recent higher
density residential developments in the neighboring city of Montebello illustrate
the types of development that can occur in the City of Pico Rivera. While the
housing market has slowed over the past couple of years, the City continues to
receive applications and developer interest for higher density residential
development and mixed-use development.
Within the current planning period the City has approved a number of multifamily
projects including a 14-unit condominium development in 2007 (approved but not
developed, a 42-unit condominium development in 2008 (approved and
developed), and a 9-unit condominium development in 2012 (approved and
developed). The lack of vacant land in the City has required creative
redevelopment and infill projects resulting in higher density residential projects on
smaller sites.
Table 4-42:
Sites for Rezoning Program
                                                          Proposed      Potential
  Proposed                     Current       Proposed
               Acres                                       Minimum        Unit
    Areas                    GP/Zoning        Zoning
                                                            Density     Capacity
  Area 1                 Single-Family      Medium                    15
               1.13
                         Residential (S-F)  Density     6 to 14 du/ac
                                            Residential
                         General
                         Commercial (C-G)
                         Multiple Family
                                            High
                         Residential
  Area 2       5.83                         Density     30 du/ac      174
                         Variable Density
                                            Residential
                         (R-M)
                         Parking (P)
                         Public Facilities  Mixed-Use
  Area 3       2.03                                     30 du/ac      30
                         (P-F)              Overlay
                                           4-87
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                         Adopted October 2013
                                                                           Proposed        Potential
                          Proposed              Current       Proposed
                                   Acres                                   Minimum           Unit
                            Areas             GP/Zoning        Zoning
                                                                            Density        Capacity
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)
                                                             Mixed-Use
                                         Limited Industrial
                                                             Overlay
                                         (I-L)
                          Area 4   21.94                                 30 du/ac        489
                                                             High
                                         Multiple Family
                                                             Density
                                         Residential
                                                             Residential
                                         Variable Density
                                         (R-M)
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)
                                                             Mixed-Use
                          Area 5   8.16                                  30 du/ac        122
                                                             Overlay
                                         Single-Family
                                         Residential (S-F)
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)    Mixed-Use
                          Area 6   5.68                                  30 du/ac        85
                                                             Overlay
                                         Parking (P)
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)
                                         Parking (P)
                                         Professional and
                                         Administrative      Mixed-Use
                          Area 7   12.44                                 30 du/ac        186
                                         (P-A)               Overlay
                                         Multiple Family
                                         Residential
                                         Variable Density
                                         (R-M)
                                         General             Mixed-Use
                          Area 8   2.8                                   30 du/ac        42
                                         Commercial (C-G)    Overlay
                                         General Industrial  Mixed-Use
                          Area 9   6.93                                  30 du/ac        103
                                          (I-G)              Overlay
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)
                                                             Mixed-Use
                          Area 10  9.82                                  30 du/ac        147
                                         Professional and    Overlay
                                         Administrative
                                         (P-A)
                                         General
                                                             Mixed-Use
                          Area 11  11.42 Commercial (C-G)                30 du/ac        171
                                                             Overlay
                                         General
                                         Commercial (C-G)
                                                             Mixed-Use
                          Area 12  1.67                                  30 du/ac        25
                                                             Overlay
                                         Parking (P)
                                         General
                                                             Mixed-Use
                          Area 13  0.97  Commercial (C-G)                30 du/ac        14
                                                             Overlay
                          TOTAL                                                          1,603
                                                            4-88
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 1
Current GP/Zoning: Single-Family Residential (S-F)
Proposed Zoning: Medium Density Residential
Proposed Density: 6-14 du/ac
Acreage: 1.13
Existing Land Use: Convenience store and parking lot
Potential Unit Capacity: 15
Description: Area 1 is located at the intersection of Kruse Road and Narrows
Drive. The majority of the site is a parking lot surrounding a small convenience
store located at the northeast corner of the site. The site is currently surrounded
by single-family residential uses. The City considers these parcels to be
underutilized and poised for redevelopment to medium density residential uses,
consistent and complimentary to the surrounding neighborhood. Assuming a
density of 6-14 du/ac dwelling units per acre, Area 1 can accommodate
approximately 15 dwelling units at densities appropriate to accommodate
moderate-income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                         4-89
2014-2021 Housing Element      Adopted October 2013
                          4-90
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 2
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                       Multiple Family Residential Variable Density (R-M)
                       Parking (P)
Proposed Zoning: High Density Residential
Proposed Density: 16-30 du/ac
Acreage: 5.83
Existing Land Use: Commercial service uses including a car wash, motel,
coffee shop, and auto service shop
Potential Unit Capacity: 174
Description: Area 2 is located at the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and
Olympic Way. The parcels within this area are occupied by dilapidated
commercial service uses the City anticipates will discontinue during the planning
period. The northwest corner of the area is occupied by a self-service car wash
surrounded by a parking lot. The City considers these parcels to be underutilized
and poised for redevelopment to high density residential uses. The parcels in the
northeast corner contain existing older multi-family residential uses and the area
is adjacent to other residential uses. Assuming a density of 16-30 dwelling units
per acre, Area 2 can accommodate approximately 174 dwelling units at densities
appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                         4-91
2014-2021 Housing Element      Adopted October 2013
                          4-92
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                          2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 3
Current GP/Zoning: Public Facilities (P-F)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 2.03
Existing Land Use: Truck yard
Potential Unit Capacity: 30
Description: Area 3 is located at the intersection of Beverly Boulevard and San
Gabriel River Parkway. This parcel is currently occupied by a County truck yard.
The City considers this parcel as underutilized and is not consistent with the
adjacent residential uses; redevelopment to mixed use is appropriate. Assuming
a 50% development capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling
units per acre, Area 3 can accommodate approximately 30 units at densities
appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-93
2014-2021 Housing Element      Adopted October 2013
                          4-94
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 4
SITE 1
Current GP/Zoning: Limited Industrial (I-L)
                       General Commercial (C-G)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 11.18
Existing Land Use: Truck distribution center, old apartment complex, and
storage buildings
Potential Unit Capacity: 167
Description: Site 1 within Area 4 is located along Durfee Avenue between
Olympic Boulevard and West Boulevard. The majority of parcels to the north are
occupied by a truck distribution center that the City anticipates will discontinue
during the planning period. Parcels to the south are occupied by an old
apartment complex and multiple dilapidated storage buildings. The City considers
these parcels to be underutilized and inconsistent with surrounding residential
uses. Future housing development in this area will benefit from proximity to
employment opportunities, services, and retail along Whittier Boulevard.
Assuming a 50% development capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30
dwelling units per acre, Site 1 in Area 4 can accommodate approximately 167
units at densities appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
These parcels are part of the Durfee Avenue Corridor Plan currently being
developed by the City of Pico Rivera. The City of Pico Rivera was awarded a
grant to design and construct a railroad grade separation along Durfee Avenue to
increase vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle safety and mobility. The Corridor Plan
will guide specific improvement activities, such as final design of the grade
                                         4-95
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          separation, complete streets improvements along the corridor, including
                          recommended cross-sections, and required right-of-way acquisitions. The
                          Corridor Plan will also provide a land use concept that will lead to conversion of
                          older, industrial buildings to multi-unit residential uses and revitalization of the
                          adjacent neighborhoods. The City is currently in contact with interested
                          developers to analyze the feasibility of multiple parcels for a large mixed-use
                          development.
                          To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
                          and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
                          development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
                          streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
                          and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
                          regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
                          extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                                                   4-96
                   	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
SITE 2
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                        Multiple Family Residential Variable Density (R-M)
                        Limited Industrial (I-L)
Proposed Zoning: High Density Residential
Proposed Density: 16-30 du/ac
Acreage: 10.76
Existing Land Use: Truck yard, industrial buildings, and low-density multi-family
housing
Potential Unit Capacity: 322
Description: Site 2 within Area 4 is located along Durfee Avenue between
Stephens Street and Whittier Boulevard. These parcels are occupied dilapidated
industrial buildings, which the City anticipates will discontinue during the planning
period. The area has a number of older low-density multi-family developments
that have the potential for redevelopment to higher density developments. The
City considers these parcels to be underutilized. Future housing development in
this area will benefit from proximity to employment opportunities, services, and
retail along Whittier Boulevard. Assuming a density of 16-30 dwelling units per
acre, Site 2 in Area 4 can accommodate approximately 246 dwelling units at
densities appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
These parcels are part of the Durfee Avenue Corridor Plan currently being
developed by the City of Pico Rivera. The City of Pico Rivera was awarded a
grant to design and construct a railroad grade separation along Durfee Avenue to
increase vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle safety and mobility. The Corridor Plan
will guide specific improvement activities, such as final design of the grade
separation, complete streets improvements along the corridor, including
recommended cross-sections, and required right-of-way acquisitions. The
Corridor Plan will also provide a land use concept that will lead to conversion of
older, industrial buildings to multi-unit residential uses and revitalization of the
adjacent neighborhoods. The City is currently in contact with interested
developers to analyze the feasibility of multiple parcels for a large mixed-use
development.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                          4-97
2014-2021 Housing Element      Adopted October 2013
                          4-98
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 5
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                       Single-Family Residential (S-F)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 8.16
Existing Land Use: Motel, gas station, and retail and services
Potential Unit Capacity: 122
Description: Area 5 is located along Rosemead Boulevard at the intersections
of Beverly Boulevard and Beverly Road. The parcels within Area 5 are occupied
by various uses including, an old motel, gas station, a small retail building, U-
Haul, and an auto center. The current uses are surrounded by large parking lots,
and all but one structure is single-story. The parcel currently zoned single-family
residential is vacant. The City considers these parcels to be underutilized and
poised for redevelopment to mixed-use. Assuming a 50% development capacity
and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 5 can
accommodate approximately 122 units at densities appropriate to accommodate
lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                         4-99
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-100
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                          2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 6
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                      Parking (P)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 5.68
Existing Land Use: Retail and service uses
Potential Unit Capacity: 85
Description: Area 6 is located at the intersection of Rosemead Boulevard and
Mines Avenue. The parcels within Area 6 are occupied by single-story retail and
service uses that are arranged in a conventional strip mall development. Over
50% of the area is covered by the parking lot that is greatly underutilized even
during peak business hours. The City considers these parcels to be underutilized
and poised for redevelopment to mixed-use. Assuming a 50% development
capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 6
can accommodate approximately 85 units at densities appropriate to
accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-101
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-102
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 7
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                       Parking (P)
                       Professional and Administrative (P-A)
                       Multiple Family Residential Variable Density (R-M)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 12.44
Existing Land Use: Hotel/motel, multi-family development, and offices
Potential Unit Capacity: 186
Description: Area 7 is located along Telegraph Road, close to the intersection
of Rosemead Boulevard. The parcels within Area 7 are occupied by a motel and
small hotel, a three-story multi-family development, and office uses. The majority
of parcels occupied by office uses are mostly parking lot areas that are
underutilized during peak business hours. The area currently has multi-family
uses that can be complemented by future mixed-use development. The City
considers these parcels to be underutilized and poised for redevelopment.
Assuming a 50% development capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30
dwelling units per acre, Area 7 can accommodate approximately 186 units at
densities appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
                                         4-103
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
                          extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                                                4-104
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 8
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 2.8
Existing Land Use: Small commercial/retail buildings, vacant buildings and
vacant lots
Potential Unit Capacity: 42
Description: Area 8 is located along Rosemead Boulevard between Isora Street
and Ibsen Street. Existing uses include small commercial/retail buildings, vacant
buildings, and two vacant lots. The vacant buildings are small and dilapidated
with for-sale signs posted in front of some properties. Businesses in this area are
outdated single-story structures. The City considers these parcels to be
underutilized and poised for redevelopment with proper lot consolidation.
Assuming a 50% development capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30
dwelling units per acre, Area 8 can accommodate approximately 42 units at
densities appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                         4-105
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-106
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 9
Current GP/Zoning: General Industrial (I-G)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 6.93
Existing Land Use: Indoor swap meet and parking
Potential Unit Capacity: 103
Description: Area 9 is located at the intersection of Paramount Boulevard and
East Slauson Avenue. The majority of the site is occupied by the Pico Rivera
Indoor Swap Meet, which the City anticipates will discontinue operation during
the planning period. The parcel is adjacent to existing residential uses. The City
considers these parcels to be underutilized and poised for redevelopment to
mixed-use. Assuming a 50% development capacity and a maximum permitted
density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 9 can accommodate approximately
103 units at densities appropriate to accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-107
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-108
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 10
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                      Professional and Administrative (P-A)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 9.82
Existing Land Use: Motels, small multi-family development, small office
building, and a vacant lot
Potential Unit Capacity: 147
Description: Area 10 is located along Rosemead Boulevard, close to the
intersection of Washington Boulevard. The parcels within Area 10 are occupied
by two old motels, a small multi-family development, a small office building, and a
vacant lot. The City considers these parcels to be underutilized and poised for
redevelopment to mixed-use. Future housing development in this area will benefit
from proximity to employment opportunities, services, and retail along
Washington Boulevard. Assuming a 50% development capacity and a maximum
permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 10 can accommodate
approximately 147 units at densities appropriate to accommodate lower income
households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-109
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-110
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 11
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 11.42
Existing Land Use: Single-story retail and services buildings, small office
building, and parking lot
Potential Unit Capacity: 171
Description: Area 11 is located along Washington Boulevard, on the northeast
and west side as it intersects Rosemead Boulevard. A portion of this area was
identified in the Washington Boulevard Light Rail Corridor study funded by
SCAG’s Compass Blueprint Program. The study identified the parcels on the
east side as a potential area for mixed-use, including multifamily residential
development. The area is occupied by single-story retail and services buildings,
small office buildings, and underutilized parking lots. The City considers this site
to be underutilized and poised for redevelopment to mixed-use. Future housing
development in this area will benefit from proximity to employment opportunities,
services, and retail along Washington Boulevard. Assuming a 50% development
capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 11
can accommodate approximately 171 units at densities appropriate to
accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
                                         4-111

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              Adopted October 2013
                          regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
                          extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                                                4-112
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 12
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
                      Parking (P)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 1.67
Existing Land Use: Single-story retail and food service buildings and
underutilized parking lots
Potential Unit Capacity: 25
Description: Area 12 is located at the northeast intersection of Rosemead
Boulevard and Telegraph Road. The area is occupied by single-story retail and
food service buildings and underutilized parking lots. The City considers this site
to be underutilized and poised for redevelopment to mixed-use. Future housing
development in this area will benefit from proximity to employment opportunities,
services, and retail along Telegraph Road. Assuming a 50% development
capacity and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 12
can accommodate approximately 25 units at densities appropriate to
accommodate lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-113
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-114
                 	 Adopted October 2013                                           2014-2021 Housing Element
AREA 13
Current GP/Zoning: General Commercial (C-G)
Proposed Zoning: Mixed-Use
Proposed Minimum Density: 30 du/ac
Acreage: 0.97
Existing Land Use: Single-story retail building and a small multi-family building
Potential Unit Capacity: 14
Description: Area 13 is located along Washington Boulevard, at the intersection
of Crossway Drive. The area is occupied by single-story retail building and a
small multi-family building. The City considers this site to be underutilized and
poised for redevelopment to mixed-use. Assuming a 50% development capacity
and a maximum permitted density of 30 dwelling units per acre, Area 13 can
accommodate approximately 14 units at densities appropriate to accommodate
lower income households.
To further encourage and facilitate the development of affordable units for low-
and very low-income families on the Site, the City will offer a menu of
development incentive opportunities, including: development fee modifications,
streamlined processing, density bonus incentives, and reductions in development
and parking standards, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for potential
regulatory and financial incentives will be prioritized to encourage housing for
extremely low- and very low-income households.
                                        4-115
2014-2021 Housing Element       Adopted October 2013
                          4-116
                       	 Adopted October 2013                                                       2014-2021 Housing Element
Summary of Available Sites
As outlined in the previous section, Table 4-38 and Table 4-39 illustrate the
City’s RHNA allocation for the 2014-2021 planning period as well as
unaddressed carry over units from the 2008-2014 planning period. Table 4-43
provides a summary of the strategies the City has identified to facilitate the
development of new residential units to accommodate their remaining RHNA
allocation.
Table 4-43:
Accommodation of the 2014-2021 RHNA
                                      Very                                     Above
                                                 Low        Moderate                          Total
                                      Low                                     Moderate
  Remaining RHNA                       428        265            283             663          1,639
  Current Residentially-Zoned
                                        0          0            18(a)           20(a)           38
  Sites (Appendix A)
  Sites in Rezoning Program
                                           1,588                  15              0           1,603
  (Table 6-7)
  TOTAL(b)
  (Remaining RHNA minus                    (895)                 250             643             2
  Current Residentially-
  Zoned Sites and Sites in
  Rezoning Program)
  Unaccommodated RHNA                        0                     0              0              0
Notes:
   (a)
       Densities of 24 units per acre are appropriate to facilitate the development of moderate and
       above moderate income housing; therefore the unit potential has been divided evenly between
       the two income categories.
   (b)
       Parentheses indicate a surplus of units.
Sites currently zoned residential can accommodate 18 moderate-income units
and 20 above moderate-income units. Sites identified in the rezoning program
can accommodate 1,588 very low- and low-income units and 15 moderate-
income units. The surplus of very low- and low-income units can be used to meet
the remaining RHNA need for moderate- and above moderate-income units.
After determining the total capacity for all available sites, including current
residentially-zoned sites and sites identified in the rezoning program, the City has
met the remaining RHNA need of 1,639 dwelling units as shown in Table 4-43.
Environmental Constraints
Potential environmental constraints to future development of sites identified
include the seismic and liquefaction hazards, which are addressed in the Non-
Governmental Constraints section of the Housing Element. Parcels identified in
the Sites Inventory were compared with all hazards maps included in the City’s
Safety Element; none were found to be within areas that have development
restrictions due to risk of damage from disasters (such as floods, wildfires, or
seismic events). The sites inventoried have a land use designation which was
determined based on surrounding land uses and has already examined potential
                                                   4-117

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                               Adopted October 2013
                          environmental constraints. Aside from the constraints mentioned above, there
                          are no additional constraints that would impede the development of new housing
                          units in the future on the identified sites.
                          Infrastructure Constraints
                          The 2014-2021 Housing Element promotes the production of housing which in
                          turn may result in population growth. Through the current General Plan update,
                          the City’s total RHNA allocation of 1,639 units will be added to the updated
                          General Plan’s residential “build out.” Analysis of infrastructure capacity for the
                          General Plan will ensure that there is enough capacity available to accommodate
                          development consistent with the City’s RHNA allocation. To ensure that
                          infrastructure needs of specific projects are addressed, the City requires that
                          project applications for new development be reviewed for adequate
                          infrastructure. Applications are evaluated on a case-by-case basis to ensure
                          there is the capacity to service new developments. Infrastructure requirements
                          and costs are also discussed in the Non-Governmental Constraints Section of
                          the Housing Element.
                          The adoption of the updated Housing Element would not in itself require or result
                          in the construction of new storm water drainage facilities or expansion of existing
                          facilities. The Whittier Narrows Dam, completed in 1957, captures local storm
                          water flows for groundwater replenishment. Per Municipal Code, Title 16,
                          Chapter 16.04 Storm Water and Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention, prior to
                          construction of new development, the project would be evaluated for its potential
                          to discharge pollutants to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
                          Discharges within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County. Further, once
                          a new development project has been evaluated for its potential to discharge
                          pollutants, the city requires BMPs to be installed during construction and
                          following project completion. Compliance with the City’s Municipal Code and
                          Urban Water Management Plan would ensure that adequate drainage is
                          provided, that future development takes into account existing capacity and
                          infrastructure conditions, and that urban runoff from new development is
                          minimized.
                          Increase in population due to new housing development could increase demand
                          on water resources. Water service in the City is provided by the City of Pico
                          Rivera Water Department and Pico Water Company. Approximately 80 percent
                          of the City’s water supply is provided by groundwater resources pumped through
                          wells and distributed throughout the City. The remaining 20 percent is purchased
                          though agreements with the Metropolitan Water District. Population growth has
                          been accounted for and factored in the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
                          (UWMP), and indicates that water sources are available to provide water for
                          future growth. The project is not recommending any increase in population in
                          excess of the SCAG projections upon which the 2010 UWMP relied for its water
                          demand projections.
                                                                    4-118

                  	 Adopted October 2013                                              2014-2021 Housing Element
The County Sanitation District maintains and operates the sewer system in the
City. The City is served by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 2 and
sewer lines are maintained by the County Department of Public Works. Sewage
from the City are conveyed through sewer mains into the Joint Water Pollution
Control Plan (JWPCP) in Carson. The JWPCP is one of the largest wastewater
treatment plants in the world and is the largest of the Sanitation Districts'
wastewater treatment plants. The facility provides both primary and secondary
treatment for approximately 280 million gallons of wastewater per day (mgd), and
has a total permitted capacity of 400 mgd. On average a housing unit generates
approximately 180 gallons of sewage on a daily basis. Given the projected
demand and the existing treatment capacity, future developments’ treatment
demand can be met by the service provider.
Financial Resources
A variety of potential funding sources are available to finance housing activities in
Pico Rivera. Due to both the high cost of developing and preserving housing,
and limitations on both the amount and uses of funds, layering of funding sources
may be required for affordable housing programs and projects. Table 4-44 lists
the potential funding sources that are available for housing activities. They are
divided into five categories: federal, State, county, local, and private resources.
The list serves as comprehensive resource and does not indicate the City’s
participation in each program.
In previous years, the primary source of funds for affordable housing activities in
Pico Rivera was the Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside fund. On Dec. 29,
2011, the California Supreme Court ruled to uphold ABx1 26, which dissolved all
redevelopment agencies (RDAs) in the State. A companion bill, ABx1 27, which
would have allowed the RDAs to continue to exist, was also declared invalid by
the court. The court’s decision required that all RDAs within California be
eliminated no later than February 1, 2012.             The City of Pico Rivera
Redevelopment Agency was dissolved as of February 1, 2012 and the City
selected the Pico Rivera Housing Assistance Agency to be the Successor
Agency responsible for all enforceable obligations owed.
Pico Rivera previously relied on estimated redevelopment housing set-aside
revenues $2.0 million annually to support the development of affordable housing
and the implementation of programs outlined in the Housing Plan. For the 2014-
2021 planning cycle, the City is investigating new funding sources to utilize to
continue administering its existing programs.
                                         4-119

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                         Adopted October 2013
                          Table 4-44:
                          Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
                          Program Name              Description                                    Eligible Activities
                          1. Federal Programs and Funding Sources
                          Community Development     The Community Development Block                Acquisition
                          Block Grant (CDBG)        Grant (CDBG) program is a flexible             Rehabilitation
                                                    program that provides communities with
                                                                                                   Homebuyer Assistance
                                                    resources to address a wide range of
                                                    unique community development needs.            Economic Development
                                                                                                   Homeless Assistance
                                                                                                   Public Services
                          Home Investment           HOME funds are used to assist low              New Construction
                          Partnership (HOME)        income (80% AMI) households.                   Acquisition
                                                                                                   Rehabilitation
                                                                                                   Homebuyer Assistance
                                                                                                   Rental Assistance
                          Emergency Shelter Grant   Funds emergency shelters, services and         Homeless Assistance
                          (ESG) Program             transitional housing for homeless              Public Services
                                                    individuals and families.
                          Neighborhood              Provides funds to purchase abandoned           Acquisition
                          Stabilization Program     and foreclosed homes and residential           Homebuyer Assistance
                          (NSP) Funds               property.
                          Choice Neighborhoods      Funds to address distressed                    New Construction
                          Grants                    neighborhoods and public and assisted          Acquisition
                                                    projects to transform them into viable and
                                                                                                   Rehabilitation
                                                    sustainable mixed-income neighborhoods
                                                    by linking housing improvements with           Economic Development
                                                    appropriate services, schools, public          Public Services
                                                    assets, transportation, and access to
                                                    jobs. Planning grants and implementation
                                                    grants are available.
                          Section 202 Housing for   HUD provides capital advances to               Acquisition
                          Seniors                   finance the construction, rehabilitation or    Rehabilitation
                                                    acquisition with or without rehabilitation of
                                                                                                   New Construction
                                                    structures that will serve as supportive
                                                    housing for very low-income elderly
                                                    persons, including the frail elderly, and
                                                    provides rent subsidies for the projects to
                                                    help make them affordable.
                          Section 811 Housing for   Grants to non-profit developers of             Acquisition
                          Persons with Disabilities supportive housing for persons with            Rehabilitation
                                                    disabilities, including group homes,           New Construction
                                                    independent living facilities and
                                                    intermediate care facilities.                  Rental Assistance
                          Housing Opportunities     HOPWA is an entitlement grant                  Acquisition
                          for Persons with AIDS     distributed to the largest jurisdiction in     Rehabilitation
                          (HOPWA)                   each county. HOPWA funds may be used
                                                                                                   Homebuyer Assistance
                                                    for a wide range of housing, social
                                                    services, program planning, and                Homeless Assistance
                                                    development costs. These include, but          Public Services
                                                    are not limited to, the acquisition,           Rental Assistance
                                                    rehabilitation, or new construction of
                                                    housing units; costs for facility
                                                    operations; rental assistance; and short-
                                                    term payments to prevent homelessness.
                                                    HOPWA funds also may be used for
                                                    health care and mental health services,
                                                    chemical dependency treatment,
                                                    nutritional services, case management,
                                                    assistance with daily living, and other
                                                    supportive services.
                                                                       4-120
                     	 Adopted October 2013                                                      2014-2021 Housing Element
Program Name                  Description                                   Eligible Activities
Supportive Housing            Provides funding to develop supportive        Homeless Assistance
Program                       housing and services that will allow          Public Services
                              homeless persons to live as
                              independently as possible. Grants under
                              the Supportive Housing Program are
                              awarded through a national competition
                              held annually.
Shelter Plus Care             Provides rental assistance for hard-to-
                              serve homeless persons with disabilities
                              in connection with supportive services
                              funded from sources outside the
                              program.
2. State Programs
Low-income Housing Tax        Tax credits are available to persons and      New Construction
Credit (LIHTC)                corporations that invest in low-income
                              rental housing. Proceeds from the sale
                              are typically used to create housing. Tax
                              credits are available between 4% and
                              9%.
Building Equity and           Grants to cities to provide down payment      Homebuyer Assistance
Growth in                     assistance (up to $30,000) to low and
Neighborhoods (BEGIN)         moderate income first-time homebuyers
                              of new homes in projects with
                              affordability enhanced by local regulatory
                              incentives or barrier reductions. One
                              funding round annually through 2009.
CalHome                       Grants to cities and non-profit developers    Predevelopment
                              to offer homebuyer assistance, including      Site development
                              down payment assistance, rehabilitation,      Site acquisition
                              acquisition/rehabilitation, and homebuyer
                              counseling. Loans to developers for           Rehabilitation
                              property acquisition, site development,       Acquisition/Rehab
                              predevelopment and construction period        Down payment
                              expenses for homeownership projects.          assistance
                              One funding round annually through            Mortgage financing
                              2011.
                                                                            Homebuyer counseling
Transit-Oriented              Under the program, low-interest loans are     Homebuyer Assistance
Development Housing           available as gap financing for rental         Predevelopment
Program                       housing developments that include
                                                                            Site development
                              affordable units, and as mortgage
                              assistance for homeownership                  Infrastructure
                              developments. In addition, grants are
                              available to cities, counties, and transit
                              agencies for infrastructure improvements
                              necessary for the development of
                              specified housing developments, or to
                              facilitate connections between these
                              developments and the transit station.
Infill Incentive Grant        Funding of public infrastructure (water,      Regulations pending
Program                       sewer, traffic, parks, site clean-up, etc) to
                              facilitate infill housing development. One
                              funding round annually.
CalHFA FHA Loan               Provides fixed rate FHA mortgages in          Homebuyer Assistance
Program                       Federally Designated Targeted Areas.
CalHFA Homebuyer’s            CalHFA makes below market loans to            Homebuyer Assistance
Down payment                  first-time homebuyers of up to 3% of
Assistance Program            sales price. Program operates through
                              participating lenders who originate loans
                              for CalHFA. Funds available upon
                              request to qualified borrowers.
                                                   4-121

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                         Adopted October 2013
                          Program Name                Description                                  Eligible Activities
                          CalHFA Mental Health        Jointly administered by the California       New Construction
                          Services Act Funds          Department of Mental Health and the          Acquisition
                                                      California Housing Finance Agency on
                                                                                                   Rehabilitation
                                                      behalf of counties, the Program offers
                                                      permanent financing and capitalized          Homeless Assistance
                                                      operating subsidies for the development      Public Services
                                                      of permanent supportive housing,             Rental Assistance New
                                                      including both rental and shared housing,
                                                      to serve persons with serious mental
                                                      illness and their families who are
                                                      homeless or at risk of homelessness.
                                                      MHSA Housing Program funds will be
                                                      allocated for the development,
                                                      acquisition, construction, and/or
                                                      rehabilitation of permanent supportive
                                                      housing.
                          CalHFA New Issue Bond       Provides affordable housing bond funding     New Construction
                          Program (NIBP)              to CalHFA and other housing finance          Acquisition
                                                      agencies. This funding allows developers     Rehabilitation
                                                      to secure a source of affordable financing
                                                      in the marketplace which otherwise could     Preservation
                                                      not be obtained.
                          Golden State Acquisition    Affordable Housing Innovation Program        New Construction
                          Fund (GSAF)                 (AHIP): provides loans for developers        Acquisition
                                                      through a nonprofit fund manager to          Rehabilitation
                                                      provide quick acquisition financing for the
                                                      development or preservation of               Preservation
                                                      affordable housing.
                          Emergency Housing and       Provides operating facility grants for       Homeless Assistance
                          Assistance Program          emergency shelters, transitional housing     Public Services
                          Operating Facility Grants   projects, and supportive services for
                          (EHAP)                      homeless individuals and families.
                          Emergency Housing and       Funds capital development activities for     Homeless Assistance
                          Assistance Program          emergency shelters, transitional housing,    Public Services
                          Capital Development         and safe havens that provide shelter and
                          (EHAPCD)                    supportive services for homeless
                                                      individuals and families.
                          Emergency Solutions         Funds projects that serve homeless           Homeless Assistance
                          Grant (ESG) Program         individuals and families with supportive     Public Services
                                                      services, emergency shelter/transitional
                                                      housing, assisting persons at risk of
                                                      becoming homeless with homelessness
                                                      prevention assistance, and providing
                                                      permanent housing to the homeless
                                                      population. The Homeless Emergency
                                                      Assistance and Rapid Transition to
                                                      Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 places
                                                      new emphasis on assisting people to
                                                      quickly regain stability in permanent
                                                      housing after experiencing a housing
                                                      crisis and/or homelessness.
                          Infill Infrastructure Grant Provides grants for infrastructure           Predevelopment
                          Program (IIG)               construction and rehabilitation to support   Site development
                                                      higher-density affordable and mixed-         Infrastructure
                                                      income housing in infill locations.
                                                                         4-122
                   	 Adopted October 2013                                                     2014-2021 Housing Element
Program Name                Description                                  Eligible Activities
Multifamily Housing         Provides funding for new construction,       Acquisition
Program:                    rehabilitation, or acquisition and           Rental Assistance
                            rehabilitation of permanent or transitional
                                                                         Public Services
                            rental housing. Projects are not eligible if
                            construction has commenced as of the         Site development
                            application date, or if they are receiving   Infrastructure
                            9% federal low income housing tax            Development Fees
                            credits. Eligible costs include the cost of
                            child care, after-school care and social
                            service facilities integrally linked to the
                            assisted housing units; real property
                            acquisition; refinancing to retain
                            affordable rents; necessary onsite and
                            offsite improvements; reasonable fees
                            and consulting costs; and capitalized
                            reserves.
Predevelopment Loan         Provides predevelopment capital to           Predevelopment
Program (PDLP)              finance the start of low income housing
                            projects.
3. County Programs
Housing Choice              Rental assistance payments to owners of      Rental Assistance
Vouchers (formerly          private market rate units on behalf of low-
Section 8)                  income (50% MFI) tenants.
Home Ownership              The County of Los Angeles provides a         Homebuyer Assistance
Program (HOP)               secondary mortgage loans to first time
                            homebuyers. HOP has been designed to
                            meet the needs of low-income families
                            and individuals who want to purchase a
                            new home, but are unable to qualify
                            without financial assistance.
Mortgage Credit             Federal tax credit for low- and moderate-    Homebuyer Assistance
Certificate (MCC)           income homebuyers who have not owned         Income Tax Credit
                            a home in the past three years. Allocation
                            for MCC is provided by the State and
                            administered by the County.
Affordable                  The Los Angeles Community                    Homebuyer Assistance
Homeownership               Development Commission provides first-
Program (AHOP)              time homebuyer assistance to low-
                            income families and individuals to
                            purchase newly constructed homes that
                            were partially financed with CDC
                            development funding.
Housing Economic            The Los Angeles County HERO program          Rehabilitation
Recovery Ownership          was designed to meet the needs of low,       Acquisition
(HERO)                      moderate and middle-income households
                                                                         Homebuyer Assistance
                            who want to purchase a foreclosed or
                            abandoned single family home, but are
                            unable to qualify without financial
                            assistance. This program provides a
                            secondary mortgage for the purchase of
                            that home, down payment assistance,
                            and rehabilitation grant opportunities. The
                            secondary mortgage is a 0% interest
                            loan. No repayment of loan will be due
                            until the home is sold, transferred, or
                            refinanced, or no longer- owner-
                            occupied.
                                                4-123
2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                        Adopted October 2013
                          Program Name               Description                                  Eligible Activities
                          Infill Sites Rental        The ISRP is designed to provide financial    Rehabilitation
                          Program (ISRP)             assistance for acquisition and               Acquisition
                                                     rehabilitation of foreclosed residences for
                                                     affordable rental housing to low-income
                                                     persons. Developers must agree to
                                                     operate the housing at affordable rents
                                                     for a period of 55-years.
                          4. Local Programs
                          Tax Exempt Housing                                                      New Construction
                          Revenue Bond               The City can support low-income housing      Rehabilitation
                                                     by holding the required TEFRA hearing        Acquisition
                                                     prior enabling the issuance of housing
                                                     mortgage revenue bonds. The bonds
                                                     require the developer to lease a fixed
                                                     %age of the units to low-income families
                                                     at specified rental rates.
                          5. Private Resources/Financing Programs
                          Federal National           Fixed rate mortgages issued by private       Homebuyer Assistance
                          Mortgage Association       mortgage insurers; mortgages which fund
                          (Fannie Mae)               the purchase and rehabilitation of a
                                                     home; low down-payment mortgages for
                                                     homes in underserved areas.
                          National Housing Trust     The Green Affordable Housing                 Predevelopment
                                                     Preservation Loan fund through the           Development Loans
                                                     National Housing Trust Provides below
                                                     market predevelopment and interim
                                                     development loans to affordable housing
                                                     developers who seek to incorporate
                                                     green building techniques when
                                                     rehabilitating existing affordable housing.
                                                     Under the program, a portion of the loan
                                                     will be forgiven when the developer
                                                     demonstrates that they have incorporated
                                                     practical, environmentally friendly design
                                                     elements in the property's rehabilitation
                                                     plan.
                          California Community       Provides support for general operating of    New Construction
                          Foundation                 existing nonprofit affordable housing        Rehabilitation
                                                     developers, with the focus on supporting
                                                                                                  Acquisition
                                                     the development and preservation of
                                                     permanent affordable housing.
                          MacArthur Foundation:      Preserving Affordable Rental Housing         Preservation
                                                     Program is a $150 million initiative that    Rehabilitation
                                                     seeks to preserve and improve affordable     Acquisition
                                                     rental housing.
                          Local banks:               Thanks to the Community Reinvestment         Homebuyer Assistance
                                                     Act of 1977, commercial banks are
                                                     required to "meet the credit needs" of all
                                                     the areas from which they draw deposits.
                                                     They usually do this through below-
                                                     market loans to both developers and
                                                     qualified low-income homebuyers, and
                                                     grants to community development
                                                     nonprofits. Many banks have set up a
                                                     separate community development
                                                     division, and partner with local
                                                     organizations that provide services like
                                                     homeownership counseling to their
                                                     borrowers. Larger banks often have a
                                                     separate foundation to handle the grants.
                                                                        4-124
                   	 Adopted October 2013                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
Potential Future Funding Sources
In addition to the funding sources listed in Table 4-43, affordable housing
advocates are working with large foundations in hopes of creating a low-interest
loan fund from endowments. Housing groups are also continuing attempts to
broaden infrastructure financing authority. An infrastructure financing district
(IFD) may be formed pursuant to California Government Code Section 53395 et
seq. (the “IFD Law”). These districts have rights to the tax increment for financing
public infrastructure. This authority exists at both the state and local level, but
under current law requires a vote. Another hurdle is that current IFD law prohibits
IFDs within any portion of a redevelopment project area that is or has been
previously created; coupled with the fact that the legislative intent of the IFD law
is that IFD areas are substantially undeveloped. However, many advocates
remain hopeful that IFDs may provide an opportunity to fill the redevelopment
gap. Current drafts of new legislation would allow cities to create infrastructure
districts without voter approval and make IFDs more user-friendly. There is also
proposed legislation that, in addition to allowing for IFD formation by resolution,
would require set-asides for affordable housing where an IFD is formed in a
transit village development district. Certain legislation also seeks to broaden the
share of property tax increment that IFDs in specified locations may collect, and
seeks to address the current deficiencies in the IFD Law.
Administrative Resources
Described below are several non-profit agencies that are currently active and
have completed projects in Los Angeles County. These agencies serve as
resources in meeting the housing needs of the City, and are integral in
implementing activities for acquisition/rehabilitation, preservation of assisted
housing, and development of affordable housing.
Habitat for Humanity
Habitat is a non-profit, Christian organization that builds and repairs homes for
sale to very low-income families with the help of volunteers and
homeowner/partner families. Habitat homes are sold to partner families at no
profit with affordable, no interest loans.
Jamboree Housing Corporation (JHC)
JHC is a non-profit developer that has developed and implemented numerous
affordable housing projects throughout Southern California and the State.
Jamboree has also established an in-house social services division to assist
residents in maintaining self-sufficiency. “Housing with a HEART” (Helping
Educate, Activate and Respond Together) now operates at most Jamboree-
owned properties.
                                          4-125

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                Adopted October 2013
                          Mercy Housing California
                          Mercy Housing has offices in Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Sacramento.
                          Mercy Housing serves more than 10,000 people at about 100 properties.
                          Residents range from families to people with special needs to seniors.
                          Neighborhood Housing Services of Los Angeles County (NHS)
                          Neighborhood Housing Services of Los Angeles County (NHS) strengthens
                          communities through the development and maintenance of quality affordable
                          housing, creation and preservation of affordable homeownership opportunities,
                          support of local leaders, providing financial education and increasing the financial
                          independence of families and people in need.
                          Energy Conservation Opportunities
                          As cities construct more housing to meet growing population demands, the
                          consumption rate of energy becomes a significant issue. The primary uses of
                          energy in urban areas are for transportation, lighting, water, heating and space
                          heating and cooling. The high cost of energy demands that efforts be taken to
                          reduce or minimize the overall level of urban consumption.
                          There are many opportunities for conserving energy in new and existing
                          residential units. Construction of energy efficient buildings does not lower the
                          price of housing. However, housing with energy conservation features should
                          result in reduced monthly occupancy costs as consumption of fuel and energy is
                          decreased. Similarly, retrofitting existing structures with energy conserving
                          features can result in a reduction in utility costs. Examples of energy
                          conservation opportunities include weatherization programs and home energy
                          audits; installation of insulation; installation or retrofitting of more efficient
                          appliances, and mechanical or solar energy systems; and building design and
                          orientation which incorporates energy conservation considerations. The City
                          enforces all provisions of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, which
                          provides for energy conservation features in new residential construction.
                          Southern California Edison programs: Southern California Edison offers a variety
                          of energy conservation services under the Low Income Energy Efficiency
                          programs (LIEE), which help qualified homeowners and renters conserve energy
                          and control electricity costs. Eligible customers can receive services from local
                          community agencies and licensed contractors working with Edison. Services
                          include weatherization, efficient lighting and cooling, refrigerator replacement,
                          and energy education. In addition, Edison participates in the California
                          Alternative Rates for Energy (CARE) program, which provides a 15% discount
                          reduction on electric bills for low-income customers and the Family Electric Rate
                          Assistance Program (FERA) that provides discounts for families with household
                          incomes slightly exceeding the low-income energy program allowances.
                                                                  4-126
                  	 Adopted October 2013                                              2014-2021 Housing Element
Southern California Gas programs: The Southern California Gas Company
offers two direct assistance programs to limited income customers: (1) a no-cost
weatherization (attic insulation and water heater blankets) and (2) a no-cost
furnace repair and replacement service. The Gas Company also participates in
the State LIEE and CARE programs, helping low-income customers conserve
energy and providing them with a discount on their gas bills.
Techniques to Conserve
Many modern design methods used to reduce residential energy consumption
are based on proven techniques that have been known to humans since the
earliest days of collective settlement. These methods can be categorized in
three ways:
     1. Building design that keeps natural heat in during the winter and out in the
         summer. Designs aim to reduce air conditioning and heating demands.
         Proven building techniques in this category include:
           Orienting windows and openings of a building to follow the path of
             the sun, in order to minimize solar gain in the summer and maximize
             solar gain in the winter;
           Utilizing “thermal mass,” earthen materials such as stone, brick,
             concrete, and tiles that absorb heat during the day and release heat
             at night;
           “Burying” sections of the structure in a hillside or berm to insulate the
             home against extremes of temperature;
           Application of window coverings, insulation, and other materials to
             reduce heat exchange between the interior and the exterior of the
             home;
           Strategic placement of openings and the use of ventilating devices
             that take advantage of natural air flow (particularly cool evening
             breezes); and
           Designing eaves and overhangs above windows to block direct
             summer solar gain during the summer, but allow for solar gain during
             the winter.
     2. Building orientation that allows natural elements to maintain a
         comfortable interior temperature. Examples include:
           Orienting the long axis of a building in a north-south position;
           Minimizing the southern and western exposure of exterior surfaces;
           Designing the structure to admit the maximum amount of sunlight
             into the building and to reduce exposure to extreme weather
             conditions; and
           Positioning dwelling units to take advantage of natural air circulation
             and evening breezes.
                                         4-127

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Adopted October 2013
                          3.        Use of landscaping features to moderate interior temperatures. Such
                                    techniques include:
                                      Planting of deciduous shade trees and other plants to protect the
                                        home;
                                      Design including natural or artificial flowing water; and
                                      Strategic placement of trees and hedges to control air flow.
                          In addition to natural techniques that have been used historically, a number of
                          modern energy conversion methods have been developed and advanced in more
                          recent years. These include:
                                      Implementation of solar panels and other devices to generate
                                        electricity;
                                      Application of solar energy to heat water;
                                      Employment of window glazing to repel summer heat and trap winter
                                        warmth;
                                      Use of weather-stripping and other insulating devices to reduce heat
                                        gain and loss; and
                                      Acquire energy efficient home appliances.
                          State Building Code Standards
                          The California Energy Commission was created in 1974 by the Warren-Alquist
                          State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Act. Upon its creation
                          the first task of the Commission was to adopt energy conservation standards for
                          new construction. The first set of residential energy conservation standards were
                          developed in the late 1970s (Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of
                          Regulations) and have been periodically revised in the years following. Pico
                          Rivera currently utilizes Tier 1 of the California Green Building Code and has not
                          adopted any local amendments to the building standards.
                          A focus of the Commission’s energy conservation standards is the definition of
                          “climate zones”. These zones were created to allow for flexible approaches to
                          energy conservation that can be tailored to different geographic regions of the
                          State. The City of Pico Rivera is located in Climate Zone 10, which covers the
                          semi-arid inland valleys. This climate zone is characterized by a mild winters, hot
                          summers, desert winds, and abundant sunshine.
                          Because of these climate conditions, a substantial percentage of residential
                          energy use goes to space cooling between the months of May and October.
                          Residential site design and construction techniques that can reduce the amount
                          of energy used for space cooling would significantly reduce overall energy
                          demand. As discussed above, a number of traditional and modern techniques
                          can decrease energy throughout the City.
                                                                   4-128

                      	 Adopted October 2013                                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
Progress Report
Section 65581 of the Government Code underscores the need for the periodic
review of the Housing Element. This process of review and evaluation permits
local officials to evaluate trends in the community and to initiate new programs
that will further housing goals. The City established six issue areas to be
addressed in the previous planning period. For each issue area, housing
programs were established to assist the City in reaching their objectives.
Table 4-45 provides a brief description of the housing programs outlined in the
previous Element, the program’s objective and the progress/status of the
program. In providing the status of the program the table will indicate whether the
program will be carried into the next planning period.
Table 4-45:
Housing Accomplishments
       Housing Element Program                             Evaluation of Effectiveness
Owner-Occupied Housing Rehabilitation Programs
1. Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program       Effectiveness: The Single-Family Residential
                                             Rehabilitation Loan Program provides zero percent,
Objective: Provide loans to low- and         simple interest, deferred payment loans to seniors,
                                             persons with disabilities, and families with low- and
moderate-income homeowners to repair
                                             moderate-incomes who own and occupy their homes
and improve up to 12 housing units per
year.                                        and need financial assistance to make repairs and
                                             improvements. This program is backed by federal
                                             funds with the loans secured by a deed of trust.
                                             Payment is typically not due until the home is sold,
                                             transferred in ownership, refinanced or the 30th year of
                                             the loan.
                                             Appropriateness: This program will be included in the
                                             2014-2021 Housing Element.
2. Housing Rehabilitation Grant              Effectiveness: Since 2006, the City has provided
Program                                      grants for 54 major and 103 minor housing
                                             rehabilitation projects. The Housing Rehabilitation
Objective: Provide grants to very low-       Grant Program provides grants up to $12,000 to low-
                                             income homeowners who need financial assistance for
income homeowners to repair and improve
                                             health- and safety-related improvements and/or minor
up to 30 housing units per year.
                                             home repairs such as exterior painting and/or
                                             sandblasting, exterior stuccoing, installation of security
                                             doors and deadbolt locks, and security strapping of hot
                                             water heaters. From the period 2010-2015, the City
                                             anticipates providing improvements to up to 150
                                             homeowners.
                                             Appropriateness: This program will be included in the
                                             2014-2021 Housing Element.
3. Neighborhood Improvement                  Effectiveness: The City has maintained a proactive
Program- Code Enforcement                    code enforcement program. The City receives on
                                             average 630 residential cases per year reporting
                                             violations, usually related to property maintenance
Objective: Continue to enforce Pico
Rivera’s development and health and          issues. The City’s program has successfully brought
                                             cited residential units into compliance with City code.
safety codes for to correct violations in
                                             From the period 2010-2015, the City anticipates
substandard structures, and require the
demolition of those units that cannot be     inspecting up to 1,500 housing units specifically in low-
                                             and moderate-income block groups based on an
rehabilitated through up to 800 inspections
                                             official designation of deteriorating and/or deteriorating
per year.
                                             area. The City also implements the Graffiti Removal
                                               4-129

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                              Adopted October 2013
                                  Housing Element Program                            Evaluation of Effectiveness
                                                                       Program, which provides funding in eligible low- and
                                                                       moderate-income block groups for neighborhood
                                                                       improvement activities.
                                                                       Appropriateness: As the City’s housing stock
                                                                       continues to age, proactive code enforcement will be
                                                                       both appropriate and necessary to maintain the City’s
                                                                       residential standards. This program will be included in
                                                                       the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                          At-Risk Housing Conservation
                          4. Subsidized At-Risk Housing                Effectiveness: The 2006-2014 Housing Element
                          Monitoring                                   indicates that the 75-unit Verna Villa Apartments is at-
                                                                       risk of conversion to market rate prior to July 2014. The
                                                                       City’s Housing Division is currently monitoring this
                          Objective: Monitor Federally-assisted
                                                                       apartment complex and will work with the owners and
                          rental housing developments that may
                          convert to market rate units during the next the Department of Housing and Urban Development
                                                                       (HUD) to maintain the affordability status of these units,
                          five-year time frame, and preserve
                                                                       if possible.
                          identified at-risk housing units.
                                                                       Appropriateness: To ensure that any future
                                                                       conversions are not detrimental to the City’s inventory
                                                                       of affordable housing, staff will closely monitor any at-
                                                                       risk units. The City will work with HUD during the 12–
                                                                       month negotiation period to identify incentives that
                                                                       would maintain the affordable status of the project or to
                                                                       negotiate a purchase, if possible. The City will also
                                                                       continue to offer a variety of development incentives
                                                                       (e.g., parking variances, density bonuses, etc.) to
                                                                       promote the development of affordable units. This
                                                                       program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                       Element.
                          Programs to Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing
                          5. Bonuses and Incentives                     Effectiveness: The City has amended the Zoning
                                                                        Code to include a Density Bonus Program.
                          Objective: Prepare and adopt a Density        Appropriateness: This program is essential to the
                          Bonus Ordinance to provide bonuses and        development of affordable units, as it allows
                          incentives to developers who construct        developers the flexibility to construct at densities above
                          projects with qualifying percentages of       what is allowed by the Municipal Code. The City will
                          affordable housing units.                     modify this program for the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                        Element to promote the adopted Density Bonus
                                                                        Ordinance on the City website and at City Hall.
                          6. Developer Consultation                     Effectiveness: The City works closely with
                                                                        developers to expedite approval procedures in order to
                                                                        diminish unnecessary timing constraints on
                          Objective: Provide early consultation with
                          potential developers with information to      development. For larger projects, an initial pre-
                                                                        consultation meeting with the Community and
                          assist them in developing affordable and
                                                                        Economic Development Department, Public Works
                          assisted housing.
                                                                        Department, and the Fire Department is arranged to
                                                                        discuss the development proposal. Through the City’s
                                                                        streamlined processing, a 42-unit condominium
                                                                        development was completed in the City in 2008.
                                                                        Appropriateness: The City provides information and
                                                                        handouts on the City’s website to assist potential
                                                                        developers. A Residential Development Handout is
                                                                        posted on the website, which summarizes residential
                                                                        development standards and related fees. To
                                                                        encourage and facilitate the development of a variety
                                                                        of housing types, the City continues to monitor permit
                                                                        processing times to ensure the fastest possible
                                                                        turnaround for applications. This program will be
                                                                        included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                                                                          4-130

                        	 Adopted October 2013                                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
        Housing Element Program                               Evaluation of Effectiveness
7. California Gold Down Payment                Effectiveness: Since this program is administered by
                                               the California Rural Home Mortgage Finance Authority,
                                               the City is unclear how active or effective the program
Objective: Publicize the California Rural
                                               has been.
Home Mortgage Finance Authority on the
City’s website, which allows qualified         Appropriateness: Though the California Gold Down
families to take a second mortgage of up to    Payment program is limited, it provides an opportunity
6% off the sale price of the home to cover     for lower income households to become first-time
down payment and closing costs.                home buyers. The City will continue this program as
                                               part of a broader “Partnership Program,” aimed at
                                               strengthening and establishing partnerships with other
                                               jurisdictions and local organizations to address
                                               community housing needs.
8. Mortgage Credit Certificates                Effectiveness: The City currently provides information
                                               on the County program on their website and directs
                                               residents, as appropriate, to apply for the program. As
Objective: Publicize the Mortgage Credit
                                               funding sources for the County were impacted during
Certificate (MCC) Program on the City’s
website, which allows qualified first-time     the planning period, it is unclear how active or effective
                                               the program has been.
homebuyers to take tax credits on their
annual mortgage interest payment as a          Appropriateness: Though the MCC Program is
dollar for dollar tax credit against federal   limited, it provides an opportunity for lower income
income tax.                                    households to become first-time homebuyers. The City
                                               will continue this program as part of a broader
                                               “Partnership Program,” aimed at strengthening and
                                               establishing partnerships with other jurisdictions and
                                               local organizations to address community housing
                                               needs.
9. Grant Acquisition Program                   Effectiveness: The City currently receives Community
                                               Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds from the
                                               Department of Housing and Urban Development. The
Objective: Pursue grant and loan
                                               City anticipates a funding allocation of $650,000 per
programs that are available from a variety
of governmental and non-profit sources to      year from 2010-2015. These grants are used to
                                               preserve and develop decent affordable housing,
assist in the development of new housing
                                               create a suitable living environment, and expand
opportunities for extremely low-income
households, other lower income                 economic opportunities.
households, and first-time homebuyers.         Appropriateness: The City will continue to participate
                                               and administer funds received through the CDBG
                                               program. For the 2014-2021 planning cycle, the City is
                                               investigating new funding sources to continue
                                               administering existing programs and address the
                                               needs of lower income households. This program will
                                               be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
10. Redevelopment Low-Income                   Effectiveness: On June 28, 2011, the Governor of
Housing Fund                                   California signed ABx126 which dissolved all California
                                               Redevelopment Agencies. Resulting legislation
                                               allowed a City to retain the housing assets of and
Objective: Develop 2 to 5 units per year
utilizing the 20% Low-Mod fund of tax          housing functions previously performed by the
                                               redevelopment agency or select the local housing
increment revenue generated by the
                                               authority to perform these duties. The City of Pico
Redevelopment Agency.
                                               Rivera chose the Pico Rivera Housing Assistance
                                               Agency to take over the housing functions of the
                                               dissolved Redevelopment Agency. The Pico Rivera
                                               Housing Assistance Agency will continue to manage
                                               remaining funding obligations for projects that utilized
                                               the Low-Moderate Income Housing Fund.
                                               Appropriateness: With the dissolution of the City’s
                                               Redevelopment Agency and the taking of RDA funds,
                                               the City has limited funding to assist low- and
                                               moderate-income households. Due to both the high
                                               cost of developing and preserving housing, and
                                               limitations on both the amount and uses of funds,
                                               layering of funding sources may be required for
                                               affordable housing programs and projects. For the
                                               2014-2021 planning cycle, the City is investigating new
                                                 4-131

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                Adopted October 2013
                                  Housing Element Program                               Evaluation of Effectiveness
                                                                          funding sources to utilize to continue administering
                                                                          existing programs.
                          11. Section 8 Housing Assistance                Effectiveness: The City has been allocated a
                          Voucher Program                                 maximum 517 Section 8 vouchers by the Department
                                                                          of Housing and Community Development. From the
                          Objective: Provide 500 rental assistance        period 2009-2010, 505 vouchers were issued, totaling
                                                                          $447,832 per month. In 2012, the number of active
                          contracts per year to very low-income
                                                                          vouchers was 491, with 3,770 residents and non-
                          households, including senior households.
                                                                          residents on the waiting list.
                                                                          Appropriateness: The Section 8 Program
                                                                          administered by the County of Los Angeles, provides
                                                                          opportunities for very low-income households to rent
                                                                          units at affordable rates. This program will be included
                                                                          in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                          Programs to Provide New Housing Opportunities
                          12. Housing Sites/Underutilized Sites             Effectiveness: Due to staffing reductions, budget
                          Inventory Program                                 cuts, and time constraints, the City was unable to
                                                                            effectively implement this program. Generally, the
                                                                            City provides information and handouts to potential
                          Objective: Continuously evaluate existing
                                                                            residential developers on the City website. The City
                          residential and non-residential properties to
                          identify new sites that may be appropriately      also offers pre-consultation with potential developers
                                                                            and provides technical assistance and available
                          developed as residential, including
                                                                            incentives for housing development.
                          affordable housing. And encourage the
                          development of underutilized R-M zoned            Appropriateness: The City will effectively implement
                          sites as well as those that are included in the   this program within the planning period. This program
                          Mixed-Use Overlay designation.                    will be modified for the 2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                                            to publicize the underutilized sites inventory on the
                                                                            City website and at City Hall. Other components of
                                                                            this program (Bonuses and incentives, developer
                                                                            consultation, infrastructure analysis, and expedited
                                                                            permit processing) will be addressed by other
                                                                            programs in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                          13. General Plan/Zoning Ordinance                 Effectiveness: Due to funding reductions, staff
                          Revision                                          cutbacks, and time constraints the City was unable to
                                                                            complete these specific Zoning Code amendments in
                                                                            the time specified in the 2006-2014 Housing Plan.
                          Objective: Amend the General Plan and
                          Zoning Code to:                                   Appropriateness: This program will be modified for
                                                                            the 2014-2021 Housing Element to appropriately
                              Establish a Mixed-Use Overlay;
                                                                            zone identified sites to meet the City’s RHNA need
                              Permit the development of Single-            through the establishment of a Mixed-Use Overlay
                                Room Occupancy (SRO) units;                 and increasing minimum residential densities at
                              Ensure that potential constraints to new     specific sites. Other components of this program
                                housing development are identified and      Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) units, addressing
                                addressed; and                              potential constraints to housing development, and
                              Allow by-right development of                transitional and supportive housing) will be
                                transitional and supportive housing in      addressed by other programs in the 2014-2021
                                all residential zones and be subject to     Housing Element.
                                the same requirements as other
                                residential uses located in the same
                                zone.
                          14. Second Unit Program                           Effectiveness: The City has amended the Zoning
                                                                            Code to address Second Units and related
                                                                            development standards in the City.
                          Objective: Amend the Zoning Code to
                          permit the construction of second units and       Appropriateness: The City will effectively implement
                          include related development standards.            this program within the planning period. The City will
                                                                            modify this program for the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                            Element to promote the adopted Second Unit
                                                                            Program on the City website and at City Hall.
                                                                            4-132

                       	 Adopted October 2013                                                            2014-2021 Housing Element
15. Lot Consolidation Program                    Effectiveness: The City provides information and
                                                 handouts on the City website to assist potential
                                                 developers. A Residential Development Handout is
Objective: Assist in the development of at
least one mixed-use development within the       posted on the website, which summarizes residential
                                                 development standards and related fees. Due to
planning period by providing assistance to
                                                 funding reductions, staff cutbacks, and time
property owners and developers in support
of lot consolidation.                            constraints the City was unable to fully implement the
                                                 Lot Consolidation Program in the manner and time
                                                 specified in the 2006-2014 Housing Plan. Generally,
                                                 the City encourages pre-consultation with developers
                                                 and provides technical assistance and available
                                                 incentives for housing development.
                                                 Appropriateness: The City will effectively implement
                                                 this program within the planning period. Some sites
                                                 identified to meet the City’s RHNA need are small
                                                 and will benefit from lot consolidation in order to
                                                 promote more efficient development. The City will
                                                 modify this program for the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                 Element to publicize the underutilized sites inventory
                                                 on the City website and at City Hall, and provide
                                                 technical assistance to developers and owners in
                                                 support of lot consolidation.
Programs to Remove Governmental Constraints
16. Ordinance Review                           Effectiveness: Due to funding reductions, staff
                                               cutbacks, and time constraints the City was unable to
                                               complete the Zoning Code amendments in the time
Objective: Monitor and review zoning
subdivision ordinances and other               specified in the 2006-2014 Housing Plan.
applicable codes, and where appropriate,       Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance
make changes to promote housing                of identifying constraints to the development of
development.                                   housing and will complete all Zoning Ordinance
                                               amendments identified in the 2006-2014 Housing Plan
                                               by the end of the planning period. The City will modify
                                               this program for the 2014-2021 Housing Element to
                                               address constraints to the development of housing if
                                               any are identified in the Housing Constraints analysis.
17. Reasonable Accommodation                   Effectiveness: The City has amended the Zoning
Program                                        Code to include formal reasonable accommodation
                                               procedures. The City maintains a policy directive to
                                               assist residents in need of reasonable accommodation
Objective: Amend the Zoning Ordinance
                                               and offers financial assistance through the Housing
to include a Reasonable Accommodation
                                               Rehabilitation Loan and Grant Programs and will
Ordinance, which provides exception in
development standards for housing for          continue to direct eligible residents to apply for funds.
                                               Applicants can apply for loans or grants to complete
persons with disabilities.
                                               improvement projects that remove constraints to their
                                               living facilities. In general, City Staff grants
                                               modifications and deviations from the Municipal Code
                                               to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities.
                                               Appropriateness: The City will effectively implement
                                               this program within the planning period. The City will
                                               modify this program for the 2014-2021 Housing
                                               Element to promote the adopted reasonable
                                               accommodation procedures on the City website and at
                                               City Hall.
Emergency Housing Programs
18. Emergency Shelters, Transitional          Effectiveness: The City has amended the Zoning
Housing, and Supportive Housing               Code to meet the requirements of SB 2 for emergency
Program                                       shelters, transitional and supportive housing, and
                                              Single-Room Occupancy (SRO)
Objective: Amend the Zoning Ordinance         Appropriateness: The City will effectively implement
so that transitional and supportive housing   this program within the planning period. The City will
will be treated as residential uses and be    modify this program for the 2014-2021 Housing
subject to the same requirements as other     Element to continue to monitor the inventory of sites
residential uses located in the same zone.    appropriate to accommodate eemergency shelters,
And permit the development of emergency       transitional and supportive housing, and SROs; and
                                              work with key organizations to ensure the needs of the
                                                 4-133

2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                            Adopted October 2013
                                  Housing Element Program                          Evaluation of Effectiveness
                          shelters in identified industrial zones.  homeless and extremely low-income individuals are
                                                                    met.
                          19. Community Based Transitional          Effectiveness: There are currently no transitional or
                          Housing Program                           permanent supportive housing facilities within Pico
                                                                    Rivera. However, through the City’s current update of
                          Objective: Continue to provide funding    the Zoning Code, transitional and supportive housing
                                                                    will be considered a residential use and only subject to
                          support for the Community Based
                                                                    those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of
                          Transitional Housing Provider.
                                                                    the same type in the same zoning district.
                                                                    Appropriateness: The City will continue to commit
                                                                    funding to a community based transitional housing
                                                                    provider to serve the needs of Pico Rivera. The City
                                                                    anticipates that the transitional housing provider will
                                                                    provide temporary housing and offer services including,
                                                                    child care, healthcare, and employment training. From
                                                                    the period 2010-2015, the City hopes to fund
                                                                    assistance for up to 70 individuals through allocated
                                                                    CDBG funds. This program will be included in the 2014-
                                                                    2021 Housing Element.
                          20. Women’s and Children’s Crisis         Effectiveness: The Women’s and Children’s Crisis
                          Shelter Program                           Shelter operate several facilities in southeast Los
                                                                    Angeles County. Services provided include medical
                                                                    services, legal services, counseling and housing
                          Objective: Continue to provide funding to
                          support the Women’s and Children’s Crisis services.
                          Shelter.                                  Appropriateness: The City will continue to commit
                                                                    funding to the Women’s and Children’s Crisis Shelter.
                                                                    From the period 2010-2015, the City hopes to fund
                                                                    assistance for up to 250 individuals through allocated
                                                                    CDBG funds. This program will be included in the 2014-
                                                                    2021 Housing Element.
                          Programs to Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
                          21. Fair Housing Counseling Program       Effectiveness: The City has continued its contract with
                                                                    the Housing Rights Center to implement Fair Housing
                          Objective: Continue the contract with the Education and Outreach. The organization’s Fair
                                                                    Housing Program is designed to raise awareness of fair
                          Southern California Housing Rights
                                                                    housing laws that protect individuals and families
                          Center to implement the Fair Housing
                          Program.                                  against housing discrimination. The organization
                                                                    develops and distributes educational literature and
                                                                    resources that describe ways to prevent housing
                                                                    injustices and applicable laws, and also offers free fair
                                                                    housing law workshops for landlords, tenants, nonprofit
                                                                    organizations, and city employees.
                                                                    Appropriateness: The City currently provides
                                                                    information on the program on their website and directs
                                                                    residents, as appropriate, to utilize services offered by
                                                                    the Housing Rights Center. This program will be
                                                                    included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                          Programs to Promote Energy Conservation
                          22. Energy Conservation Program            Effectiveness: In 2012, the City kicked-off its Energy
                                                                     Efficiency Program, Pico Rivera Only You Can Save
                          Objective: Continue to implement a         Energy, which aims to provide residents with simple,
                                                                     powerful, and engaging messages about the
                          range of programs and techniques that are
                                                                     importance of saving energy. Through a grant from the
                          effective in reducing residential energy
                          consumption.                               U.S. Department of Energy, as part of the American
                                                                     Recovery and Investment Act, the City was able to
                                                                     create an informational and instructional video that
                                                                     offers conservation tips. The City mailed the video in
                                                                     CDs to 16,500 residents and businesses. The City has
                                                                     also replaced 437 of its existing incandescent
                                                                     traffic/pedestrian signal lights with high-efficiency LED
                                                                     lights and upgraded five outdated HVAC units at three
                                                                     City-owned facilities to enhance energy efficiency. The
                                                                        4-134

           	 Adopted October 2013                                                        2014-2021 Housing Element
Housing Element Program                        Evaluation of Effectiveness
                                  City continues to support ongoing energy conservation
                                  programs from Southern California Edison and Sempra
                                  Energy Company, and publishes multiple brochures
                                  and information guides to help residents conserve
                                  water.
                                  Appropriateness: The City recognizes this program as
                                  essential to encourage reduction in residential energy
                                  consumption. This program will be included in the
                                  2014-2021 Housing Element.
                                    4-135
2014-2021 Housing Element                                     Adopted October 2013
                          This page intentionally left blank.
                                        4-136
                     October 2014
                   	
CHAPTER 5
Circulation Element
Introduction
Mobility—the ability to get from one place to another—is an essential component
of a desirable and economically sustainable community. The degree of mobility
within a community depends on the efficiency and connectivity of the various
components that comprise the transportation network: roadways, sidewalks and
trails, bicycle routes, rail lines, and transit services. There are important linkages
among the City’s public transportation system, its pattern of land use,
environmental management practices, and supporting infrastructure.
The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide a safe, efficient, and
adequate circulation system in the city. Although traffic on local roads is generally
free-flowing, major thoroughfares, particularly the major routes connecting the
community to regional freeway systems, experience congestion at key
intersections and along several segments during peak traffic hours.
Pico Rivera is largely a built-out community. Integrated solutions that improve
mobility for all modes of travel are needed, including enhancing the efficiency of
existing roadways and the ability to walk, bicycle, and use transit. While public
transportation systems serve the community, and rail transit is planned, transit
services need to be expanded sufficiently to provide a reasonable alternative to
auto use for most travelers.
To ensure the continued availability of a responsive transportation system that
supports the mobility needs of Pico Rivera’s residents and businesses, the
Circulation Element sets forth provisions for a multimodal transportation system,
including existing and future roadways and intersections, pedestrian and bicycle
paths, public transit, and parking facilities.
The Circulation Element presents the City’s policies for achieving and
maintaining safe, efficient, and reliable mobility for residents, visitors, goods, and
services throughout the community. Through implementation of this Element, the
City seeks to:
 Establish and maintain a safe and efficient roadway and highway network with
    adequate carrying capacity during peak travel hours;
 Make provisions for local and regional transit services that represent viable
    alternatives to automobile travel during peak commuting hours as well as
                                            5-1

    5. Circulation Element
                                adequately accommodating the needs of transit-dependent residents
                                throughout the day;
                              Support the community’s local economy by providing for the movement of
                                needed goods by truck and rail without impacting the community’s residential
                                neighborhoods;
                              Enhance the ability of children to safely access schools, parks, and library
                                facilities by walking or riding bicycles; and
                              Provide adequate and accessible parking facilities.
   View of the Passons
          underpass           Build a walkable city, reduce traffic congestion, improve transit, and expand
                                the bicycle network.
                             Vehicular Movement
                             Operations and Issues
                             Pico Rivera is surrounded by several state and interstate highways that form the
                             backbone of the regional transportation network, including the Santa Ana
                             Freeway (I-5) to the south, the San Gabriel River Freeway (I-605) to the east,
                             and the Pomona Freeway (CA 60) less than 2 miles to the north. The highway
                             system affords Pico Rivera with good connectivity to the remainder of the Los
                             Angeles basin and beyond.
                             The city’s roadway network consists of a hierarchy of streets that accommodate
                             local trips and regional travel through Pico Rivera as well as to adjacent
                             communities. This network is characterized by high traffic volumes during peak
                             hours along many of the city’s major roadways, with relatively lower volumes on
                             the remainder of the city’s streets.
                             Level of Service (LOS) is used to describe operations and perceived traffic
                             congestion on roadways. LOS is a qualitative description of traffic flow based on
                             several factors such as speed, travel time, delay, and freedom to maneuver. LOS
                             is used similarly to a grading scale and ranges from LOS A as least congested
                             through LOS F as most congested. The General Plan identifies LOS D or better
                             as the desired objective for intersections within the city. Table 5-1 provides a
                             description of each level of service letter grade as well as the range of delays
     View of congested       associated with each grade. Table 5-2 provides the range of scores associated
intersection in Pico Rivera.
                             with each LOS for pedestrian and bicycle travel modes.
                             Pico Rivera faces several challenges relating to the operations and design of its
                             roadway network. These include:
                              The LOS at many intersections is approaching design capacity, causing
                                vehicles to wait multiple signal changes before entering the intersections.
                                                                        5-2

                           October 2014
                         	
 Congestion along the adjacent and nearby highways results in backups along
    city streets near interchanges, as well as vehicles using the city roadway
    network as alternative routes.
 High levels of ingress and egress from adjacent uses on several of the City’s
    roadways slows the flow of traffic, preventing these roadways from functioning
    to their true capacity.
Table 5-1
Intersection Automobile Mode Levels of Service (LOS) Criteria
           Description of Drivers’ Perception and                         Delay in Seconds
  LOS      Traffic Operation                                        Unsignalized      Signalized
           This level is typically assigned when the volume-to-
           capacity ratio is low and either progression is
           exceptionally favorable or the cycle length is very
    A                                                              < 10              < 10
           short. If it is due to favorable progression, most
           vehicles arrive during the green indication and
           travel through the intersection without stopping.
           This level is typically assigned when the volume-to-
           capacity ratio is low and either progression is highly
    B                                                              > 10 and < 15     > 10 and < 20
           favorable or the cycle length is short. More vehicles
           stop than with LOS A.
           This level is typically assigned when progression is
           favorable or the cycle length is moderate. Individual
           cycle failures (i.e., one or more queued vehicles are
           not able to depart as a result of insufficient capacity
    C                                                              > 15 and < 25     > 20 and < 35
           during the cycle) may begin to appear at this level.
           The number of vehicles stopping is significant,
           although many vehicles still pass through the
           intersection without stopping.
           This level is typically assigned when the volume-to-
           capacity ratio is high and either progression is
    D                                                              > 25 and < 35     > 35 and < 55
           ineffective or the cycle length is long. Many vehicles
           stop and individual cycle failures are noticeable.
           This level is typically assigned when the volume-to-
           capacity ratio is high, progression is unfavorable,
    E                                                              > 35 and < 50     > 55 and < 80
           and the cycle length is long. Individual cycle failures
           are frequent.
           This level is typically assigned when the volume-to-
           capacity ratio is very high, progression is very poor,
    F                                                              > 50              > 80
           and the cycle length is long. Most cycles fail to clear
           the queue.
  Source: Highway Capacity Manual, 2010
                                                     5-3

5. Circulation Element
                       Table 5-2
                       Intersection Non-Automobile Mode LOS Criteria
                                                   LOS                         LOS Score
                                                    A                               <2
                                                    B                         > 2 and < 2.75
                                                    C                        >2.75 and < 3.5
                                                    D                        > 3.5 and < 4.25
                                                    E                        >4.25 and < 5.00
                                                    F                             > 5.00
                                      Source: Highway Capacity Manual, 2010
                        The traffic-carrying capacities of Beverly Boulevard, Whittier Boulevard,
                           Washington Boulevard, and Telegraph Road are restricted by older, narrower
                           bridges over the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel rivers, while the carrying
                           capacity of Rosemead Boulevard and Paramount Boulevard are restricted to
                           the south by the under-crossings of the I-5 freeway.
                        The ability to provide additional lanes, turning lanes at intersections, and other
                           improvements on the City’s major thoroughfares is constrained by restricted
                           rights-of-way, minimal building setbacks, and the need for utility relocations.
                        There are several at-grade railroad crossings of city roadways that impact
                           traffic flows and safety.
                        Many of the City’s roadways do not incorporate “Complete Streets” elements
                           such as bicycle lanes and transit/bus turnouts. As a result, the City’s bicycle
                           system is incomplete and buses tend to block travel lanes as they stop to pick
                           up and drop off passengers.
                       Local Roadway Network
                       As stated previously, roadway widening is not possible without taking
                       considerable property and right-of-way. Therefore, roadway widening is not
                       necessarily a practical proposition in the City. Given the challenges to widen
                       existing streets, the Circulation Element anticipates that existing roadway widths
                       will likely remain on most streets in the City. Therefore, where needed major
                       improvements are infeasible, alternative measures are pursued to ease
                       congestion. These include signal timing coordination, prohibiting or limiting on-
                       street parking, traffic systems management, demand management, and
                       alternative travel modes. The City of Pico Rivera is committed to exploring and
                       utilizing feasible technologies for traffic system management to improve traffic
                       flow and to cost-effectively enhance capacity where roadway widening is not
                       possible. However, in the interest of providing improved pedestrian and vehicular
                       mobility, non-motorized transportation options and improved safety, the City may
                                                                         5-4

                    October 2014
                  	
consider future street widening pursuant to appropriate traffic studies. The City
recently received grants to widen the bridges at Telegraph Road and Washington
Boulevard at the western city limits and will continue to pursue grants and other
funding to widen bridges for improved safety and mobility.
                                                                                   Roadway Classifications
The City’s streets are organized in a hierarchy according to their functional
                                                                                   These represent general
classification. This hierarchy recognizes the type, volume and character of        guidelines and should be
intended traffic service. The City’s roadway classifications are summarized in     considered in context relative to
                                                                                   adjacent land use and the
Table 5-3:                                                                         primary function of the arterial or
                                                                                   collector as appropriate.
Pico Rivera’s Circulation Plan is illustrated in Figure 5-1. The Circulation Plan
identifies the existing and planned network of major roadways intended to
support planned land uses within the community, circulation policies, economic
development goals, and other general plan priorities.
The City’s circulation system is also made up of a number of private streets. Pico
Rivera’s private streets are illustrated in Figure 5-2.
As Pico Rivera moves forward into its future, the community’s transportation and
land use plans will provide for implementation of regional plans and programs,
such as the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Plan, Regional
Transportation Plan and Sustainable Communities Strategy, South Coast Air
Quality Management Plan, and other applicable regulations aimed at enhancing
the sustainability of the transportation network, minimizing energy use, and
reducing air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions.
                                           5-5

5. Circulation Element
                       Table 5-3
                       Roadway Classifications and Standards
                                                                                                                   Standards
                                                                                                           Right of
                       Classification        Description                                                     Way1          Capacity3
                                             These streets are four to six lane roadways that
                                             connect regional facilities and accommodate
                                             intra-city and sub-regional level travel. There is
                                             limited interference to traffic flow. Major arterials
                                                                                                                         Up to 50,000
                                             typically function as truck routes and emergency
                                                                                                                         ADT
                                             response routes. However, they are not they are
                        Major Arterials                                                                 100 – 120 feet   depending on
                                             not exclusively auto-dominated streets and
                                                                                                                         number of
                                             provide sidewalks, bike lanes and transit
                                                                                                                         lanes.
                                             facilities. Limited on-street parking may be
                                             allowed with an appropriate overall design and
                                             the street may also include landscaped
                                             medians.
                                             These streets are four lane roadways that serve
                                             as intermediaries between collectors and major
                                             arterials. They are typically used for shorter trips                        Up to 25,000
                                             to activity centers, jobs, and other local                                  ADT
                         Secondary
                                             destinations. Secondary arterials have been or             80 – 100 feet    depending on
                           Arterials
                                             will be built to an enhanced standard to address                            number of
                                             transit, bicycle, pedestrian, and/or equestrian                             lanes.
                                             travel. Secondary arterials may serve as truck
                                             routes in certain locations.
                                             Collector streets are primarily two lane; facilities;
                                             but can be up to four lanes. They serve as
                                             intermediate routes that connect arterials to                               Up to 25,000
                                             local streets and accommodate intra-city travel.                            ADT
                          Collectors         They provide access within and between                     60 – 80 feet     depending on
                                             neighborhoods. They may also carry local                                    number of
                                             transit service and provide on-street parking.                              lanes
                                             Collectors provide bike routes and sidewalks.
                                             Traffic calming strategies may be applied.
                                             Local streets are two lane roadways that provide
                                             direct access to adjacent properties. They
                                             typically serve the interior of neighborhoods and
                                             are not intended for through traffic. Local streets
                        Local Streets        should accommodate pedestrian and bicycle                  60 feet2         < 8,000ADT
                                             travel, although bike lanes are not needed given
                                             the low traffic volumes. On-street parking is
                                             often provided and traffic calming strategies
                                             may be applied.
                       Source: City of Pico Rivera, Public Works Department.
                       1. The City Engineer may recommend widening the street greater than the maximum standard as reasonably
                           necessary to accommodate complete streets improvements (including vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian
                           traffic) pursuant to a traffic study that shows public safety will not be reduced.
                       2. A “special circumstance” exemption exists for the local roadway classification which would permit a
                           minimum ultimate right-of-way down to 30 feet if the City Engineer and City Council determine the following:
                                  The roadway will be utilized to improve residential neighborhood circulation.
                                  Residential uses are limited to one side of the street only.
                                  Sidewalks required on residential side.
                                  Non-residential side must be a passive use such as a park or school.
                                  The street can only connect with local roadways.
                                  Existing physical barriers preclude obtaining the recommended right-of-way.
                       3. Due to the generalized nature of ADT capacities, the values are typically viewed as general rather than
                           absolute guides for estimating levels of service and sizing the future roadway system. Research shows that
                           Transportation Systems Management (TSM) measures increase the roadway capacity by approximately 7
                           percent, but depending on the roadway segments’ traffic patterns, directional splits and availability of
                           dedicated turn lanes can vary from 5 to 10 percent. TSM measures may include strategies such as signal
                           coordination, intersections widening, and access management.
                                                                                   5-6

  October 2014
	
               Figure 5-1: Circulation Plan
                            5-7
5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                      5-8
  October 2014
	
               Figure 5-2: Private Streets
                           5-9
5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-10
                     October 2014
                   	
Goods Movement
Pico Rivera has a large number of industrial and commercial businesses that rely
on efficient truck and rail travel through the City to move goods and supplies.
Heavy truck traffic along the City’s streets can result in increased maintenance
costs due to infrastructure degradation, and can impact residential and other noise-
sensitive land uses. To monitor and regulate truck travel, the City has formally
designated truck routes, as shown in Figure 5-3. In designating and modifying
truck routes, the City will balance the need for serving its industrial and commercial
land uses with the need to protect residential neighborhoods and other sensitive
uses from noise, air quality, and other potential impacts of truck travel. Where truck
                                                                                       Passons underpass.
routes have been modified or route designations have been removed, existing
truck uses may continue to use previously designated truck routes until such time
that the use is relocated or transitions to a more compatible use for the area.
Both the BNSF and Union Pacific railroads maintain lines through the City (see
Figure 5-3). The BNSF line is a major corridor that connects the Ports of
Los Angeles and Long Beach to the midwestern and eastern United States.
Approximately 100 trains per day operate along this rail corridor, and are evenly
split between freight and passenger trains. Coordination with BNSF and Union
Pacific is required in order to minimize noise, air quality, and other impacts to
sensitive uses from train travel, as well as to address traffic constraints and safety
concerns associated with at-grade rail crossings of the City’s roadways.
                                           5-11

5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-12
  October 2014
	
               Figure 5-3: Truck Routes
                          5-13
5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-14
                     October 2014
                   	
Transit
Metrolink is a regional rail system operated by the Southern California Regional
Rail Authority, with all routes converging at downtown Los Angeles Union
Station. The closest Metrolink stations are the Commerce Station located west of
Pico Rivera in the City of Commerce and the Norwalk/Santa Fe Springs Station
located to the south in the City of Norwalk. Both stations are on the Orange
County line, which connects Oceanside and Orange County to downtown Los
Angeles. The Norwalk/Santa Fe Springs station is also on the 91 line, which,
extends from downtown Riverside to downtown Los Angeles. The Riverside line
also traverses Pico Rivera, as shown in Figure 5-4.
Washington Boulevard is one of two alternative alignments for the proposed
Metro Gold Line Extension (Eastside Transit Corridor Phase II). This alignment
would include a proposed above-grade station at the intersection of Washington
and Rosemead Boulevards. This station would enhance transit options for Pico
Rivera’s residents and employees, as well as provide opportunities for higher
intensity transit-oriented development and related economic development
activities at that intersection. At the same time, potential parking, traffic, and
visual impacts associated with the proposed line and station will need to be
addressed. Current funding scenarios show that local Measure R money could be
available for the selected alignment starting in 2028. Potential state and federal
funding sources that may be used to accelerate the project implementation
schedule are also being explored.
The California High Speed Rail Authority is evaluating alternatives for a High
Speed Rail system that would connect passengers from San Diego to
Sacramento. Both an aerial option and an at-grade option are being considered
through the City of Pico Rivera (see Figure 5-4). The current proposal is to run
along the existing railroad near the BNSF rail yard, between Paramount
Boulevard and Rosemead Boulevard. The project is currently in the planning
process.
Public transportation within Pico Rivera is provided by the Los Angeles County
Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro), Montebello, and Downey Link Bus
Lines. The area’s transit system provides an option for travel within the City, with
good connectivity to the region, as shown in Figure 5-5 Included are several
fixed-route bus lines, as well as dial-a-ride services. Many of the City’s major
roadways lack bus turnouts, requiring buses to stop in travel lanes and interrupt
the flow of traffic to pick up and drop off passengers. Additional coordination with
the transit providers is needed to identify locations along existing and proposed
routes for incorporating bus turnouts.
                                                                                     Montebello Bus Lines.
                                         5-15

5. Circulation Element
                       Figure 5-4: Transit Service Rail Lines
                                        5-16
  October 2014
	
               Figure 5-5: Transit Service Bus Lines
                                5-17
5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-18
                     October 2014
                   	
Non-Motorized Transportation
Functional bicycle routes are scarce in Pico Rivera. Many of the city’s designated
bicycle routes have never been striped, and the high number of ingress and
egress points on major roadways can make it difficult for bicyclists to safely use
these roadways. On many roads, right-of-way is not available for striped bicycle
lanes without removing on-street parking or widening the roadway. Figure 5-6
illustrates the location of the city’s designated bicycle routes. It also illustrates the A bicyclist using the sidewalk
city’s existing and proposed equestrian trails.                                              along Telegraph Road.
Regional bicycle and off-road biking trails exist along the western side of the Rio
Hondo Channel (called the Lario Bike Trail), and eastern side of the San Gabriel
River (San Gabriel River Bike Trail). The Lario Bike Trail is the longest bikeway in
the Los Angeles River Watershed. These regional trails provide off-street bicycle
and pedestrian access to the Whittier Narrows Recreation Area to the north,
adjacent cities to the south, and the Pacific Ocean. There are a number of
access points to these regional trails near the City. Equestrian trails are located
in the northern portion of the city. There is an improved equestrian trail that runs
along the west side of San Gabriel River Parkway from Melita Street to the San
Gabriel River. Another trail extends from San Gabriel River Parkway to Melita
Street to Amistad Avenue, to Friendship Avenue, along the east side of Durfee
Avenue (between Friendship Avenue and Kruse Road) and then along the west
side of Durfee Avenue at Streamland Park. This trail connects to the northern
city boundary and some proposed county trails.
The “Emerald Necklace Park Network” is a vision for a comprehensive 17-mile
loop trail system of parks and greenways connecting 10 cities, including the City
of Pico Rivera, and nearly 500,000 residents along the Río Hondo and San
Gabriel rivers. The nonprofit group Amigos de los Rios, which works with local
government, businesses, and residents to design and create quality public
environments, created the Emerald Necklace Park Network vision. The proposed
project would include enhancements to the Whittier Narrows area at the north
end of the city. When complete, the Emerald Necklace will provide a regional
network of trails and parks with connections that extend to the Angeles National
Forest and the ocean.
                                                                                                 Lario Bike Trail
                                           5-19

5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-20
  October 2014
	
               Figure 5-6: Existing and Proposed Trail Facilities
                                      5-21
5. Circulation Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
                                     5-22
                   October 2014
                 	
Parking
While newer development in Pico Rivera generally includes adequate off-street
parking, some older strip commercial developments in the City were originally
designed with very limited or no off-street parking. These areas (such as along
Telegraph Road, Whittier Boulevard, Rosemead Boulevard and Durfee Avenue)
depend on on-street parking or offer parking at the rear of uses, accessed by
commercial alleys. The City provides parking along the north side of Whittier
Boulevard at two locations for use by patrons of surrounding businesses.
However, these additional lots do not fully make up for the lack of parking for
area businesses.
                                                                                         On-street parking along
                                                                                            Whittier Boulevard
The lack of parking within older commercial corridors requires businesses to
depend on the use of on-street parking. As a consequence, the carrying capacity
along some major roadways is constrained by parking taking up potential travel
lanes, as well as by vehicles entering and leaving on-street parking spaces.
Coordinating with local businesses to develop off-street parking solutions will
help to improve roadway carrying capacity and reduce congestion, as well as
benefit existing businesses and new economic development opportunities. Such
                                                                                     Complete Streets
solutions might include, but are not limited to, parking restrictions during peak
travel hours, provision of joint-use off-street parking facilities, and inclusion of Assembly Bill 1358, also known
improvements to enhance alternative travel modes.                                    as the California Complete
                                                                                     Streets Act of 2008, requires
                                                                                     cities and counties to include
Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Implementation                                      complete streets policies in their
                                                                                     general plans. Complete streets
Actions                                                                              are designed and operated to
                                                                                     enable safe access for all users
                                                                                     including motorists, bicyclists,
Complete Streets                                                                     pedestrians and public transit
Goal 5.1                                                                             riders of all ages and abilities.
                                                                                     Typical components of complete
Promote active living, improve local air quality, and enhance the                    streets may include sidewalks,
livability of the community through an integrated multimodal                         bike lanes, special bus lanes,
                                                                                     comfortable and accessible
network that serves all users within the City and offers convenient                  transit stops, frequent crossing
mobility options, including vehicular travel, transit services, bicycle              opportunities, median islands,
routes, and pedestrian paths.                                                        accessible pedestrian signals,
                                                                                     curb bulb-outs and similar. Such
                                                                                     components can be
Policy 5.1-1 Multimodal Options. Make transportation mode shifts possible by         incorporated into the design of
designing, operating, and maintaining streets to enable safe and convenient          new streets, as well as
                                                                                     improvements to existing
access and travel for all users—pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, and people  roadways.
of all ages and abilities, as well as freight and motor vehicle drivers—and to
foster a sense of place in the public realm.
Implementation Programs for Policy 5.1-1:
   Work with Montebello Bus Lines to determine the feasibility and desirability of
    relocating the existing terminal along Passons Boulevard and Jackson Street
                                         5-23

5. Circulation Element
                            to a different location (potentially along Washington Boulevard) to anchor
                            higher intensity transit-oriented development.
                           If the proposed Washington Boulevard alignment for the Gold Line
                            Extension is selected:
                          – Work with Metro on design of the proposed transit station to minimize its
                              visual impacts;
                          – Work with Metro to determine necessary amenities to be included as part
                              of the project (e.g., kiosk showing location of businesses and provision of
                              overhead walkways to each quadrant of the intersection, intersection and
                              aesthetic improvements along Washington Boulevard);
                          – Make provisions for transit-oriented improvements (e.g., streetscape
                              improvements) in the area; and
                          – Increase densities and intensities, and allow mixed-use development at the
                              Washington-Rosemead intersection.
                       Policy 5.1-2 Serve All Users. Provide a safe, efficient, and accessible
                       transportation network that meets the needs of all users in the community,
                       including seniors, youth, and the disabled, and contributes to the community’s
                       quality of life by:
                        Balancing the needs of all users of the public rights-of-way by providing safe
                          and convenient travel and access for bicyclists, transit riders, freight and
                          motor vehicle drivers, and people of all ages and abilities.
                        Designing streets to accommodate larger vehicles such as buses, fire service
                          vehicles, and freight delivery trucks without compromising pedestrian and
                          bicycle safety.
                        Providing safe and comfortable access for persons with disabilities.
                        Providing public open space that integrates amenities including street trees
                          and landscaping, street and sidewalk lighting, transit facilities, street furniture,
                          water features, and public art work.
                       Policy 5.1-3 Complete Streets. Accommodate other modes of travel such as
                       bicycling and walking when implementing roadway improvements, where
                       feasible.
                        Promote the use of transit by improving the efficiency of transit systems and
                          creating safe and attractive walking environments.
                        Promote the ability to walk by providing safe and comfortable pedestrian
                          facilities and traffic signal timing that allows for the safe crossing of major
                          roadways by pedestrians.
                        Provide street lighting that is attractive, functional, and appropriate to the
                          character and scale of the neighborhood or area, and that contributes to
                          vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle safety.
                                                                 5-24

                    October 2014
                  	
 Demand-actuated traffic signals should include push buttons to signal the
   need for pedestrians to cross, and include audible signals and countdown
   signs to assist the disabled in crossing streets.
 Demand-actuated traffic signals corresponding with bicycle routes should
   include bicycle sensitive loop detectors or push buttons adjacent to the curb.
 Permit the sharing or parallel development of pedestrian walkways with          Additional policies addressing
                                                                                  transit and non-motorized
   bicycle paths, where this can be safely accomplished, in order to maximize     transportation modes can be
   the use of public rights-of-way.                                               found in the Healthy
                                                                                  Communities Element section
 Require the construction of attractive walkways in new residential,             under “Healthy Transportation
   commercial, office, and industrial developments, including provision of        System.”
   shading for pedestrian paths.
 Maximize visibility and access for pedestrians, and encourage the removal of
   barriers for safe and convenient movement of pedestrians.
Implementation Program for Policy 5.1-3:
   Develop design guidelines to address aesthetics and accommodate wider
    sidewalks, where feasible, within existing roadway widths by identifying a
    range of lane widths, and roadway and right-of-way widths. This will provide
    flexibility to accommodate existing roadway widths while providing for
    enhancements and will allow the characteristics of roadways to be tailored to
    their unique circumstances for the most efficient use. These guidelines
    should be coordinated as necessary with related policy documents and plans
    (such as the Bike and Pedestrian Trails Plans, Master Plans, Corridor Plans,
    or other).
Policy 5.1-4 Smart Growth Development. Integrate transportation and land use
decisions to enhance opportunities for development that is compact, walkable,
and transit oriented.
Implementation Program for Policy 5.1-4:
   Enact development standards and incentives that encourage development
    along major thoroughfares to contribute Complete Street amenities.
Policy 5.1-5 Access to Key Locations. Strive to provide multimodal access
throughout the City, but especially to key locations such as employment centers,
schools, parks medical facilities, libraries, and grocery stores.
Policy 5.1-6 System Expansion. Require new development to contribute funds
to area-wide transit improvements to expand the system and increase efficiency.
Implementation Program for Policy 5.1-6:
   Establish a citywide fee program to expand transit facilities and to improve
    transit service.
                                          5-25

5. Circulation Element
                       Policy 5.1-7 Transit Ridership. “Utilize the Gateway Cities 2014 Strategic
                       Transportation Plan as a guide to analyze proposed and future transportation
                       projects that affect transit ridership, personal vehicle travel, and other modes at a
                       local and regional level.
                       Policy 5.1-8 Context-Sensitive Street Standards. Design and operate streets
                       and intersections to be sensitive to adjacent land uses and districts and to all
                       roadway users, including transit, bicycles, and pedestrians, where appropriate.
                       Policy 5.1-9 Roadway Sizing. Provide appropriate roadway sizing in the city.
                       Where roads are wider than traffic requires, consider converting surplus land to
                       landscaped medians, bicycle lanes, and wider sidewalks to make the roadway
                       more pedestrian and bicycle friendly.
                       Policy 5.1-10 Amenities. Improve streetscape amenities around the city,
                       including bus shelters and trash receptacles to create an enhanced environment
                       and encourage usage.
                       Vehicular Movement
                       Goal 5.2
                       A roadway system that ensures the safe and efficient movement of
                       people, goods, and services.
                       Policy 5.2-1 Roadway Plan. Plan, design, and improve roadways in accordance
                       with Figure 5-1 Circulation Plan.
                       Policy 5.2-2 Level of Service Objective. Strive to achieve and maintain
                       operations at intersections at LOS D or better at peak travel times within the City.
                        In those locations where this objective is infeasible, implement all feasible
                          mitigation measures.
                        Require all development projects to provide their fair share (in the form of
                          physical improvements and/or fee payment) for all feasible improvements.
                       Policy 5.2-3 Alternative Measures to Increase Efficiency. Maximize the
                       operational efficiency of the roadway system by developing alternative measures
                       where improvements are needed but are not feasible to implement. Measures
                       can include traffic demand management programs, consolidation of driveways,
                       and prohibiting on-street parking to ease congestion.
                       Implementation Program for Policy 5.2-3:
                           Develop a Traffic Signal Synchronization Plan to address signal coordination
                            along major arterials and intelligent transportation systems such as
                            centralized traffic control and real time travel information to manage traffic
                            flows.
                           Identify roadways and major intersections that would require alternative
                            measures, and provide specific improvement proposals to ease congestion.
                                                                 5-26

                     October 2014
                   	
    Encourage the provision of reciprocal access and parking agreements
     between adjacent land uses, where appropriate, to facilitate off-street
     vehicular movement between adjacent commercial and other nonresidential
     uses, and to reduce the number of driveways along major roadways.
    Require existing driveways that are unnecessary or substandard to be
     removed or upgraded, wherever feasible, in conjunction with any on-site
     development or any adjacent street construction.
Policy 5.2-4 Intersections. Identify intersection improvements needed
throughout the city to provide acceptable levels of service to maintain
consistency with the Circulation Element.
Implementation Program for Policy 5.2-4:
    Prioritize needed intersection improvements.
    Identify potential funding sources for needed intersection improvements.
    As funds for intersection improvements             become    available, make
     improvements to priority intersections.
Policy 5.2-5 Bridge Widening. Work with surrounding jurisdictions and the
Southern California Association of Governments to plan for and secure funding
for needed future bridge improvements over the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
Rivers.
Policy 5.2-6 Roadway Capacity. Create additional roadway capacity along
Passons Boulevard and other roadways, where feasible, through elimination of
on-street parking (either all day or during peak hours), as well as other street
improvements that can be made within the existing right-of-way.
Policy 5.2-7 Park and Ride Lots. Maintain the existing park and ride lot at Pico
Park and explore adding additional lots within the city to encourage carpooling,
including at Smith Park.
Policy 5.2-8 Medians. Identify proposed locations for enhanced medians within
the community to improve the existing streetscape.
Implementation Program for Policy 5.2-8:
    Develop priorities for the improvement of proposed medians.
Policy 5.2-9 Private Streets. Private streets, where permitted, shall provide for
adequate circulation and emergency vehicle access. Private streets that will
accommodate more than 50 vehicles per hour in the peak hour or that are
designed for on-street parking shall be designed to public street standards. The
design of other private streets shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Public Works Director. Prior to their approval, adequate provisions for the long-
term maintenance of private streets shall be ensured. Private streets shall be
improved to public street standards prior to acceptance of dedications to the City.
                                         5-27

      5. Circulation Element
                               Policy 5.2-10 Traffic Studies. Require the preparation of site-specific traffic
                               studies for new development proposals that are determined by the City to have
                               the potential to impact traffic.
                               Policy 5.2-11 Funding Sources. Pursue and develop funding sources for the
                               maintenance and rehabilitation of the transportation system.
                               Policy 5.2-12 Regional Coordination. Continue to coordinate transportation
                               and land use plans and policies with local and regional planning agencies, and
Additional policies addressing incorporate the Regional Transportation Plan, where feasible. This includes:
truck routes and railroad
crossings can be found in the          Continuing to work with Caltrans and neighboring cities to minimize any
Healthy Communities Element             cumulative significant impacts on State facilities, including Interstate 5,
section under “Safe
Transportation System.”
                                        State Route 60, and State Route 605.
                                       Participation in the development of a fair share fee program if required by
                                        Caltrans, to address mitigation of significant impacts to the above listed
                                        state facilities.
                               Policy 5.2-13 Regional Trips. Coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions and
                               regional agencies to address the impacts of trips originating outside of and
                               passing through the city.
                               Policy 5.2-14 Transportation Demand Management. Promote transportation-
                               demand management programs, as appropriate, for uses with substantial traffic-
                               generating characteristics.
                               Implementation Program for Policy 5.2-14:
                                  Provide incentives for City employees to commute to work using alternative
                                   modes of transportation to the use of single-occupant automobiles.
                                  Encourage employers to provide incentives for employees to commute to
                                   work using alternative modes of transportation or to carpool, and allow
                                   telecommuting and alternative work schedules.
                               Policy 5.2-15 Traffic Calming. Consider development of a traffic calming
                               program and implementation of traffic calming measures, where appropriate and
                               feasible, to minimize the impacts on the use of local streets by vehicular traffic
                               and to maintain the health, safety and livability of the neighborhoods.
                               Implementation Program for Policy 5.2-15:
                                  Establish a Traffic Calming Program with clear guidelines of the process to
                                   evaluate traffic calming measures, to establish development standards, and
                                   to prioritize traffic calming requests.
                               Policy 5.2-16 Pavement Maintenance. Utilize the 2012-2017 Pavement
                               Management Program for the ongoing maintenance of city streets.
                                                                         5-28

                     October 2014
                   	
Goods Movement
Goal 5.3
A transportation network that moves goods efficiently within and
through the community and region.
Policy 5.3-1 Efficient Movement. Support infrastructure improvements and the
use of emerging technologies that facilitate the timely movement of trade,
including facilities for the efficient intermodal transfer of goods between truck and
rail.
 Maximize direct movement between industrial areas and freeways, with truck
    routes avoiding residential areas to the extent feasible.
 Design street systems serving industrial areas, including the primary routes
    accessing these areas, to accommodate the movement of trucks.
Policy 5.3-2 Rail. Work with railroad operators to facilitate the transport of goods
by rail through the city when compatible with city traffic flows and other
community priorities.
Policy 5.3-3 Off-Peak Deliveries. Encourage businesses to schedule deliveries
at off-peak periods.
Bicycle and Pedestrian Network
Goal 5.4 A balanced transportation system where bicycling and walking are
alternative methods to the automobile.
Policy 5.4-1 Continuous Network. Provide a safe and continuous bicycle and            Additional policies addressing
pedestrian network that links neighborhoods, parks, schools, libraries,               equestrian trails and facilities
                                                                                      can be found in the Healthy
commercial development, major employers, and other frequently visited                 Communities Element.
destinations as a means of improving health in the city.
Policy 5.4-2 Roadway Improvement Projects. Incorporate bicycle and
pedestrian features within roadway improvement projects, when feasible.
Policy 5.4-3 Bicycle Network. Design and implement a functional bicycle
network by expanding bicycle routes, striping bicycle lanes where feasible,
providing signage for bicycle routes, and providing adequate bicycle parking at
City facilities.
Implementation Program for Policies 5.4-1 and 5.4-3:
     Identify and pursue potential sources of grant funding for bicycle and
      pedestrian improvements.
Policy 5.4-4 Bicycle Support Facilities. Require bicycle parking and support
facilities at new industrial, commercial, institutional developments, and transit
facilities, as appropriate.
Implementation Program for Policy5.4-4:
                                            5-29

5. Circulation Element
                          Identify and pursue potential sources of grant funding to implement a bike
                           share program and bicycle facilities.
                          Support development of bicycle facilities and a bike share program at Smith
                           Park and other locations in the city in close proximity to mass transit and
                           regional bike routes.
                       Policy 5.4-5 River Bike Trails. Improve, maintain, and expand bike trails along
                       the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel river corridors.
                       Policy 5.4-6 Pedestrian Network. Improve the pedestrian network by
                       incorporating streetscape improvements such as shade trees, plantings, lighting,
                       and street furniture.
                       Policy 5.4-7 Sidewalk Deficiencies. Improve areas with sidewalk deficiencies to
                       increase walking in Pico Rivera.
                       Policy 5.4-8 ADA. Incorporate American with Disabilities Act (ADA)
                       requirements to create an accessible pedestrian system that can serve all users.
                       Policy 5.4-9 Regional System. Coordinate with surrounding jurisdictions,
                       regional agencies, and non-profit groups to improve the Emerald Necklace Park
                       Network, a loop trail system of parks and greenways which includes areas within
                       the City of Pico Rivera.
                       Parking
                       Goal 5.5
                       Well-managed parking opportunities that are balanced with traffic
                       congestion and other City priorities.
                       Policy 5.5-1 Parking Standards. Ensure that City parking standards are
                       appropriate to the use and location of existing and new development.
                       Implementation Program for Policy 5.4-1:
                          Update parking standards for residential, commercial, industrial, and mixed-
                           use development.
                       Policy 5.5-2 Older, Strip Commercial. Develop off-street parking solutions for
                       older, strip commercial developments only where reducing or eliminating on-
                       street parking will improve carrying capacity and reduce congestion. Such
                       solutions might include, but are not limited to, parking restrictions during peak
                       travel hours or provision of joint use off-street parking facilities.
                       Policy 5.5-3 On-Street Parking Turnover. Implement parking management
                       tools that maximize on-street parking turnover, where appropriate.
                       Policy 5.5-4 Shared Parking. Encourage parking in shared surface lots to make
                       the most efficient use of land, while maximizing shared parking opportunities for
                       uses with varied peak parking standards.
                                                                 5-30

                     October 2014
CHAPTER 6
Community Facilities
Element
Introduction
Community facilities and the delivery of municipal services are an extremely
important and often unnoticed component of the quality of life enjoyed by those
who live, work, and own property in Pico Rivera.
A key attribute of a livable community is feeling and being safe, whether as a
resident, worker, business owner, or visitor. A safe community that has low crime
rates; responsive police, fire and emergency services; safe routes for travel for
those on bikes and pedestrians; well-maintained properties and spaces; and a
strong sense of community that enhances the perception and experience of
safety and well-being positively affects investment, businesses attraction, and      Pico Rivera City Hall
property values.
Efficient water and energy supply, wastewater, stormwater, and communications
systems are vital to most daily activities. These facilities require regular
maintenance and improvements to enhance efficiency and take advantage of
technological advances. Many of these facilities are also owned and maintained
by agencies other than the City, requiring close coordination between Pico
Rivera’s needs and the capabilities of the agencies providing the facilities and
services.
This element addresses the community’s existing and future facility and service
needs, including general government, law enforcement, fire protection, water,
wastewater, and energy. It is intended to provide for a fiscally-sound community
that maintains appropriate service and facilities standards, delivers services in an
efficient and effective manner, meets the expectations of its constituents, and
consistently aims to be better and more productive.
General Government Facilities                                                        City Council Meeting
General government facilities maintained by the city include City Hall, the city
maintenance yard and other parks and recreation facilities. Pico Rivera’s City
Hall houses city departments, including: Administration, City Clerk, Community
and Economic Development, Finance and Public Works. The Recreation and
Community Services Department is located in a separate building, south of City
Hall. In addition, the Records Retention Center is located on Lundahl Drive.
                                        6-1

6. Community Facilities Element
                                The City's maintenance yard, located at 9633 Beverly Road houses various
                                division of Public Works field staff. The maintenance operations include streets,
                                facilities, fleet, traffic signing and striping, street sweeping, water operations, sewer
                                maintenance, and parks.
                                Sheriff Facilities
                                Law enforcement within Pico Rivera is provided on a contractual basis by the
                                Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department. By contracting for law enforcement,
                                the City of Pico Rivera receives comprehensive services, including patrol and
                                traffic law enforcement, detective, and support services. The Sheriff’s station in
                                the City of Pico Rivera is located adjacent to City Hall at 6631 Passons Boulevard,
                                as shown in Figure 6-1.
     Sheriff’s Station
        th
     40 Anniversary             Fire Protection Facilities
                                Fire protection and paramedic services for the City are provided on a contractual
                                basis by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. There are three fire stations
                                located in the city, as shown in Figure 6-1. Each station operates three shifts,
                                providing 24-hour coverage. The locations and service areas for each fire station
                                are summarized as follows:
                                Fire Station #25: Located at 9209 E. Slauson Boulevard, serves the portion of
                                the city from Slauson Boulevard to the south city limit.
                                Fire Station #40: Located at 4864 Durfee Avenue, provides fire protection
                                services from the north city limit to Mines Avenue and paramedic services for the
                                entire city.
                                Fire Station #103: Located at 7300 Paramount Boulevard, serves the central
                                portion of the city from Mines Avenue to Slauson Boulevard.
                                Fire Hazards
                                Primary fire hazards in the city are structural and industrial fires. Los Angeles
                                County has a number of ordinances, programs, and requirements pertaining to
                                fire hazards. These include ordinances establishing buffer areas for brush
     Fire Station #40
                                management, as well as requirements as part of subdivision ordinances that
                                establish standards for access and minimum water fire flow requirements.
                                Man-made structures can be threatened by fire, depending on their use,
                                construction, and condition. Buildings that present more than a normal level of
                                threat from fire are generally older wood frame structures. Another factor that
                                increases the risk of fire is the use of older single-unit homes for commercial
                                purposes, especially those that utilize combustible materials, such as paints,
                                solvents, and fuels. Because the City is essentially built out, the risk of wildland
                                fires is limited.
                                                                               6-2

October 2014                                           6. Community Facilities Element
             Figure 6-1: Fire and Sheriff’s Facilities
                               6-3

6. Community Facilities Element
                                Water Facilities
                                Pico Rivera is served by two water purveyors: the City of Pico Rivera Water
                                Authority (PRWA) and the Pico Water District (PWD). Each purveyor maintains its
                                own distribution system and operates several water supply wells to extract local
                                groundwater from the Central Basin aquifer. The city’s total size is 8.9 square
                                miles, of which approximately 32 percent (2.87 square miles) is served by PWD,
                                and the remaining 68 percent (6.03 square miles) is served by PRWA, as shown in
                                Figure 6-2. Both PRWA and PWD supply water to their respective residential,
                                commercial, industrial, and fire protection customers within Pico Rivera. General
                                Plan policies related to water facilities will be implemented by both the PRWA and
                                PWD, as applicable.
                                                                            6-4

October 2014                                              6. Community Facilities Element
           Figure 6-2: Water Agencies Serving Pico Rivera
                                 6-5
6. Community Facilities Element
                                Wastewater Facilities
                                The City of Pico Rivera’s Sewer Division is responsible for the collection of
                                wastewater within the City limits and delivery to the trunk sewer mains of Los
                                Angeles County Sanitation Districts (LACSD). After sewage is collected locally
                                and delivered to the regional trunk lines, wastewater flows south toward the Los
                                Coyotes Water Reclamation Plant of LACSD in the City of Cerritos. LACSD is
                                responsible for all regional trunk sewer lines and sewage treatment, while the
                                City is responsible for the operation and maintenance of sewer mains and lift
                                stations within the City limits. Regional trunk sewer lines of LA are shown in
                                Figure 6-3.
                                City of Pico Rivera also receives tertiary treated recycled water from LACSD’s
                                San Jose Creek Water Reclamation Plant and Los Coyotes Water Reclamation
                                Plant through the purveyor Central Basin Municipal Water District. Currently, Pico
                                Rivera Municipal Golf Course, Rio Hondo Park, Smith Park, County Library and
                                some street medians in the City are irrigated with recycled water. The City is also
                                extending recycled water service to Rio Vista Park.
                                Stormwater Facilities
                                Storm drains are the primary flood control facilities in the city, which serve to
                                convey local water runoff, as shown in Figure 6-4. Regional flood control
                                structures include the Whittier Narrows Dam and the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
                                spreading grounds, located adjacent to the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel rivers.
                                The Whittier Narrows Dam captures local stormwater flows for groundwater
                                replenishment.
                                                                        6-6

October 2014                                             6. Community Facilities Element
      Figure 6-3: Major Sewer Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
                               6-7
6. Community Facilities Element
                          Figure 6-4: Major Storm Drain Facilities Serving Pico Rivera
                                                      6-8
                    October 2014                                                      6. Community Facilities Element
Energy Facilities
The Southern California Edison (SCE) electricity supply company is responsible
for the provision of electrical facilities and services within the city. SCE owns the
transmission lines that run the length of the San Gabriel River (see Figure 6-5).
These transmission lines provide power to the city in its entirety. The City of
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power operates a 500-kilovolt (kV)
transmission line within Pico Rivera. The overhead power lines generally run on
the eastern edge of the Rio Hondo spreading grounds and along the northern
boundary of the city. The right-of-way underneath the transmission line is
currently used for a variety of temporary uses, such as nurseries, parking, and
open space.
SCE’s 220 kV double circuit transmission lines bring power from a generating
station to an electrical substation to distribute electricity throughout Pico Rivera
and other jurisdictions within the area. Power distribution lines bring power from
the substation to individual homes. SCE maintains three substations within the
city located at Beverly Boulevard and the San Gabriel Freeway (I-605); the
southwest corner of Slauson Avenue and Serapis Avenue, and near the
southeast corner of Durfee Avenue and Stephens Street.
The Southern California Gas Company is responsible for the provision of natural
gas service and facilities within the city.
                                            6-9

6. Community Facilities Element
                                Figure 6-5: Major Energy Transmission Facilities
                                                      6-10
                    October 2014                                                     6. Community Facilities Element
Solid Waste Facilities and Recycling
Solid waste generated within Pico Rivera is collected by a company holding an
exclusive franchise agreement with the City. The residential, commercial and
industrial services include curbside collection of waste, commingled recyclables,
and greenwaste. Pico Rivera has a number of waste diversion programs in place to
minimize the need for landfill disposal of solid wastes, including a Demolition and
Recycling ordinance in compliance with Assembly Bill 939. There are
recycling/drop-off centers for oil/filter recycling, Household Hazardous Waste,
and Beverage Container recycling throughout the city. Whittier Fertilizer, which is
located on Kruse Road, provides important recycling services to Pico Rivera to
achieve applicable waste diversion requirements. The City continues to strive to
improve its solid waste management efforts through educational outreach and
obtaining grants to further fund and improve their waste management programs.
The City recently received funding for the collection, removal, transportation,
recycling and disposal of waste tires from illegal tire piles and a grant for public
education regarding the benefit of properly recycling bottles and cans.
Telecommunications
A variety of telecommunication facilities—including telephone, cable television,
and high speed internet services—exists in the City of Pico Rivera, provided by
private service providers. Additionally, the City of Pico Rivera Public Information
Division manages CTV3, the city’s cable television channel that provides regular
programming featuring local news, educational presentations, special videos and
public service announcements on the latest city events, services, and meetings.
El Rancho Unified School District also operates a public access television
program.
Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
General Government Facilities
Goal 6.1
Efficient and fiscally responsible government services that are
responsive to local residents and businesses.
Policy 6.1-1 Involved Citizenry. Provide for the full inclusion of people of
diverse backgrounds, ages, genders, interests, lifestyles, and socioeconomic
status in governmental decision-making through a variety of community outreach
and information programs.
Policy 6.1-2 Access to City Government. Establish and promote City Hall as a
comfortable and approachable place for community members to voice concerns,
conduct business, and obtain information regarding the provision of City services.
                                          6-11

6. Community Facilities Element
                                Policy 6.1-3 Community Outreach. Encourage residents and businesses to
                                become active in local government by providing a variety of involvement
                                programs designed to stimulate community spirit and pride.
                                Policy 6.1-4 Sufficient Public Facilities. Provide a sufficient number and size of
                                general government facilities in order to adequately provide the services required
                                for the City’s population and businesses.
                                Sheriff Facilities
                                Goal 6.2
                                A safe community with low risk of crime, and with protection of life
                                and property.
                                Policy 6.2-1 Service Standards. Coordinate with the Los Angeles County
                                Sheriff’s Department to maintain the following law enforcement standards in the
                                City:
                                • Four-minute average response time for emergency calls;
                                • Ten-minute average response time for non-emergency calls; and
                                • Staffing levels of one officer per 1,000 residents.
                                Policy 6.2-2 Adequate Equipment. Maintain adequate levels of equipment to
                                provide effective and highly visible law enforcement services within the City.
                                Implementation Programs for Policies 6.2-1 and 6.2-2:
                                •    Work with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to pursue available
                                     state, federal, and other funding sources to support facilities, equipment,
                                     programs, and staffing for law enforcement services.
                                •    Use applicable General Plan performance standards to determine needed
                                     facilities and staffing when renewing the City’s service contract with the
                                     Sheriff’s Department.
                                Policy 6.2-3 New Development. Require new development to contribute fees to
                                fund its fair share of improvements that are needed to maintain law enforcement
                                service standards, facilities, and equipment.
                                Policy 6.2-4 Defensible Space. Incorporate defensible space security and
                                design features in new and retrofitted development to minimize opportunities for
                                criminal activity. Such features should include:
                                • Well-lighted and visible streets and street names, building entrances and
                                    addresses, recreation areas, and parking areas.
                                • Limited access into and between buildings to reduce escape routes and to
                                    make undetected entry difficult.
                                • Landscaping that permits surveillance of open areas and entryways and
                                    avoids creating places for concealment.
                                                                         6-12

                      October 2014                                                  6. Community Facilities Element
• Emergency vehicle access around buildings to the extent feasible within
   multiunit residential and nonresidential developments.
• Elimination of the potential for roof access via stacked pallets, flag poles, and
   other means within multiunit residential and nonresidential developments.
• Conduct a study of alleyways within the City and determine if they should be
   abandoned and how to make alleyways safer.
Policy 6.2-5 Gang Suppression Programs. Continue to work with the
El Rancho Unified School District and the Sheriff’s Department to develop and
implement gang suppression and intervention programs that enhance crime
prevention.
Policy 6.2-6 Graffiti Abatement. Continue to work with various agencies to fund
aggressive graffiti enforcement and abatement programs, and require removal of
graffiti that is in public view.
Implementation Program for Policies 6.2-5 and 6.2-6:
•   Pursue available state, federal, and other funding sources to develop and
    implement gang suppression and intervention programs, implement graffiti
    enforcement and abatement programs, and remove graffiti.
•   Maintain standards that limit potential for graffiti and that require prompt
    removal of graffiti on private property that is visible to the public.
Policy 6.2-7 Crime Prevention Programs. Maintain an array of community-
based service and education programs designed to prevent crime, including
Neighborhood Watch Programs and the P.R.I.D.E. youth program.
Policy 6.2-8 Mutual Aid. Continue to coordinate with the County Sheriff’s
Department, area police departments, and other appropriate law enforcement
agencies to promote regional cooperation and provide mutual aid during
emergency situations.
Fire Protection Facilities
Goal 6.3
Adequate fire protection and emergency medical services.
Policy 6.3-1 Service Standards. Coordinate with the Los Angeles County Fire
Department to maintain the following fire and emergency service standards as
recommended by the Insurance Services Office, Inc. (ISO) and the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA):
• Four-minute response time for the first arriving fire company for 90 percent of
   incidents.
• Eight-minute response time for arrival of multiple fire companies for
   90 percent of incidents.
• Four-person minimum staffing of fire companies.
                                         6-13

6. Community Facilities Element
                                • Fire Confinement Success Rate – holding structure fires to floor or origin (i.e.,
                                    preventing the fire from spreading to additional floors after first arrival on the
                                    scene) for 90 percent of incidents.
                                • Fire Company Reliability – handling calls for services within assigned station
                                    for 90 percent of incidents.
                                Policy 6.3-2 Effective Service. Maintain adequate staffing, equipment,
                                technology, and training to provide effective and efficient fire protection and
                                emergency medical services within the City.
                                Implementation Programs for Policies 6.3-1 and 6.3-2:
                                •    Work with the Los Angeles County Fire Department to pursue available state,
                                     federal, and other funding sources to support facilities, equipment, programs,
                                     and staffing for fire prevention and suppression services.
                                •    Use applicable General Plan performance standards to determine needed
                                     facilities and staffing when renewing the City’s service contract with the
                                     County Fire Department.
                                Policy 6.3-3 Adequate Fire Flows and Water Storage. Maintain adequate fire
                                flow pressure as established by the Los Angeles County Fire Department and
                                sufficient water storage for emergency situations.
                                Policy 6.3-4 Enforcement of Codes. Continue to enforce all relevant codes and
                                ordinances for existing buildings and new construction to reduce the risk of fire
                                hazards.
                                Policy 6.3-5 New Development. Consider fees for new development to help
                                maintain fire protection service levels without adversely affecting service levels
                                for existing development.
                                Policy 6.3-6 Review of Development Proposals. Continue to include the Fire
                                Department in the review of development proposals to ensure that projects
                                adequately address safe design and on-site fire protection.
                                Policy 6.3-7 Mutual Aid. Continue to coordinate with appropriate fire protection
                                agencies to provide mutual aid during emergency situations.
                                Policy 6.3-8 Education. Continue to support community outreach activities and
                                programs designed to inform and educate the public concerning fire prevention
                                and suppression.
                                Water Facilities
                                Goal 6.4
                                A sustainable supply of water delivered through an efficient
                                infrastructure system to meet existing and future needs.
                                Policy 6.4-1 Reliable Supply and Distribution. Provide high quality potable
                                water and a regularly maintained distribution system to meet normal and
                                emergency demands in both wet and dry years.
                                                                          6-14

                    October 2014                                                    6. Community Facilities Element
Implementation Programs for Policy 6.4-1:
•    Coordinate with PWD to ensure high quality groundwater is provided within
     their service area, and that the distribution system is well-maintained.
•    Pursue available state, federal, and other funding sources to support the
     planning, improvement, operations, and maintenance of water facilities.
Policy 6.4-2 Urban Water Management Plan. Maintain and keep up to date the
Urban Water Management Plan and other water master planning and capital
improvement tools to ensure adequate water supply, infrastructure, maintenance,
rehabilitation, funding, and conservation measures.
Implementation Program for Policy 6.4-2:
•    Review and regularly update the City’s Urban Water Management Plan and
     other water master planning and capital improvement tools, including
     coordination with PWD for the portion of Pico Rivera within the PWD service
     area.
Policy 6.4-3 New Development. Require new development to demonstrate the
availability of adequate water supply and fire flow, and to provide infrastructure
and/or finance the costs of improvements necessary to serve the demands
created by the development, as appropriate.
Policy 6.4-4 Energy Efficient Infrastructure. Employ best practices to maintain
the highest feasible energy efficiency in the water infrastructure system to reduce
costs and greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy 6.4-5 Water Conservation. Encourage water conservation as a means of
protecting the long term availability of water resources. Require new and
retrofitted development to be equipped with water conservation devices.
Wastewater Facilities
Goal 6.5
Adequate and well-maintained wastewater infrastructure to meet                          Policies addressing water
                                                                                        conservation and use of
existing and future needs and to ensure the health and safety of the                    recycled water can be found in
Pico Rivera community.                                                                  the Environmental Resources
                                                                                        Element section under “Water
Policy 6.5-1 Sufficient Infrastructure. Maintain and upgrade the City’s                 Quality and Conservation.”
wastewater collection system to meet the needs of existing development and
future growth such that restricted wastewater flows occur only during peak-day,
peak-hour conditions.
Implementation Program for Policy 6.5-1:
•    Pursue available state, federal and other funding sources to support the
     planning, improvement, operations, and maintenance of wastewater facilities.
Policy 6.5-2 Wastewater Treatment Plant Capacity. Maintain coordination with
the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts to ensure that the wastewater
                                          6-15

6. Community Facilities Element
                                treatment plants serving the City can accept wastewater flows from Pico Rivera
                                and remain within the rated capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities serving
                                the City.
                                Policy 6.5-3 Infrastructure Master Planning. Maintain up-to-date wastewater
                                master planning and capital improvement tools to ensure adequate wastewater
                                infrastructure, maintenance, rehabilitation, and funding.
                                Implementation Program for Policy 6.5-3:
                                •    Review and regularly update the City’s sewer master plan and capital
                                     improvement tools.
                                Policy 6.5-4 Adequate Facilities for New Development. Require new
                                development to demonstrate the availability of adequate wastewater facilities in
                                accordance with city plans and standards.
                                Policy 6.5-5 New Development Contribution. Ensure that new development
                                constructs, dedicates, and/or pays its fair share contribution to the wastewater
                                treatment and collection system that is necessary to serve the demands created
                                by the development.
                                Policy 6.5-6 Monitoring Discharge. Continue to monitor uses that may generate
                                toxic or potentially hazardous substances to prevent contamination of water and
                                wastewater.
                                Policy 6.5-7 Best Practices. Work with Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts to
                                identify and implement, as feasible, best practices and technologies for wastewater
                                collection and treatment, including those that reduce the amount of wastewater
                                requiring treatment, maintain the highest possible energy efficiency, and reduce
                                costs and greenhouse gas emissions.
                                Policy 6.5-8 Reclaimed Water. Utilize reclaimed water for all municipal parks
                                and greenways including the Bicentennial Park Campground and Sports Arena
                                and continually search for local, state and federal grants to develop the proper
                                infrastructure.
                                Energy Facilities
                                Goal 6.6
                                A community adequately served by energy facilities with minimal
                                exposure to electromagnetic fields.
                                Policy 6.6-1 Adequate Services. Maintain coordination with SCE and the
                                Southern California Gas Company to ensure that adequate electricity and natural
                                gas services and facilities are available.
                                Policy 6.6-2 New Development. Ensure that approvals of proposed
                                development are contingent upon the ability of SCE and the Gas Company to
                                provide sufficient energy supply and infrastructure.
                                                                         6-16

                     October 2014                                                    6. Community Facilities Element
Policy 6.6-3 Locating Sensitive Uses. Locate sensitive uses an adequate
distance from major electrical transmission lines based on siting guidelines used
by the California Public Utilities Commission to minimize exposure to
electromagnetic fields.
Policy 6.6-4 Renewable Energy. Encourage the use of solar power and
renewable fuel sources for a sustainable community.
Policy 6.6-5 Municipal Vehicle Fleet. Pursue local, state and federal funding to
obtain alternative-fuel vehicles such as electric vehicles and strategically locate
electric charging stations for private and public use.
Implementation Program for Policy 6.6-3:
•    Incorporate standards for the location of sensitive uses near major electrical
     transmission lines consistent with the California Public Utilities Commission
     siting guidelines into the City’s zoning ordinance.
Policy 6.6-6 Undergrounding Utilities. Continue to work with energy providers
to underground existing facilities, especially along arterials, targeted corridors
and around substations, while utilizing the Underground Utility Districts to finance     Policies addressing energy
                                                                                         conservation and use of
this construction.                                                                       renewable energy sources can
                                                                                         be found in the Environmental
Policy 6.6-7 Visual Impacts. Work with SCE and the Gas Company to minimize
                                                                                         Resources Element section
the impacts of energy facilities within the community, including use of low profile      under “Energy Conservation.”
or underground substation facilities.
Policy 6.6-8 Joint Use. Where feasible, facilitate joint use of major electricity
transmission line corridors for uses such as wholesale nurseries, pedestrian and
bike trails, and linear parks.
Policy 6.6-9 Coordination. Coordinate with DWP on any projects with the
potential to impact LADWP transmission line rights-of-way prior to project
approval to ensure appropriate clearances, access issues, construction activities,
safety, grading, drainage and other such issues are adequately and appropriate
addressed.
Solid Waste Facilities and Recycling
Goal 6.7
Reduced solid waste generation and disposal, and increased
recycling opportunities.
Policy 6.7-1 Adequate Services. Maintain adequate solid waste facilities and
services to maximize diversion and minimize landfilling of solid wastes.
Implementation Program for Policy 6.7-1:
•    Undertake a regular review of solid waste diversion rates and work with
     appropriate solid waste collection, disposal, and recycling service providers
     to maximize diversion within the community.
                                           6-17

6. Community Facilities Element
                                Policy 6.7-2 Compatible Facilities. Ensure that solid waste collection and
                                recycling facilities are located and operated in a manner that is compatible with
                                surrounding uses.
                                Policy 6.7-3 Recycling Plans. Maintain up-to-date Source Reduction and
                                Recycling Element, Household Waste Element, and other relevant plans
                                designed to maximize solid waste management efficiency and diversion.
                                Implementation Program for Policy 6.7-3:
                                •    Regularly review and update, as needed, the Source Reduction and
                                     Recycling Element, Household Waste Element, and other relevant plans to
                                     determine whether new goals or programs are needed to meet waste
                                     diversion goals.
                                Policy 6.7-4 City Facilities. Continue to require office recycling services at City
                                Hall and other City facilities to increase solid waste diversion.
                                Policy 6.7-5 Non-Residential Recycling. Provide convenient and effective
                                composting and recycling programs for commercial and industrial uses, as well
                                as waste diversion programs for construction activities, to minimize the solid
                                waste stream to landfills.
                                Policy 6.7-6 New Construction. Encourage the use of recycled materials in new
                                construction, including building construction and expansions, as well as for
                                infrastructure improvements.
                                Policy 6.7-7 Education. Provide public education and outreach programs on the
                                benefits of solid waste reduction and recycling, and communicate recycling
                                options and locations within the city.
                                Telecommunication Facilities
                                Goal 6.8
                                Quality communication systems that enhance community economic
                                development and governmental efficiency, and provide equitable
                                access for all.
                                Policy 6.8-1 Access. In conjunction with local internet, television, telephone,
                                cellular and other telecommunications service providers, provide access to and
                                availability of a wide range of state-of-the-art telecommunication systems and
                                services throughout the city.
                                Policy 6.8-2 New Development. Establish requirements for the installation of
                                feasible state-of-the-art telecommunications technologies in new and retrofitted
                                development.
                                Policy 6.8-3 Co-location. Require compatible co-location and design of wireless
                                telecommunication facilities that are as visually unobtrusive as feasible and
                                minimize visual impacts on surrounding uses.
                                                                          6-18

                    October 2014                                            6. Community Facilities Element
Policy 6.8-4 City Operations. Expand the use of telecommunications and new
technologies to enhance the performance of internal City operations and the
delivery of public services.
                                   6-19
6. Community Facilities Element
                                This page intentionally left blank.
                                              6-20
                    October 2014
CHAPTER 7
Economic Prosperity
Element
Introduction
                                                                                   Pico Rivera Towne Center
Economic prosperity is a prime indicator of the success and vitality of a
community. The structure and strength of the local economy influences a
community’s physical development and its ability to fund essential services. In
today’s economy, maintaining a local inventory of well paying jobs and sales tax
generating uses is the foundation for sustaining the financial resources needed to
provide services and amenities that enrich the quality of life of residents and
workers.
It is Pico Rivera’s desire to encourage a broad range of employment and
entrepreneurial options, and to generate sufficient revenues to pay for the
services and facilities desired by the community. While the City cannot control
larger market forces and cycles, it will strategically position itself to maximize
potential opportunities, foster a climate attractive to business, and ensure
responsible use of available fiscal resources.
This element aims at enhancing the Pico Rivera’s economic well-being and
                                                                                    Starbucks in Pico Rivera
sustainability. It provides a strategic approach to economic development that
reflects the community’s unique opportunities and challenges. The intent of this
element of the General Plan is to further elevate Pico Rivera as a great place to
live, work, and do business.
Economic Context
Pico Rivera’s economic base is largely centered on retail and wholesale trade,
warehousing and manufacturing, and educational services. Similar to many
communities in southern California, the majority of local residents commute
outside the City to work.
Pico Rivera’s local employment base declined between 1990 and 2010, largely
due to the closure of the City’s largest employer in 2000, the Northrop Grumman
Corporation B-2 Division. The City has largely weathered the economic downturn
caused by the plant closure through redevelopment of the157-acre facility with
industrial, research and development, office and retail uses.
                                                                                       Baskin Robbins in
Most of the commercial development in the city is located along the major                 Pico Rivera
roadways including Whittier Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Slauson Avenue
                                         7-1

     7.Economic Prosperity Element
                                   and Telegraph Road, with smaller concentrations along Beverly Boulevard,
                                   Rosemead Boulevard and Durfee Avenue. Most of the city’s commercial
                                   businesses are located in strip commercial developments. The city’s retail
                                   centers have been more recently developed and include the Krikorian Theatre
                                   Village Walk Complex, Pico Rivera Marketplace, and the Pico Rivera Towne
                                   Center. Industrial businesses can be found along Whittier Boulevard, Gregg
                                   Road and San Gabriel River Parkway, but the city’s largest concentration of
                                   industrial businesses are located in the southwest portion of the city, generally
                                   located along Paramount Boulevard, Slauson Avenue and Telegraph Road. The
                                   major industrial centers include the Pacific Gateway Business Park on Whittier
    Krikorian Theatre in
         Pico Rivera               Boulevard and the Pico Rivera Commerce Center and Business Center on
                                   Paramount Boulevard.
                                   Many of the city’s existing commercial and industrial sites have older design
                                   standards that do not meet current market needs, and are located along
                                   congested roadways. The city’s industrial spaces are typically defined by smaller
                                   “floorplates” that are most suitable for local and regional companies.
                                   Economic analyses (see Appendix F- Economic Prosperity Report) have
                                   indicated that a variety of industries would be interested in locating in the city,
                                   including clothing, food, warehousing, distribution, and logistics companies, if
                                   better designed and located spaces were available.
                                   Opportunities & Challenges
                                   As described in the Land Use Element, 16 Opportunity Areas have been
                                   identified in the city where the potential exists for economic development and
                                   community enhancement through the introduction of new uses, intensification,
         Pico Rivera
                                   and/or design improvements. Many of these Opportunity Areas are located within
     Commerce Center
                                   or near existing business concentrations. Encouraging business expansion and
                                   providing improved access and infrastructure in these areas will further enhance
                                   the City’s economic growth.
                                   Pico Rivera has a number of attributes that provide opportunities for business.
                                   These include:
                                   • Proximity to downtown Los Angeles and other nearby economic centers;
                                   • Good connectivity to highways, adjacent markets, and ports;
                                   • Strong local industrial and skilled labor base;
                                   • Broad range of local businesses that offer diverse employment opportunities;
                                   • Concentrations of top employers in key areas of the city;
                                   • Reasonable housing prices and high home ownership rates;
                                   • Stable local population base;
A Mi Hacienda in Pico Rivera
                                   • Quality community amenities and recreational programs; and
                                                                              7-2

                    October 2014                                                      7.Economic Prosperity Element
• Possible future Gold Line Light Rail Extension through the city.
At the same time, the City faces challenges to economic growth. These include:
• Limited vacant land for new development;
• Areas with inadequate public infrastructure;
• Congestion on key roadways;
• Retail vacancies and parking deficiencies along key commercial corridors;
• Outdated and poor quality commercial and industrial buildings in some areas;
• Lack of higher end retail and visitor amenities;
• Overcrowded and older housing stock in some areas;
• Lack of local high-paying jobs;
• An aging population and, although increasing, a lower per capita income and
    educational attainment than some nearby communities;
• A historically less positive image and perception in the region that has been
    steadily improving;
• Slow projected growth;
• High local sales tax rate; and
• Constrained city finances and staffing.
The above opportunities and challenges can both support and hinder
Pico Rivera’s future economic development. In response, the City will be
strategic, collaborative, innovative, and flexible to capitalize on the opportunities
that are presented.
Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
Strategic Approach
Goal 7.1
A strategic approach to economic growth that responds to changes
in the market and achieves measurable success.
Policy 7.1-1 Economic Development Strategy. Maintain an economic
development strategy to grow business, employment, and income in Pico Rivera
that emphasizes:
• Enabling a diverse range of business activities, including skilled labor and
    technology-focused manufacturing; warehousing and logistics; and
    professional/technical, educational, medical/health, and financial services.
• Assisting existing Pico Rivera businesses to prosper and remain in the
    community as they grow.
                                         7-3

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                              • Encouraging new businesses that are a good match for the community’s
                                  skilled labor pool to relocate to Pico Rivera.
                              • Partnering with the El Rancho Unified School District, Rio Hondo Community
                                  College, Chamber of Commerce and local business community to provide for
                                  workforce training to meet the needs of current and future local businesses.
                              • Maintaining quality development and an image as a successful community.
                              • Ensuring that the infrastructure needed to support successful businesses is
                                  available.
                              • Maintaining a supportive and cost effective environment in which to do
                                  business.
                              • Maximizing access to a variety of funding programs for local economic
                                  development.
                              • Responsible and sustainable fiscal governance of the community.
                              • Los Angeles County Economic Development Corporation’s five key
                                  components for economic development success which includes an educated
                                  workforce, business-friendly environment, attractive quality of life, smart land
                                              st
                                  use and 21 century infrastructure.
                              Policy 7.1-2 Partnerships. Partner with the Los Angeles County Economic
                              Development Corporation (LAEDC), Southeast Area Social Services Funding
                              Authority (SASSFA), U.S. Small Business Administration, Chamber of
                              Commerce, other business organizations, neighboring cities, and regional
                              agencies to strengthen strategic alliances, leverage resources, and enhance the
                              City’s economic and business development efforts.
                              Policy 7.1-3 City Support. Provide dedicated City staffing, resources, and
                              training to support economic development activities and business assistance
                              programs.
                              Policy 7.1-4 Communication. Maintain regular communication with local and
                              regional business leaders and economic development organizations to discuss
                              trends, identify future opportunities for growth and associated needs, and share
                              information regarding the City’s economic development programs and activities.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.1-4:
                              •    Periodically survey the business community for evaluation of City services
                                   and improvement suggestions.
                              Policy 7.1-5 Performance Review. Review local performance benchmarks for
                              economic growth, and adjust strategies and programs as needed to enhance
                              success and align with resource availability.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.1-5:
                              • Establish and annually review specific metrics to measure Pico Rivera’s
                                  progress in meeting its economic goals. These metrics should address:
                                  – Local employment by sector
                                  – Jobs-to-housing ratio
                                  – Number of employed residents
                                  – Unemployment rate
                                  – Median income
                                                                         7-4

                    October 2014                                                    7.Economic Prosperity Element
   – Number of business licenses by business type
   – Sales tax revenue
   – Success stories of local public investment and economic development
       policies and programs
Policy 7.1-6 Economic Development Priorities. Provide priority for access to
economic development resources to (1) existing businesses seeking to expand
within Pico Rivera, (2) businesses seeking to relocate to Pico Rivera, and
(3) retention of existing businesses to help them to access:
• Capital markets through the use of tax-exempt industrial development bonds
   and taxable bonds.
• Below-market rate interest rate business loans through revolving loan
   programs (e.g., CDBG, SBA, CDIF).
• County economic development programs aimed at lowering labor costs.
• County, state and federal agencies that can supplement the City’s economic
   activities such as the Los Angeles County Economic Development
   Corporation.
Existing Businesses
Goal 7.2
A prosperous base of warehousing and manufacturing, retail and
commercial service, office-based, and professional businesses,
enhancing economic opportunities, local employment, and
municipal revenues.
Policy 7.2-1 Retention and Growth. Place a high priority on the retention and
growth of existing and local startup businesses.
Policy 7.2-2 Marketing. Partner with local businesses and the Chamber of
Commerce on joint marketing and advertising campaigns to promote business,
community events, buy local programs, and local business-to-business sales.
Policy 7.2-3 Retrofit and Reuse. Establish retrofit and reuse programs and tools
to modernize, upgrade, and intensify the use of older commercial and industrial
buildings and sites to be more competitive in the region, with particular focus on:
• Older commercial centers along Whittier Boulevard, Beverly Boulevard,
   Slauson Avenue, Telegraph Road and Durfee Avenue; and
• Older industrial areas in the northeastern and southwestern portions of the
   City.
Policy 7.2-4 Commercial Center Revitalization and Expansion. Facilitate
revitalizing and improving commercial centers at key locations in the city.
• Accommodate new retail and other uses within the shopping center at the
    southwest corner of Rosemead Boulevard and Mines Avenue that take
   advantage of the site’s strategic location adjacent to Smith Park, and reinforce
   the function of the park, community center, and adjacent library as a major
   community gathering place.
• Facilitate consolidation of the commercial parcel at the southeast corner of
   Rosemead Boulevard and Beverly Boulevard with existing commercial centers
                                         7-5

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                                 to the south to provide for a larger commercial site capable of supporting
                                 development of grocery store at that location.
                              • Provide for conversion of outdated and marginal industrial uses within the
                                 Durfee Avenue corridor area with high-density residential uses that will
                                 expand the support base for existing and future small businesses along
                                 Durfee Avenue.
                              Policy 7.2-5 Off-Street Parking. Within locations such as the north side of
                              Whittier Boulevard and along Durfee Avenue, assist in business development by
                              facilitating off-street parking solutions, such as shared parking and municipal
                              parking lots, for commercial uses that have limited areas available for parking.
                              Policy 7.2-6 Signage. Provide for improved signage to commercial areas and
                              other key amenities and destinations in the city.
                              Policy 7.2-7 Big Box Retail. Continually study market trends and implement
                              policies and ordinances, such as adaptive reuse, and adopt contingency plans to
                              assist in the possible vacancies of big box retailers.
                              New Businesses & Employment
                              Goal 7.3
                              New businesses and jobs that will continue to grow and diversify
                              Pico Rivera’s economy and reduce the need for residents to travel
                              outside the City for services and employment.
                              Policy 7.3-1 High-Wage Jobs. Target the attraction of a diversity of new
                              businesses and employers with an emphasis on high-growth industries that
                              create permanent, higher wage jobs to help raise the City’s median income level.
                              Policy 7.3-2 Emerging Industries. Work with businesses, real estate and
                              development interests, and economic development and planning organizations to
                              identify emerging industries and businesses, determine siting and other needs,
                              and encourage the creation of complementary industry clusters.
                              Implementation Program for Policies 7.3-1 and 7.3-2:
                              • Work with the real estate community to maintain a current listing of properties
                                 for sale and for lease for the development and expansion of employment- and
                                 revenue-generating uses.
                              Policy 7.3-3 Commercial Uses. Identify and proactively recruit new high-quality
                              commercial uses, specialty stores, and sit-down restaurants that expand the
                              diversity of retail and service offerings, increase the generation of sales tax, and
                              enhance visitor amenities.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.3-3.
                              • Prepare a retail leakage study to identify retail and other local-serving
                                 commercial opportunities, along with related growth in household demand for
                                 such uses.
                              Policy 7.3-4 Industrial Base. Diversify the City’s industrial base and facilitate
                              investment in the City’s industrial areas to attract research and development,
                              business incubators, manufacturers, transportation and logistics companies,
                              services, and other emerging industries.
                                                                        7-6

                      October 2014                                                        7.Economic Prosperity Element
Policy 7.3-5 Local-Serving Businesses. Facilitate the ability of local residents
to open and expand businesses within the community, and encourage location
and expansion of businesses within Pico Rivera and serve the local needs of
Pico Rivera’s unique community culture.
Implementation Programs for Policy 7.3-5:
• Give appropriate priority to local residents and locally owned businesses when
    implementing economic development programs.
• Give appropriate priority to businesses serving the local needs of Pico
    Rivera’s unique community culture.
Policy 7.3-6 Intensification. Facilitate higher-intensity employment-generating
and mixed-use development at key locations in the city.
• In the San Gabriel River Parkway corridor, encourage higher intensity light
                                                                                                Additional policies regarding
    industrial uses to replace the existing low-intensity industrial uses.
                                                                                                land use can be found in the
• At the intersection of San Gabriel River Parkway and Beverly Boulevard, work                  Land Use Element
    with the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works to relocate their
    existing maintenance yard to a more suitable location, converting the site for
    mixed-use development. Provide for the conversion of the existing mini-
    warehouse facilities in the northeast and southeast quadrants of the
    intersection to a multistory office or light industrial uses.
• On the north side of Beverly Boulevard, east of the 605 Freeway, provide for
    consolidation of the two existing industrial uses into higher-intensity mixed use
    or light industrial development.
• At the northeast corner of Paramount Boulevard and Slauson Avenue, provide
    for replacement of the existing “swap meet” site with a mixed-use or light
    industrial development.
• At the Montebello Bus Lines Transit Center, work with Montebello Bus Lines
    to identify and secure a feasible site for relocation of the existing transfer
    station that provides improved connectivity to retail businesses. Potential
    locations include the Rosemead Boulevard/Washington Boulevard
    intersection (particularly if the Gold Line light rail is extended to that location).
Implementation Program for Policy 7.3-6:
• Develop and offer incentives for developing and intensifying employment-
    generating uses such as expedited processing, reduced fees, and assistance
    with needed infrastructure.
Policy 7.3-7 Industrial Land Use. Retain adequate manufacturing and industrial
land use base, in particular near key transportation corridors such as I-605 and
I-5, to support emerging industrial sectors.
Policy 7.3-8 Health Care Services. Encourage provision of primary and
specialized health care services within Pico Rivera to increase and diversify
employment opportunities.
Implementation Program for Policy 7.3-8:
• Develop and offer incentives for developing health care uses such as
    expedited processing and reduced fees.
                                             7-7

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                              Policy 7.3-9 Office Development. Encourage office development within
                              Pico Rivera to increase and diversify employment opportunities.
                              Implementation Program for Policies 7.3-8 and 7.3-9:
                              • Consider implementation of lease agreements as an incentive for the
                                  development of new health and office development. Such agreements could
                                  include subsidies of rental rates to enhance the economic feasibility of
                                  financing development, while increasing the economic attractiveness of the
                                  projects for new and expanding businesses.
                              Policy 7.3-10 Bicentennial Park Campground and the Sports Arena.
                              Encourage revitalization of the Bicentennial Park Campground and Sports Arena
                              area to capitalize on the natural amenities and resources of the area, such as
                              trail and tour guides, campgrounds, equestrian uses, and nature and open space
                              preserves and create an economic development driver for the community.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.3-10:
                              • Aggressively pursue federal and state funding and grants for targeted
                                  recreational and habitat restoration, recognizing the great value these assets
                                  offer in drawing residents, businesses, and visitors to the community.
                              Policy 7.3-11 Small Business. Support projects and programs by local banks,
                              the U.S. Small Business Administration, nonprofit organizations, and colleges
                              and universities to create business incubators, microfinance programs and other
                              means to encourage small business development in the city.
                              Policy 7.3-12 Senior Services. Attract affordable extended-care housing for
                              seniors to the community, providing for a continuum of senior housing and care
                              ranging from active adult communities to assisted living and skilled nursing care
                              centers.
                              Policy 7.3-13 Workplace Alternatives. Promote the establishment of workplace
                              alternatives, including home occupations and telecommuting to reduce peak hour
                              congestion, including permitting home occupations in all residential districts.
                              Policy 7.3-14 Business Incubators. Encourage the development of technology
                              incubators to promote entrepreneurship and support start-up companies.
                              Policy 7.3-15 Manufacturing Movement. Support the Manufacturing Movement
                              which prioritizes policies to increase exports, Research & Design investments for
                              sustainable smart manufacturing systems, entrepreneurs’ access to U.S. public
                                                                                                st
                              capital markets to grow new companies, programs for 21 century training
                              programs and reduce regulatory and structural costs that create jobs.
                              Policy 7.3-16 Film Industry. Continually support the California Film
                              Commission’s “film friendly” initiatives, review and update the City’s film friendly
                              ordinance to generate local revenue, bolster local businesses, provide temporary
                              jobs for local residents and to attract, retain and grow the Motion Pictures/Video
                              Industry in the region.
                                                                        7-8

                     October 2014                                                     7.Economic Prosperity Element
Workforce Development
Goal 7.4
An educated and highly skilled workforce that is well matched to
existing and targeted industries.
Policy 7.4-1 Training and Education. Collaborate with the El Rancho Unified
School District, Rio Hondo Community College, trade organizations, the
Chamber of Commerce, and other workforce development partners to expand
local job training, skills-matching, and continuing education programs, providing
quality, life-long learning opportunities that can train a highly skilled local labor
force.
Policy 7.4-2 Adult Education. Support professional development and continuing
education programs so that working adults can expand their skills and embrace
lifelong learning.
Policy 7.4-3 Youth Skills. Promote partnerships between local businesses and
educational institutions that work with youths to provide internships, in target
industries, training for life skills, and job readiness.
Implementation Program for Policies 7.4-2 and 7.4-3:
• Undertake a survey of local businesses and workforce development agencies
    to determine high priority job training needs to provide focus for local training
    programs on those needs.
Policy 7.4-4 Technical Colleges. Support the development of technical colleges
and training institutions that build job skills commensurate with the growth of the
community’s economic base.
Policy 7.4-5 Veteran Training. Support programs and apply for local, county,
state and federal grants to assist in reintegrating Veterans into meaningful
employment within the labor force.
Community Image
Goal 7.5
A community that looks successful and is attractive to existing and
potential businesses and employees.
Policy 7.5-1 Livable Community. In conjunction with the Chamber of
Commerce and other organizations, promote Pico Rivera’s unique character and
lifestyle as a means of attracting and retaining higher-income, college-educated
professionals to the community along with the businesses they manage.
Policy 7.5-2 Business Climate. In conjunction with the Chamber of Commerce
and other organizations, promote Pico Rivera as a highly livable community and
an excellent place to do business, stressing its advantages (e.g., location close
to downtown Los Angeles, skilled workforce, involved community).
Implementation Programs for Policy 7.5-2:
• Maintain economic information and development opportunities on the City’s
    website and create interactive links with the real estate brokerage and
    development industry.
                                             7-9

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                              • Publicize positive images of Pico Rivera through placement of articles in the
                                  local and regional media and business and trade journals.
                              Policy 7.5-3 Arts and Culture. Partner with community and business
                              organizations to support arts and cultural activities and facilities in Pico Rivera.
                              Policy 7.5-4 Design Standards. Maintain design standards that ensure
                              consistency and quality of architecture, site design, landscaping, and signage in
                              commercial and industrial projects without making the cost of doing business in
                              Pico Rivera prohibitive.
                              Implementation Programs for Policy 7.5-4:
                              • Assist in enhancing existing building façades on commercial and residential
                                  buildings.
                              • Implement a well-designed way-finding program combining signage, public
                                  art, and urban design improvements to identify shopping areas; emphasize
                                  community landmarks, such as the community center and Sports Arena; and
                                  assist visitors in finding their way around the community.
                              Policy 7.5-5 Reduce Conflicts. Maintain appropriate performance standards for
                              industrial uses in close proximity to residential uses to reduce conflicts between
                              residential and industrial uses.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.5-5:
                              • Develop and implement performance standards for industrial uses in close
                                  proximity to residential uses to eliminate conflicts. These could take the form
                                  of:
                                  – Standards for buffers between industrial and residential uses.
                                  – Performance standards to be applied to all industrial uses, with special
                                      standards for impacts to residential uses.
                                  – Special land use designations/zoning for industrial uses adjacent to
                                      residential neighborhoods.
                              Policy 7.5-6 Enforcement. Provide consistent enforcement of City codes to
                              promote property maintenance.
                              Policy 7.5-7 Diverse Housing. As a means of helping local businesses attract
                              the best possible employees, provide for a diverse mix of quality housing options
                              for various age groups, income levels, and household sizes to attract and retain
                              educated and skilled workers, allowing them to remain within the community and
                              at their place of employment as their housing needs change over time.
                              Provision of Infrastructure
                              Goal 7.6
                              Adequate infrastructure to support existing businesses and
                              industries and desired expansion of the community’s business
                              sector.
                              Policy 7.6.1 Infrastructure Investment. Improve public infrastructure in
                              commercial and employment-generating areas.
                              • Provide telecommunication enhancements, such as development of a city-
                                  wide fiber optic network, and modify building regulations as needed to ensure
                                                                         7-10

                      October 2014                                                7.Economic Prosperity Element
    that development will be designed to meet the needs of future communication
    technologies, ensuring that Pico Rivera is properly positioned to participate
    fully in the new global economy.
• Develop improved traffic signal coordination along major commercial and
    truck routes, including Rosemead Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Slauson
    Avenue, and Telegraph Road.
Implementation Programs for Policy 7.6-1:
• Pursue available state, federal, and other funding sources to support the
    planning, improvement, and maintenance of utility and roadway infrastructure.
• Modify the City building code to require new structures to be equipped with a
    fiber-optics interface and copper cabling throughout.
• Incorporate needed improvements into the City’s Capital Improvement Plan.
Policy 7.6-2 Development Agreements. Enter into development agreements,
as appropriate, to secure the participation of new development in needed
infrastructure improvements and funding programs beyond that which can be
required by the City to mitigate project impacts.
Cost of Doing Business
Goal 7.7
A cost effective and supportive environment in which to do
business.
Policy 7.7-1 Customer Service. Promote and strengthen a high level of
customer service in City government.
Implementation Program for Policy 7.7-1:
• Assign a City staff member to serve as a project ombudsman to guide
    businesses through City processes efficiently from start to finish.
Policy 7.7-2 Development Review Process. Maintain a development review
process that is conducive to establishing new businesses and expanding existing
businesses within Pico Rivera.
• Provide excellent customer service to retail businesses and developers of
    employment-generating projects by focusing on solving problems and
    providing certainty in the development review process.
• Streamline the development review process so that it works effectively and
    efficiently for the applicant and the public through:
    – Explicit statements of City expectations
    – Early identification of issues
    – Consistent application of community policy
    – An emphasis on expedited problem solving
    – Ensuring that detailed regulations facilitate and do not hinder the
        achievement of community objectives
Policy 7.7-3 Fee Competitiveness. Maintain development fees, user charges,
special assessments, and taxes so as to ensure that they do not unreasonably
                                           7-11

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                              burden new business formation and expansion of existing businesses, and also
                              maintain financial competitiveness with other cities in the region.
                              Implementation Program for Policy 7.7-3:
                              • Periodically evaluate the City’s development fees, user charges, special
                                  assessments, and taxes in comparison of those of communities in the region
                                  with which Pico Rivera competes for economic development.
                              Policy 7.7-4 Incentives. Provide fiscally prudent local incentives, such as fee
                              deferrals, expedited processing, assistance in assembling parcels, modified
                              development standards, development density/intensity bonuses, and
                              infrastructure assistance, to attract and support business development and
                              expansion within the community.
                              • Focus business attraction and expansion efforts on sales tax-generating uses,
                                  employment-intensive industrial uses requiring skilled labor, and office-based
                                  employment that will enhance the local economy.
                              • Actively seek larger retail businesses the City lacks, such has home furnishing
                                  and appliance stores, and (in the northern portion of the city) an American-
                                  style supermarket.
                              • Encourage multi-tenant business park uses along the San Gabriel River
                                  Parkway.
                              • Promote service industries with sit-down restaurants as ancillary uses.
                              • Conduct outreach to City vendors or suppliers to attract new businesses to
                                  Pico Rivera.
                              Policy 7.7-5 Public Property. Strategically use vacant and underutilized public
                              properties to encourage business expansion and attract new businesses.
                              Funding Programs
                              Goal 7.8
                              Adequate funding for economic development activities and related
                              improvement programs in a post-redevelopment era.
                              Policy 7.8-1 Funding Sources. Pursue and develop alternative funding sources
                              for economic development planning and programs, including grants, loans, and
                              partnerships with federal, state and regional agencies and organizations.
                              Policy 7.8-2 Financing Districts. Explore the use of assessment districts,
                              community facilities districts, business improvement districts and infrastructure
                              financing districts that are mutually desirable to property owners, businesses,
                              and the City.
                              Policy 7.8-3 Public/Private Partnerships. Support public/private partnerships
                              and other efforts to fund and implement key projects that meet the City’s
                              economic development goals.
                              Policy 7.8-4 Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy. Develop a
                              Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy (CEDS) and specifically pursue
                              U.S. Economic Development Administration funds.
                                                                      7-12

                   October 2014                                                      7.Economic Prosperity Element
City Fiscal Management
Goal 7.9
Sustainable fiscal governance that strengthens the City’s ability to
meet public service demands.
Policy 7.9-1 Financial Standards. Apply prudent financial standards and
controls to balance projected City revenues with public services costs, including
reserves and replacement funds.
Policy 7.9-2 Point of Sale. Continually work with HDL Companies, the City’s
sales tax consultant, to review office, business park, and industrial development,
and seek opportunities for the designation of these uses within the city as “point
of sale.”
Implementation Program for Policy 7.9-2:
• Develop and offer incentives to office-based and industrial businesses that
   designate their Pico Rivera facility as “point of sale” for sales tax generation.
   Such incentives could include expedited processing, reduced fees, special
   business license rates, and assistance with needed infrastructure.
Policy 7.9-3 Service Delivery. Continue to increase efficiencies in providing
public services, and apply a range of financing approaches to develop, maintain,
and operate such services.
Policy 7.9-4 General Plan Priorities. Link the provision of services and
construction of capital improvements with General Plan priorities as part of the
Capital Improvement Program and annual budget process.
Policy 7.9-5 Fiscal Impact Analysis. Evaluate the fiscal impacts of any
development project requesting public funding, infrastructure participation, or
revenue sharing.
                                         7-13

7.Economic Prosperity Element
                              This page intentionally left blank.
                                            7-14
                     October 2014
                   	
CHAPTER 8
Environmental Resources
Element
Introduction
A healthy natural environment contributes directly to existing and future quality of
life, and to the identity of a community. Clean air and water, wise use of energy
and other renewable resources, reduction in the generation of greenhouse gas
emissions, and protection of unique biological and cultural resources are vital to
the well-being of a community and to society as a whole. Thoughtful conservation
of environmental resources is not only beneficial to current residents and
businesses, but to the quality of life of future generations.
Pico Rivera values and is committed to protecting and enhancing its
environmental resources. One of the community’s core values is to minimize the
impacts of urban activities on natural environmental systems and functions. The
intent is to live in balance with the community’s environmental setting, and
manage resource needs and conservation for the common good.
This element addresses the long-term management of Pico Rivera’s
environmental resources including air quality, greenhouse gas emissions, water
resources, biological resources, mineral resources, and cultural resources.
Sustainable Communities Strategy
California Senate Bill 375 requires each of the 18 metropolitan planning
organizations (MPO) in the State to prepare a Sustainable Communities Strategy
(SCS) to demonstrate how development patterns and transportation network,
policies, and programs will work together to achieve greenhouse gas emission
reduction targets for cars and light trucks, if there is a feasible way to do so. If a
MPO cannot meet the targets through a SCS, then the region is required to
develop an alternative planning strategy that demonstrates how GHG reduction
targets could be achieved.
In essence, the SCS includes four building blocks:
     A land use component that accommodates the Regional Housing Needs
      Assessment (RHNA) and includes the protection of sensitive resources,
      including areas protected under habitat conservation plans;
     Transportation networks including highways, transit, and local streets and
      roads;
                                           8-1

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                       Transportation demand management strategies; and
                                       Transportation system management programs and policies.
                                   Unique to the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) region,
                                   the Gateway Cities Council of Governments which is made up of 27 cities and
                                   the County of Los Angeles including Pico Rivera was one of two sub-regions
                                   which developed its own SCS for incorporation into SCAG’s 2012-2035
                                   RTP/SCS.
                                   The Gateway Cities SCS was developed by selecting greenhouse gas reduction
                                   strategies that work for and would be implemented by each individual city over
                                   the next 25 years. These local strategies were then integrated with subregional
                                   and regional transportation projects which are part of the 2012-2035 SCAG RTP.
                                   The SCS contains transportation and land use programs, plans and strategies
                                   that each jurisdiction will implement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
                                   2020 and 2035 below regional targets set by the California Air Resources Board
                                   (ARB).
                                   The greenhouse gas reduction strategies selected by the City of Pico Rivera and
                                   included in the Gateway Cities SCS are reflected in this element, as well as
                                   within the Housing Element and Circulation elements of the General Plan. These
                                   strategies include the following.
                                       Sites to accommodate the City’s share of the Regional Housing Needs
                                        Assessment (RHNA);
                                       Compressed work week for City employees;
                                       Bus pass sales at City Hall;
                                       Bicycle/pedestrian initiatives, including citywide bicycle system and improved
                                        pedestrian facilities, as well as incorporation of complete streets programs
                                        into the Circulation Element;
                                       Safe routes to school program;
                                       Transportation Demand Management Ordinance;
                                       Traffic signal synchronization along Beverly, Whittier, and Washington
                                        boulevards, as well as along Telegraph Road;
                                       Various traffic signal improvements; and
                                       Possible construction of the Gold Line light rail.
                                   Air Quality
                                   The City of Pico Rivera is located in the South Coast Air Basin within the
                                   jurisdiction of the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). The
                                   SCAQMD is responsible for ensuring that air quality within the South Coast Air
                                   Basin conforms to federal and state air quality standards, and is also responsible
                                   for planning, implementing and enforcing programs designed to attain and
                                                                              8-2

                     October 2014                                                        8. Environmental Resources Element
                   	
maintain ambient air quality standards in the South Coast Air Basin and Mojave
Desert air basins.
The SCAQMD has achieved some success in the efforts to improve the air
quality of the Los Angeles metropolitan area, which has historically had some of
the worst air quality in the nation. Even with these successes, air quality remains
poor, and of high concern for Southern California residents.
Existing air quality is measured based upon ambient air quality standards, which
represent the levels of air quality that are considered safe, with an adequate
margin of safety, to protect the public health and welfare. Federal, State, and
local agencies are responsible for the implementation of the Federal Clean Air
Act (1977), and the California Clean Air Act. The Federal Clean Air Act requires
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) to set National Ambient Air
Quality Standards for pollutants considered harmful to public health and the
environment. The California Clean Air Act established state ambient air quality
standards that either meet or exceed federal standards. The California Air
Resources Board (ARB) oversees the implementation of this act and oversees
emission reduction activities.
If an area does not meet air quality standards, it is considered to be an area of
“non-attainment.” The pollutants of concern in Los Angeles County are ozone (O3),
fine particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide
(NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and lead (Pb), of which O3, PM, CO are in
nonattainment status.
Air quality monitoring sites help determine whether a region’s air quality is
considered in attainment or non-attainment by comparing contaminant ambient
air samples to standards set forth by federal and state agencies. The South
San Gabriel Valley monitoring station is located in the city, and samples indicate
that O3, PM10, and PM2.5 concentrations have exceeded standards over a three-
year time period.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere are often referred to as “greenhouse
gases.” Greenhouse gases are released into the atmosphere by both natural
sources and human activity. Without the natural greenhouse gas effect, the
earth’s average temperature would be cooler than it is currently. The
accumulation of these gases in the earth’s atmosphere is considered to be a
cause for the observed increase in the earth’s temperature.
Although California’s rate of growth of greenhouse gas emissions is slowing, the
state is still a substantial contributor. Recent legislation in California requires that
greenhouse gas emissions and climate change be addressed by state and
                                           8-3

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                   regional agencies, specifically greenhouse gas reduction targets established by
                                   Executive Order S-3-05, Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32), and Senate Bill 375 (SB 375).
                                   In addition, GHG emissions from individual developments are being addressed
                                   during the environmental review process required by CEQA.
                                   Because transportation, and in particular automobile travel, is the largest source
                                   of GHG emissions, GHG reduction strategies focus on reducing vehicle miles
                                   traveled through a combination of reducing commute distances (higher density,
                                   more compact communities) and increasing the use of transit. Other major
                                   sources of GHG emissions include water and wastewater delivery, treatment,
                                   and disposal; energy consumption in buildings, and solid waste management.
                                   Thus GHG reduction strategies also include programs aimed at minimizing water
                                   and energy consumption, as well as at minimizing solid waste generation.
                                   Energy Conservation
                                   Energy conservation can result in both environmental and economic benefits for
                                   the Pico Rivera residents and businesses. This can be accomplished through a
                                   variety of methods such as: increasing energy efficiency through building and site
                                   design; educating the community on the benefits of conserving energy; providing
                                   incentives for utilizing renewable energy systems; and working with the local
                                   utility provider to provide rebates for energy retrofits.
                                   Water Resources, Quality, and Conservation
                                   There are two major surface water bodies in Pico Rivera, the Rio Hondo River
                                   located along the western boundary of the City, and the San Gabriel River
                                   located along the eastern boundary. In the central part of the City are the Rio
                                   Hondo and San Gabriel Coastal Basin Spreading Grounds for the rivers, which
                                   are two large, off-channel percolation basins. The spreading grounds temporarily
                                   hold water, which allows sufficient time for it to percolate through the bottoms
                                   and sides of the ponds and replenish the groundwater basin. Figure 8-1
Rio Hondo Spreading                illustrates the location of these water resources.
         Grounds
                                   Groundwater in the area is drawn from the Central Basin, which underlies the
                                   entire San Gabriel Valley. Groundwater depths vary, primarily depending on the
                                   amount of water extracted through groundwater pumping. Local precipitation in
                                   the Basin does not directly influence the groundwater supply to any great degree.
                                   This is due to the presence of a layer of impermeable material that lies between
                                   the surface and the producing aquifers. As a consequence, very little of the
                                   annual rainfall reaches the aquifers. Natural replenishment of the groundwater
                                   supply is limited to surface inflow through the Whittier Narrows, located north of
                                   the City. Groundwater levels are maintained through artificial replenishment
                                   overseen by the Water Replenishment District of Southern California (WRD).
                                                                             8-4
                     October 2014                                                     8. Environmental Resources Element
                   	
Annual water quality reports published by the City of Pico Rivera, the Pico Water
District, and the San Gabriel Valley Water Company indicate that the water
supplied to customers meets state and federal standards. Groundwater in the
Basin is of generally good quality and is suitable for use by the public.
Open Space
Open space and recreational facilities for the enjoyment and needs of all citizens
are essential for the well being of people in Pico Rivera. Open space areas
define the boundaries of and provide relief from urbanization and the built
environment. Parks not only serve the physical and social needs of individuals,
they also serve as gathering places and create opportunities for families and
neighbors to meet and interact with one another, as well as break up the
monotony of surrounding urban environments. When the City incorporated in
1958, it inherited an existing park system from the County of Los Angeles. In the
first eight years following incorporation, the City allocated all capital funds
available to improvement of existing facilities rather than acquisition of additional
sites. The result is a well-developed parks system throughout the city.
Pico Rivera is a highly urbanized community bounded by three major open space
areas: the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel rivers which form the community’s
western and eastern boundaries, and the Whittier Narrows Recreation Area
(WNRA), located north of the city straddling the area between the San Gabriel                        Rio Hondo River
River above the Whittier Narrows Dam and the Rio Hondo River. In addition to
these regional open space areas, the city contains an extensive system of local
park land.
Portions of the San Gabriel River adjacent to the city and most of the Rio Hondo
River remain in a fairly natural state, supporting stream-side vegetation of
willows, sycamores, cottonwoods, and mule fat. The Rio Hondo Spreading
Grounds along the western boundary of the city provides a refuge for many
species of birds but is void of significant natural vegetation.
The city currently maintains a comprehensive system of parks and recreational
facilities. Residents, workers and visitors enjoy the city’s recreation facilities
including athletic fields, gymnasiums and community centers, a nine-hole executive
golf course and aquatic facilities.
In 2002, the City developed a Parks Master Plan of conceptual drawings to                               Pico Rivera
provide a comprehensive, collective vision of restoration and modernization of all                Municipal Golf Course
of the city’s major park facilities. As part of the city’s effort to enhance the
provision of vital city services, the City has initiated numerous park renovation
projects, and has also entered a joint use facility agreement with El Rancho
Unified School District for use of recreational facilities.
                                           8-5

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                   Figure 8-1: Water Resources
                                                8-6
                     October 2014                                                         8. Environmental Resources Element
                   	
Biological Resources
The Los Angeles County General Plan designates the 4,145 acre Whittier Narrows
Recreation Area as a local Significant Ecological Area. The WNRA includes a mix
of oak, sycamore and willow riparian woodland, freshwater marsh, grasslands and
coastal sage scrub. It also supports resident and migratory bird species, and many
regional biological values, including protection of existing core populations of rare
species, presence of plant communities with restricted distribution, essential habitat
for resident species and migratory birds, and potential habitat linkages along and
between the San Gabriel River and the Puente Hills corridor.                                           San Gabriel River Trail
Based on recent research of the California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB),
there is a potential for special status species to be present in the northeastern
portion of the city along the San Gabriel River, north of Whittier Boulevard, as
well as in the far northern portion of the city near the WNRA.
The WNRA effectively isolates the city from the significant wildlife habitat areas
on the dam’s upstream side. This location and the disturbed condition of the
vegetation in Pico Rivera combine to minimize the amount of wildlife in the city.
No rare or endangered species are known to be present within the city.
Cultural Resources
Pico Rivera and the surrounding area have a long and varied history of human
occupation, which includes origins with Native American villages, Spanish and
Mexican ranchos, and post-World War II settlements. Due to this rich history, the
City contains historic, archaeological, and paleontological resources.
There are many locations of historic interest in Pico Rivera; however, no sites are
currently listed in Federal register. One site is California registered and is located at
9235 Whittier Boulevard; the old National Bank of Pico Rivera. Two prehistoric
                                                                                                        Pico Rivera Historical
sites, LAN-182 and LAN-1179H have been identified and are reported to be                                       Museum
located near the Pico adobe structure near Pio Pico State Historical Park. .
Mineral Resources
The San Gabriel Valley has historically been an important source of nonmetallic
minerals and rocks. Over the past century, a number of exploratory wells were
drilled in Pico Rivera; however, none have indicated the presence of oil or natural
gas. Although the city is surrounded by riverbeds, there are no commercially
viable sand and gravel resources in the area.
                                           8-7

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                   Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
                                   Sustainable Communities Strategy
                                   Goal 8.1
                                   A sustainable community where land use and transportation
                                   improvements are consistent with regional planning efforts and
                                   adopted plans to reduce dependence on the use of fossil fuels and
                                   decrease greenhouse gas emissions.
                                   Policy 8.1-1 Regional Efforts. Continue to work with the Gateway Cities COG
                                   and member agencies in regional planning efforts, and to implement regional
                                   plans and programs.
                                   Policy 8.1-2 Gateway Cities SCS. Continue to implement sustainable strategies
                                   identified in, and maintain consistency with, the Gateway Cities Council of
                                   Governments 2012 Subregional Sustainable Communities Strategy and updated
                                   versions incorporated into SCAG’s RTP/SCS.
                                   Policy 8.1-3 Environmental Integrity. Foster sustainable living by reducing
                                   community dependency of fossil fuels and other non-renewable resources,
                                   minimizing air pollutant and GHG emissions, retaining existing open space lands,
                                   and restoring habitat areas along the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel Rivers.
                                   Policy 8.1-4 Efficient Land Use Patterns. Promote efficient land use patterns
                                   and compact development that supports widespread walkability and bicycle use,
                                   providing for a modest and incremental overall increase in community
                                   development intensity that complements the existing community fabric by:
                                      Encouraging infill and redevelopment of vacant and underutilized sites;
                                      Facilitating the development of engaging and livable streetscapes
                                       characterized by benches, vegetation-appropriate architecture, and
                                       pedestrian/bicycle linkages.
                                      Providing opportunities for non-motorized transportation and linkages
                                       between new development and transit.
                                   Policy 8.1-5 Energy Conservation. Promote energy conservation through:
                                      Partnerships with Southern California Edison and Southern California Gas
                                       Company programs;
                                      Improving the energy efficiency and increasing conservation in existing and
                                       new city buildings;
                                      Improving energy efficiency of outdoor lighting, including upgrading of city-
                                       owned street lights, as well as outdoor lighting within parks and municipal
                                       parking lots to more energy efficient models;
                                      Increasing water efficiency and water conservation in existing city buildings
                                       and new development projects; and
                                      Providing for renewable energy generation at city facilities with the aim of
                                       achieving five percent of city facilities’ energy needs with renewable energy
                                       generation by 2030.
                                                                             8-8

                      October 2014                                                    8. Environmental Resources Element
                    	
Policy 8.1-6 Water Conservation. Promote water conservation programs that
reduce per capita consumption of water and increase the use of recycle water
supplies for non-potable uses.
Policy 8.1-7 Solid Waste Management. Practice and promote responsible
waste management with the aim of exceeding mandated waste diversion targets
when economically feasible to do so.
Policy 8.1-8 Social Equity. Foster quality of life by building social sustainability,
promoting lifelong learning, and ensuring a healthy, connected, and equitable
social environment for all residents.
Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Goal 8.2
Continued improvement in local and regional air quality with
reduced greenhouse gas emissions to maintain the community’s
health.                                                                                          GHG Reduction Target:
                                                                                                 Reduce per capita and
Policy 8.2-1 Regional Efforts. Coordinate local air quality improvements and                     municipal greenhouse gas
                                                                                                 emissions to 15 percent below
greenhouse gas emissions reduction efforts with surrounding communities, and
                                                                                                 2005 levels by 2020, consistent
regional agencies such as the South Coast Air Quality Management District, the                   with State law.
Gateway Cities Council of Governments.
Policy 8.2-2 GHG Reduction Measures. Reduce greenhouse gas emissions in
the City and the region through the following measures including, but not limited
to:
   Implementing land use patterns that reduce automobile dependency by
    increasing housing and employment densities within mixed use settings and
    transit-oriented developments;
   Reducing the number of vehicular miles traveled through implementation of
    Transportation Demand Management Programs;
   Encouraging the use of alternative modes of transportation by supporting
    transit facility and service expansion, expanding bicycle routes and improving
    bicycle facilities, and improving pedestrian facilities;
   Increasing building energy efficiency through site design, building orientation,
    landscaping, and incentive/rebate programs;
   Implementing water conservation measures;
   Requiring the use of drought-tolerant landscaping; and
   Increasing solid waste diversion through recycling efforts.
Implementation Program for Policy 8.2-2:
       Implement the projects set forth in the Gateway Cities 2012 Sustainable
        Community Strategy and updated versions.
Policy 8.2-3 Construction Emissions. Require new development projects to
incorporate feasible measures that reduce emissions from construction, grading,
excavation, and demolition activities to avoid, minimize, and/or offset their
impacts consistent with South Coast Air Quality Management District
requirements.
                                         8-9

      8. Environmental Resources Element
                                         Policy 8.2-4 Operational Emissions. Require new development projects to
                                         incorporate feasible measures that reduce operational emissions through project
                                         and site design and use of best management practices to avoid, minimize, and/or
                                         offset their impacts consistent with South Coast Air Quality Management District
                                         requirements.
                                         Policy 8.2-5 Toxic Air Pollutants. Locate uses, facilities and operations that
                                         may produce toxic or hazardous air pollutants (e.g., industrial uses, highways) an
Refer to Section 10.3, Safe              adequate distance from sensitive receptors, consistent with California Air
Transportation Systems in                Resources Board recommendations.
the Healthy Community
Element for policies on                  Implementation Program for Policy 8.2-5:
modifying truck routes to                         Require projects for new industrial development or expansion of existing
avoid residential areas.                           industrial uses that produce air pollutants or toxic air contaminants to
                                                   conduct a health risk assessment and establish appropriate mitigation
                                                   prior to approval.
                                         Policy 8.2-6 Odors. Require that adequate buffer distances be provided
                                         between odor sources such as industrial users and sensitive receptors.
                                         Policy 8.2-7 Consolidate Industrial Uses. Consolidate truck-intensive industrial
                                         uses within the southern portion of the city to separate truck routes from
                                         neighborhoods and minimize potential impacts of diesel emissions on existing
                                         residential uses.
                                         Implementation Program for Policy 8.2-7:
                                             Where feasible and appropriate, provide assistance to existing truck-
                                              intensive industrial uses adjacent to residential neighborhoods in the
                                              northern portion of the City to relocate within industrial areas in the southern
                                              portion of the City away from residential neighborhoods.
                                         Policy 8.2-8 Truck Schedules. Encourage businesses to alter local truck
                                         delivery schedules to occur during non-peak hours, when feasible.
                                         Policy 8.2-9 Park and Ride Lots. To encourage carpooling, work with the city of
                                         Whittier to develop additional park and ride facilities along the I-605 freeway, and
                                         with the cities of Downey and Commerce to develop additional park and ride
                                         facilities along the I-5 freeway.
                                         Policy 8.2-10 Employers. Encourage employers to allow flexible work hours and
                                         telecommuting where feasible, and to provide incentives for employee use of
                                         public transit, biking, walking, and carpooling for home to work commutes.
                                         Policy 8.2-11 City Employees. Encourage city employees through incentives
                                         and other methods to use alternative modes of transportation for home to work
                                         commutes including public transit, carpooling, and biking/walking. Allow
                                         telecommuting and flexible work schedules, when feasible.
                                         Policy 8.2-12 Municipal Fleet. Purchase low-emission vehicles for the City’s
                                         non-emergency fleet and use clean, alternative fuel sources for trucks and heavy
                                         equipment, when feasible.
                                         Policy 8.2-13 Contractor Preference. Give preference to contractors that
                                         commit to apply methods to minimize greenhouse gas emissions in building
                                         construction and operations, such as the use of low or zero-emission vehicles
                                         and equipment.
                                                                                  8-10

                     October 2014                                                    8. Environmental Resources Element
                   	
Policy 8.2-14 Transit Vehicles. Encourage and work with local and regional
transit providers to use transit vehicles and facilities that are powered by
alternative fuels and are low emissions.
Policy 8.2-15 Indoor Air Quality. Encourage the use of landscaping, ventilation
systems, or other mitigation measures to achieve healthy indoor air quality in
sensitive uses.
Policy 8.2-16 Funding. Pursue regional, State, and federal funding opportunities
for transportation projects or improvements that improve air quality and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy 8.2-17 Education. Participate in efforts that educate the public about air
quality, its effects on health, and actions that can be taken to improve air quality
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy 8.2-18 Electric Vehicles. Encourage provision of or readiness for
charging stations and related infrastructure for electric vehicles within new
development and redevelopment proposals and within City operations.
Energy Conservation
Goal 8.3
A community with improved energy conservation and efficiency.
Policy 8.3-1 Energy Conserving Land Use Practices. Implement energy
conserving land use practices including higher density and mixed-use
development in proximity to transit along with infill development; improvements to
the community’s bicycle system; and expansion of transit routes, facilities, and
services.
Implementation Program for Policy 8.3-1:
    Work with Metro and Montebello Bus Lines to find ways of increasing transit
     services and facilities within Pico Rivera.
Policy 8.3-2 Heat Gain Reduction. Ensure that site and building designs reduce
exterior heat gain and heat island effects (e.g., tree planting, reflective paving
materials, covered parking, cool roofs), when feasible.
Policy 8.3-3 Tree Planting. Continue to provide shade trees along street
frontages, and promote planting shade trees on private property.
Implementation Program for Policy 8.3-3:
    Establish a citywide shade tree program to increase the planting of shade
     trees in Pico Rivera and to minimize heat island effects.
Policy 8.3-4 Building Orientation. Encourage building              orientations and
landscaping designs that promote the use of natural lighting,    take advantage of
passive summer cooling and winter solar access, and               incorporate other
techniques to reduce energy demands. Where feasible, place       the long access of
buildings along an east-west axis. 		
Policy 8.3-5 Renewable Energy. Encourage new development to install, and
consider providing incentives for, onsite renewable energy systems and facilities
(e.g., solar).
Implementation Program for Policy 8.3-5:
                                          8-11

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                       Work with the Southern California Edison Company to provide information to
                                        Pico Rivera residents and businesses regarding the availability of programs
                                        to assist in the provision of on-site renewable energy generation.
                                   Policy 8.3-6 Industrial Users. Encourage new industrial users to install
                                   cogeneration facilities and renewable energy systems such as solar, when
                                   economically feasible.
                                   Policy 8.3-7 Energy Efficiency. Encourage all new development to implement
                                   additional energy efficient measures beyond what is required by State law to
                                   exceed minimum energy efficiency requirements.
                                   Policy 8.3-8 City Facilities. Install energy-efficient lighting, appliances, and
                                   alternative-energy infrastructure (e.g., solar panels) in city facilities, where
                                   economically feasible.
                                   Policy 8.3-9 Retrofit Existing Buildings. Coordinate with local energy providers
                                   to increase energy efficiency by promoting the retrofit and renovation of existing
                                   buildings through energy rebates and incentives.
                                   Policy 8.3-10 City’s Fleet. Improve the fuel efficiency of the City’s fleet by
                                   purchasing the most energy-efficient equipment that is cost-effective over its
                                   useful life.
                                   Policy 8.3-11 Education. Coordinate with local energy providers to increase
                                   awareness of energy conservation through public education programs.
                                   Water Resources, Quality, and Conservation
                                   Goal 8.4
                                   Protection of the City’s water resources and quality with
                                   implementation of sustainable water use practices that meet the
                                   needs of its residents and businesses.
                                   Water Resource Protection
                                   Policy 8.4-1 Surface Water. Protect surface water resources in Pico Rivera,
                                   including the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel Rivers.
                                   Policy 8.4-2 Groundwater. Work with applicable agencies to monitor and
                                   protect the quality and quantity of groundwater from the Central Basin.
                                   Policy 8.4-3 Recharge. Protect provide important groundwater recharge
                                   capabilities along the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel rivers.
                                   Water Quality
                                   Policy 8.4-4 Regional Coordination. Coordinate and collaborate with agencies
                                   in the region and watershed to address water quality issues.
                                   Policy 8.4-5 National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. Regulate
                                   construction and operational activities to incorporate stormwater protection
                                   measures and best management practices in accordance with the City’s National
                                   Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
                                   Policy 8.4-6 Industrial Users. Regulate discharge from industrial users in
                                   accordance with local, regional, and State regulations to protect the City’s natural
                                   water bodies.
                                                                              8-12

                    October 2014                                                     8. Environmental Resources Element
                  	
Policy 8.4-7 Underground Storage Tanks. Monitor underground storage tanks
containing hazardous materials on a regular basis in accordance with federal,
state, and local regulations.
Policy 8.4-8 New Development. Require new development to protect the quality
of surface and groundwater bodies and natural drainage systems through site
design, stormwater retention and treatment, and implementation of low impact
development measures (LID).
Water Conservation
Policy 8.4-9 Water Conservation on City Property. Incorporate water
conservation techniques into City-owned buildings and property including water
efficient fixtures, drought-tolerant and native landscaping, efficient irrigation
systems, on-site stormwater capture and reuse systems, and water reuse, in
accordance with state and other relevant standards, including the city's Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
Policy 8.4-10 Water Conservation in New Development. Require new
development to incorporate water conservation techniques into building and site
design including the use of water efficient fixtures, drought-tolerant and native
landscaping, efficient irrigation systems, on-site stormwater capture and reuse
systems, and water reuse in accordance with state and other relevant standards,
including the city’s Water Efficient Landscape ordinance.
Policy 8.4-11 Recycled Water. Continue to use, and expand opportunities to
increase the use of, recycled water in the city parks, landscaped areas along
roadways, and the municipal golf course, if supplies are available.
Implementation Programs for Policy 8.4-11:
    Continue to work with the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts and other
     applicable agencies to facilitate the availability of recycled water within the
     City.
    Develop measures that would require the use of recycled water within the
     community parks and roadway landscape areas in the city.
    Apply for county, state and federal grants to develop infrastructure for the
     use of recycled water.
Policy 8.4-12 Groundwater Replenishment. Work with the Water
Replenishment District to actively pursue the feasibility of retaining more local
storm runoff for groundwater replenishment.
Policy 8.4-13 Education. Educate residents and businesses about the
importance of water conservation and potential techniques and programs.
Mineral Resources
Goal 8.5
Mineral resource extraction activities compatible with adjacent uses.
Policy 8.5-1 Compatible Activities. Require that any future oil, gas, and mineral
resource extraction activities be compatible with and minimize impacts on
adjacent uses.
                                         8-13

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                   Biological Resources
                                   Goal 8.6
                                   Preservation of the City’s open space and significant biological
                                   resources as components of a sustainable community.
                                   Policy 8.6-1 Open Space Conservation. Conserve areas that serve as interim
                                   and permanent open space in the City, including the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
                                   river corridors and their spreading grounds, other publicly maintained open
                                   space, and utility corridors.
                                   Policy 8.6-2 Valuable Natural Resources. Preserve and restore unique and
                                   valuable natural resources and associated habitats, primarily located along the
                                   Rio Hondo and San Gabriel river channels and spreading grounds, including
                                   special-status species, in coordination with federal, state, and local resource
                                   agencies.
                                   Implementation Programs for Policy 8.6-2:
                                       Conduct a study of existing habitats, primarily located along the Rio Hondo
                                        and San Gabriel river corridors, to determine where restoration is possible.
                                       Work with the Watershed Conservation Authority and Corps of Engineers to
                                        pursue funding sources for habitat restoration.
                                   Policy 8.6-3 New Development. Require discretionary development proposals
                                   that could potentially impact natural resources to conduct a biological resource
                                   assessment to ensure that project-related impacts are considered and mitigated
                                   consistent with federal, state, and local regulations.
                                   Policy 8.6-4 Tree Preservation. Preserve significant native and heritage trees,
                                   and reduce the loss of these trees through mitigation and replanting programs,
                                   when feasible.
                                   Implementation Program for Policy 8.6-4:
                                       Adopt a community tree protection ordinance and establish a Community
                                        Forestry program that identifies goals for the protection and preservation of
                                        trees in Pico Rivera, and establishes specific performance standards for the
                                        care and protection of public trees.
                                   Policy 8.6-5 Wildlife Movement. Preserve and enhance interconnected open
                                   space and natural areas along the river corridors and spreading basins, and its
                                   connections to the Whittier Narrows Recreation Area, to provide for wildlife
                                   movement.
                                   Policy 8.6-6 Native Plants. Use native and drought tolerant plants and trees in
                                   all public and private landscaping.
                                   Cultural Resources
                                   Goal 8.7
                                   Preservation of important cultural and paleontological resources
                                   that contribute to the unique identity and character of Pico Rivera.
                                                                             8-14

                     October 2014                                                  8. Environmental Resources Element
                   	
Policy 8.7-1 Resource Preservation. Protect and preserve significant historic,
archaeological, and paleontological resources, including those recognized at the
national, state, and local levels.
Policy 8.7-2 Identification. Undertake programs to identify significant historic
and archaeological resources that meet local, state, and federal criteria.
Implementation Program for Policy 8.7-2:
   Develop a process and schedule to conduct a study that identifies historic
    and archaeological resources that meet local, state, and federal criteria.
Policy 8.7-3 Consultation. As part of the development review process, ensure
that potential impacts to historic, archaeological, and paleontological resources
are minimized.
Implementation Program for Policy 8.7-3:
   Consult with the following organizations and individuals regarding any known
    historic, archaeological, and paleontological resources that may be present:
    Pico Rivera History and Heritage Society; Information Centers of the
    California Historical Resources Information System; Native American
    Heritage Commission; and Native American groups and individuals.
Policy 8.7-4 Resource Assessment. Require new development necessitating
discretionary approval that could potentially impact historic, archaeological,
and/or paleontological resources to conduct a resource survey to ensure that
potential sites are identified for avoidance or special treatment.
Implementation Programs for Policy 8.7-4:
   Require the preparation of a historical resource assessment by a
    professional architectural historian who meets the Secretary of the Interior’s
    Standards for projects subject to discretionary approval that involve the
    demolition, relocation, or alteration of a building or structure over 45 years
    old or that would result in a change to the building or structure’s immediate
    setting and would cause a substantial adverse change in the significance of
    an historical resource pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5.
   Require, as a condition of project approval, the implementation of appropriate
    and feasible measures to reduce any potential impacts associated with a
    substantial adverse change in the significance of an historical resource
    identified in an historical resource assessment.
   Require that when any subsurface cultural resources, paleontological
    resources, or human remains are encountered, all work within 100 feet of the
    discovery be stopped and the area protected from further disturbance until
    the discovery is evaluated by a qualified professional. The appropriate City
    personnel shall be notified immediately. The resources shall be examined by
    qualified personnel to determine their significance and develop appropriate
    protection and preservation measures, if necessary. If human remains are
    discovered, they shall be treated in compliance with applicable state and
    federal laws, including notifying the County Coroner and consulting with the
    California Native American Heritage Commission, as appropriate.
Policy 8.7-5 Incentives. Consider providing financial incentives to private
owners and development in order to maintain, rehabilitate, and preserve
significant historic resources.
                                          8-15

8. Environmental Resources Element
                                   Implementation Program for Policy 8.7-5:
                                      Pursue federal, state and local funding sources in order to maintain,
                                       rehabilitate, and preserve significant historic resources.
                                   Policy 8.7-6 Adaptive Reuse. Encourage the preservation and adaptive reuse
                                   of historic sites and structures, and require the adaptive reuse of historic
                                   structures to meet Secretary of Interior Standards for such reuse.
                                   Policy 8.7-7 Informational Kiosks. Work with the historic society to develop
                                   signs within the City to highlight locations of historical or cultural significance.
                                                                             8-16

                    October 2014
                  	
CHAPTER 9
Safety Element
Introduction
A safe place to live and work is a key objective of any community, and is at the
core of community values in Pico Rivera. A safe community contributes to the
well-being of its residents, is an important consideration in retaining and
attracting quality businesses, positively affects property values and investment,
and furthers overall quality of life. Thus, protecting the safety and security of local
residents, businesses, employees and visitors is one of the city’s highest
priorities.
The occurrence of natural and man-made disasters in southern California, such
as earthquakes and flooding, underscores the need to effectively address safety
in the city. While some naturally occurring hazards may be unavoidable, their
impacts on the community can be reduced through preparedness, reliable
response, and thoughtful regulation.
This element addresses seismic and geological hazards, flood hazards,
hazardous materials, and emergency preparedness. Related law enforcement
and fire protection policies are included in the Community Facilities Element.
Seismic and Geologic Hazards
Pico Rivera’s topography is relatively flat, ranging from approximately 200 feet
above sea level in the northern portion of the city to 140 feet above sea level in the
southern portion. Several soil types can be found in the city, the majority of which
have low potential for shrink-swell or erosion hazards.
The Los Angeles Basin is criss-crossed by numerous regional earthquake faults,
several of which lay in the vicinity of Pico Rivera (see Figure 9-1). While most of
these faults are inactive, a few result in occasional earthquakes. Those faults
most likely to impact the City as a result of seismic activity include the San
Andreas, the Sierra Madre, and the Raymond Hill faults. The largest seismic
event that affected the city was the 1987 Whittier Narrows Earthquake, a
magnitude 5.9 quake that caused localized, but severe damage in Pico Rivera.
The primary seismic hazards associated with earthquakes are ground rupture
and ground shaking. The extent of both and accompanying levels of damage are
dependent upon a number of factors including magnitude of the event, distance
from the epicenter, and underlying soil conditions. In addition, ground shaking
                                           9-1

9. Safety Element
                  Figure 9-1: Regional Faults
                               9-2
                     October 2014                                                           9. Safety Element
                   	
can induce several secondary seismic hazards that may result in damage. These
include liquefaction, differential settlement, landslides, and seiching. The central
portion of the city and the Whittier Narrows Dam area has medium liquefaction
potential, while the remainder of the City has low local liquefaction potential. While
the potential for differential settlement, landslides, and seiches exist within
Pico Rivera, given soil, topographic and other conditions, their likelihood and
potential severity are generally limited.
The California Building Standards Code regulates the design and construction of
foundations, building frames, retaining walls, excavations, and other building
elements. A key objective of this code is to mitigate the effects of seismic shaking
and adverse soil conditions.
Flood Hazards
The control of storm water in Pico Rivera is under the jurisdiction of the
Los Angeles County Flood Control District, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the City. The Flood Control District constructs and maintains storm drain and
flood control facilities in the city. The City sets drainage requirements for streets
and highways and identifies areas that require infrastructure improvements. The
City also identifies storm drain deficiencies, establishes priorities, and submits
this information to Los Angeles County Flood Control District. The Army Corps of
Engineers maintains the regional flood control facilities along the Rio Hondo and
San Gabriel rivers.
Regional flood control structures along the two major surface water bodies in
Pico Rivera -- the Rio Hondo River along the western boundary of the city, and
the San Gabriel River along eastern boundary -- include the Whittier Narrows
Dam to the north near Montebello, and the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel spreading
grounds. The Whittier Narrows Dam, completed in 1957, captures regional
stormwater flows for groundwater replenishment. The dam effectively removed
the city from the natural flood plain of the San Gabriel and Rio Hondo rivers. The
Rio Hondo River is contained within a lined channel, while the San Gabriel River
remains in its natural state for several miles below the dam.
                                                                                       Whittier Narrows Dam
To protect the public from flood hazards and for home insurance purposes,
FEMA publishes maps that show the boundaries of potential flooding. The limits
of these floods are based on the largest storm that could be expected to occur,
once every 100 and 500 years, respectively. A 100-year flood has a one percent
chance of occurring in any given year, while a 500-year flood has a 0.2 percent
chance of occurring in any given year.
The city in its entirety had at one time been located within a designated “AR”
Flood Zone, which indicated that there was a flood risk from the San Gabriel and
Rio Hondo rivers. This flood zone designation resulted in higher flood insurance
                                           9-3

9. Safety Element
                  rates for property owners. However, upstream flood control measures were
                  implemented and improvements to local river and dam areas have been
                  accomplished. As a result, the entire city with the exception of the actual rivers is
                  now designated as an “X” Flood Risk Zone indicating that the area is outside of
                  the 500-year flood and that flood insurance is no longer mandated. The rivers are
                  located in Flood Zone A which is subject to inundation by the one percent annual
                  change flood event. Figure 9-2 identifies the FEMA Flood Zones in the city.
                  Storm drains in Pico Rivera serve to convey local water runoff into the main
                  channels of the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel Rivers. Per an assessment
                  conducted by the County of Los Angeles, the City has several focused areas with
                  localized flooding and deficient storm drain systems.
                  The entire City lies within the flood inundation area of the Whittier Narrows Dam
                  (See Figure 9-3). Flood risk for this structure under normal operations or as a
                  consequence of an event such as an earthquake is classified as high by both the
                  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Dam Safety Action Classification (DSAC) System,
                  and the FEMA HAZUS program. The Whittier Narrows Dam is currently classified
                  as DSAC-II, which is defined as being unsafe or potentially unsafe. The U.S.
                  Army Corps of Engineers is currently preparing a Dam Safety Modification Study
                  to be completed in 2014. In the study, engineers will develop and evaluate
                  scenarios to modify the dam to withstand failure during rare events. The result of
                  the study will be a recommended mitigation plan that will ultimately be designed
                  and constructed.
                                                           9-4

  October 2014                              9. Safety Element
	
               Figure 9-2: FEMA Flood Zones
                             9-5
9. Safety Element
                  Figure 9-3: Dam Inundation
                               9-6
                    October 2014                                                   9. Safety Element
                  	
Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials are defined as any injurious substance, including
pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals, chemicals, explosives, and nuclear fuels and
materials. Hazardous materials are commonly handled by a range of industrial,
manufacturing, commercial, auto related, medical, educational, and residential
uses. Because of the locations of large industrial areas, major truck routes, and
main line railroads within the city, the transport, use, and storage of various
hazardous materials within the community is a common occurrence. Risks
related to the transport, use, and storage of these hazardous materials is low,
however. Since these materials represent a potential danger to human health
and safety, their transport, use, storage, and disposal is highly regulated by a
variety of federal, state, and local laws and agencies.
The Los Angeles County Fire Department, acting as the City’s contracted fire
protection provider, administers a number of hazardous waste management
programs in Pico Rivera. In addition, the County Fire Department enforces
environmental laws and regulations pertaining to hazardous materials throughout
the County. The Fire Department’s Health Hazardous Materials Division permits
and inspects hazardous material handling and generating businesses to ensure
all federal, state, and local laws and regulations are followed. The division also
provides 24-hour emergency response services to hazardous materials incidents
and investigates criminal complaints alleging violations of hazardous materials
and waste laws.
The Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan describes existing
and future conditions, needed management facilities, and recommended
programs on a County-wide basis. The City of Pico Rivera has adopted the
Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan along with a City
Household Hazardous Waste Plan, both of which reduce risks to human health
and the environment. In addition, the City provides several hazardous waste
disposal alternatives for businesses and residents, including participation in the
County’s Household Hazardous Waste Round Up events.
Hazardous materials are transported via rail lines in the City (BNSF and Union
Pacific), and major roadways, particularly designated truck routes. The transport
of hazardous materials by truck or rail is regulated by the United States
Department of Transportation through National Safety Standards and the
California Department of Toxic Substances Control.
Emergency Preparedness
The Los Angeles County Fire Department and Sheriff’s Department provide first
response within Pico Rivera in the event of disasters and emergencies. Proper
preparation can help minimize exposure to potential disasters, and improve the
                                          9-7

9. Safety Element
                  ability to respond during an emergency. To prepare for disasters it is important
                  that the City works closely with local agencies to maintain essential services,
                  help facilitate disaster operations, and speed recovery systems.
                  Pico Rivera has an Emergency Management Division that works in coordination
                  with all departments to strengthen the City’s ability to prepare for, mitigate
                  against, respond to, and recover from threatened or actual natural disasters, acts
                  of terrorism, or other man-made disasters. Various preparedness activities are
                  conducted regularly such as trainings, drills, and exercises to promote a safer,
                  less vulnerable community.
                  The City, being led by the Sheriff’s Department, is participating in the
                  development of an inter-agency emergency communication system that is being
                  developed for all jurisdictions within Los Angeles County to utilize in the event of
                  a major Southern California disaster.
                  The City has adopted a Standardized Emergency Management System/National
                  Incident Management System (SEMS/NIMS) Emergency Operation Plan. This
                  plan identifies responsibilities, common tactics, and a chain of command for
                  federal, state, and City agencies in the event of an emergency. The intent is to
                  provide a common methodology for the agencies to request resources and
                  equipment from each other, minimize duplicative efforts, and coordinate overall
                  response.
                  The City has also adopted a Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan in
                  coordination with the El Rancho Unified School District and Pico Water District to
                  integrate hazard mitigation activities. This plan includes the designation of
                  several evacuation routes in the case of a disaster as shown on Figure 9-4. The
                  major restriction to city-wide evacuation is limited regional access routes. Without
                  additional freeway facilities, regional evacuation routes for the Pico Rivera area
                  are anticipated to be constrained.
                                                            9-8

  October 2014                               9. Safety Element
	
               Figure 9-4: Evacuation Routes
                             9-9
9. Safety Element
                  Goals, Policies, and Implementation Actions
                  Seismic and Geologic Hazards
                  Goal 9.1
                  Standards, improvements and actions that minimize risks posed by
                  geologic and seismic hazards.
                  Policy 9.1-1 Safety Standards. Maintain enforcement of up-to-date seismic
                  safety and structural design standards, including the California Building
                  Standards Code for new and retrofitted buildings.
                  Policy 9.1-2 Geotechnical Studies. Require that geotechnical studies be
                  prepared for development in areas where geologic or seismic hazards may be
                  present, such as liquefaction in the central portion of the city and in the Whittier
                  Narrows Dam area.
                  Policy 9.1-3 Infrastructure. Encourage property owners, Caltrans, the railroads,
                  and local utility companies to regularly inspect and strengthen (as needed)
                  infrastructure susceptible to failure during an earthquake.
                  Implementation Program for Policy 9.1-3:
                      Work with Caltrans, the railroads, and local utility companies to pursue
                       funding sources for the retrofit of infrastructure.
                  Flood Hazards
                  Goal 9.2
                  A community protected from potential flood and dam inundation
                  hazards.
                  Policy 9.2-1 Sufficient Infrastructure. Coordinate with the Los Angeles County
                  Flood Control District to ensure that the City’s storm drainage system is
                  adequately sized, maintained, rehabilitated and funded to accommodate
                  stormwater runoff and prevent flooding.
                  Implementation Program for Policies 9.2-1, 9.2-2 and 9.2-6:
                      Pursue available state, federal, and other funding sources to support
                       facilities, projects, and programs for storm drainage and flood control.
                  Policy 9.2-2 Deficient Areas. Prioritize the construction and upgrade of storm
                  drainage infrastructure in areas where localized flooding and deficient storm
                  drainage systems exist.
                  Implementation Program for Policy 9.2-2:
                      Identify required improvements and funding sources to eliminate deficient
                       storm drainage systems, and incorporate such improvements into the City’s
                       Capital Improvement Program. Locations with deficient storm drainage are:
                       Washington Street (north side) between Rosemead and Paramount, Mines
                       (south side) at Manzanar, Olympic north of Acacia Avenue, Beverley Road
                       and Tobias Avenue, Terradell Street and Pico Vista Road, Greenvale and
                       Masoncrest Drive.
                                                             9-10

                     October 2014                                                     9. Safety Element
                   	
Policy 9.2-3 Adequate Capacity for New Development. Require new
development to demonstrate the availability of adequate capacity in the storm
drainage system to accommodate projected flows and not exacerbate existing
deficiencies.
Policy 9.2-4 New Development Contribution. Ensure that new development
constructs, dedicates and/or pays its fair share contribution to the storm drainage
system improvements necessary to serve the demands created by the development.
Policy 9.2-5 Coordination. Maintain up-to-date mapping of dam inundation
areas within the City.
Implementation Program for Policy 9.2-6:
    Work with the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, the U.S. Army
     Corps of Engineers, and other agencies in the timely implementation of
     updated flood control measures and regular maintenance and monitoring of
     regional flood control facilities such as the Whittier Narrows Dam.
Hazardous Materials
Goal 9.3
Safe production, use, storage, and transports of hazardous
materials.
Policy 9.3-1 Hazardous Materials Regulation. Coordinate with County, State
and other applicable agencies to enforce pertinent laws, disclosures and siting
requirements that regulate the production, use, storage, disposal, and transport
of hazardous materials.
Policy 9.3-2 Hazardous Materials Uses. Ensure that land uses involved in the
production, storage, transportation, handling, or disposal of hazardous materials
are located and operated in a manner that minimizes risk to other land uses.
Implementation Program for Policy 9.3-2:
    When approving new development, ensure that the site:
     –   Is sufficiently surveyed for contamination and remediation, particularly for
         sensitive uses near existing or former toxic or industrial sites.
     –   Is adequately remediated to meet all applicable laws and regulations, if
         necessary.
     –   Is suitable for human habitation.
     –   Is protected from known hazardous and toxic materials.
     –   Does not pose higher than average health risks from exposure to
         hazardous materials.
Policy 9.3-3 Hazardous Waste Management Plan. Require businesses that
store, generate, use or transport hazardous materials to comply with the
Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. Provide appropriate
response and notification in the event of an emergency or violation.
Policy 9.3-4 Site identification. Participate in efforts to identify sites previously
used for hazardous materials handling, storage and disposal.
                                           9-11

9. Safety Element
                  Policy 9.3-5 Known Areas of Contamination. Require new development in
                  areas of known contamination to perform comprehensive soil and groundwater
                  contamination assessments prior to development approvals. If contamination
                  exceeds regulatory levels, require remediation procedures consistent with
                  applicable regulations for the proposed use prior to any site disturbance.
                  Policy 9.3-6 Best Practices. Encourage industries, businesses and residents to
                  utilize best practices and technologies that reduce the use of hazardous
                  materials and generation of hazardous wastes.
                  Policy 9.3-7 Education. Promote public education efforts regarding the proper
                  use, storage, and disposal of hazardous wastes, including common household
                  items.
                  Policy 9.3-8 Household Hazardous Waste Plan. Provide for the management
                  of household hazardous waste through implementation and regular update of the
                  City’s Household Hazardous Waste Plan.
                  Policy 9.3-9 Household Hazardous Waste Disposal. Continue to partner with
                  Los Angeles County to encourage homeowners to dispose of hazardous waste
                  and E-waste at regular collection events.
                  Policy 9.3-10 Pipelines. Require that new pipelines channels carrying
                  hazardous materials avoid residential areas and other sensitive land uses to the
                  greatest extent feasible.
                  Policy 9.3-11 Truck Routes. Maintain a system of truck routes that minimizes
                  truck travel adjacent to and through areas designated for residential use.
                  Implementation Program for Policy 9.3-11:
                       In conjunction with Caltrans, the County and adjacent cities, periodically
                        review and update designated truck routes in order to minimize the potential
                        transport of hazardous materials through residential and other sensitive land
                        use areas.
                  Policy 9.3-12 Pesticides and Herbicides. Encourage integrated pest
                  management principles to reduce or discontinue the use of pesticides and
                  herbicides.
                  Implementation Program for Policy 9.3-12:
                       Review landscaping procedures to determine the extent to which integrated
                        pest management principles can be employed to reduce or discontinue the
                        use of pesticides and herbicides at city-owned facilities.
                       Provide educational materials to multi-unit residential, commercial, and
                        industrial uses outlining alternatives to the use of pesticides and herbicides.
                  Emergency Preparedness
                  Goal 9.4
                  Collaborative community preparation, response and recovery in the
                  event of disasters and emergencies.
                  Policy 9.4-1 Emergency Management Division. Continue to support the efforts
                  of the City’s Emergency Management Division to prepare for, mitigate against,
                  respond to, and recover from disasters and emergencies.
                                                             9-12

                     October 2014                                                     9. Safety Element
                   	
Implementation Program for Policies 9.4-1, 9.4-2, 9.4-4 and 9.4-7:
   Pursue available state, federal, and other funding sources to support
    emergency preparedness programs, staffing, plans, exercises, education and
    training.
Policy 9.4-2 Emergency Management Plans. Maintain a Standardized
Emergency Management System/National Incident Management System
Emergency Operation Plan and Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan in
coordination with local, state and federal agencies and organizations.
Implementation Program for Policy 9.4-2:
   Regularly update the City’s Emergency Management System/National
    Incident Management System Emergency Response Plan, Multi-
    Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan, and the Emergency Operations Plan as
    required and in coordination with local, state and federal agencies and
    organizations.
Policy 9.4-3 Mutual Aid. Continue to participate in mutual and automatic aid
agreements for the provision of fire, law enforcement, medical response, public
works, mass care, and other assistance.
Implementation Program for Policy 9.4-3:
   Participate with Los Angeles County and other applicable agencies in
    conducting disaster-preparedness exercises to periodically test and improve
    emergency response.
Policy 9.4-4 Evacuation Routes. Coordinate with Caltrans, the County and
adjacent cities to improve roadway capacity along evacuation routes, and to
designate additional routes.
Implementation Programs for Policy 9.4-5:
   Work with Caltrans, the County and adjacent cities to pursue funding to
    enhance roadway capacity along evacuation routes.
   Develop dam failure evacuation plans in cooperation with the Corps of
    Engineers, the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, and the County
    Fire and Sheriff’s departments.
   Evaluate structural stability of all bridges within the City and obtain county,
    state or federal grants to rehabilitate.
Policy 9.4-5 Critical Facilities. Require critical facilities (e.g., fire, police,
mainline utilities, emergency command center, and other essential facilities) to
incorporate construction standards that resist damage and allow continued
function following a major disaster.
Policy 9.4-6 Emergency Response Facilities and Staffing. Ensure that public
safety infrastructure and staff resources keep pace with growth and change in
the community.
Implementation Program for Policies 9.4-6:
   As part of contract renewals for sheriff and fire protection services, conduct
    periodic reviews of the ability of local sheriff and fire personnel to respond to
    emergencies within the community.
                                          9-13

9. Safety Element
                     Work with the Los Angeles County Fire Department to maintain an active
                      swift water rescue response capability for the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
                      rivers.
                     Strategically cross-train Fire Department personnel as emergency medical
                      technician defibrillators and paramedics, as well as in urban search and
                      rescue and swift water rescue.
                     Strategically cross-train Fire Department personnel to be ready to operate at
                      the level of Hazardous Materials First Responder.
                  Policy 9.4-7 Education & Training. Promote public education and training
                  efforts to prepare residents and businesses to effectively respond to disasters
                  and emergencies, including the Pico Rivera Community Emergency Response
                  Team (CERT), and Los Angeles County’s Mass Notification System (ALERT)
                  and Neighborhood Preparedness (AWARE) effort.
                                                          9-14

