                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Land Use Element summarizes key land use issues for Live Oak, describes existing and planned land
uses in the Planning Area, and outlines the goals and policies that will be used to implement the City’s
development and conservation objectives through the year 2030. New development proposed within
the Planning Area is compared to the goals and policies found in the General Plan to determine whether
it is consistent with the City’s vision.
The Land Use Element has been prepared consistent with Government Code Section 65302(a),
describing the distribution and general location and extent of land for several types of uses, including
housing, commercial development, public uses, open space, and recreation uses. Also per State law, this
Land Use Element establishes allowable densities and intensities for different land uses and identifies
areas subject to flooding. The land within the Planning Area is not subject to 200-year flooding as
defined by SB 5 and related legislation. A complete discussion and specific areas potentially subject to
flooding as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the California
Department of Water Resources (DWR) is provided in Appendix C, “Background Information, SB 5
General Plan Amendment for 200-Year Flood Protection.”
Although each element of a general plan is intended to have equal weight and force of law under
Government Code, Sections 65300–65303.4, the land use element is often considered the most
fundamental chapter of most local general plans, since the establishment of standards for land use and
development intensity can have substantial effects on the remaining elements of the plan.
KEY ISSUES
During a series of General Plan Visioning Workshops, residents of Live Oak identified key issues facing
the City of Live Oak. The following issues are related to land use:
       With recent land use change, Live Oak is at risk of becoming a “bedroom community” for distant
         employment centers like Sacramento, Yuba City, and Chico.
       The City needs to provide opportunities for economic development in the industrial, agricultural
         related, professional and service sectors, so that there are jobs within the community for
         current and future residents.
       More retail and services for Live Oak residents are needed. Currently, businesses are focused
         along the State Route (SR) 99 corridor, which is convenient to drivers along SR 99, but not for
         the community itself.
       The City needs to provide a variety of housing types to meet the needs of a diverse population.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
     Pedestrian-friendly neighborhood-scale shops and activity centers should be incorporated into
        residential areas in order to create vibrant neighborhoods.
     The City should work with property owners on revitalization and reinvestment to create a
        downtown core area that could serve as the civic and cultural heart of the community.
     Civic, recreational, and cultural opportunities need to be provided throughout the community.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
The majority of land in Live Oak today is in residential use. Commercial uses are focused along the SR 99
corridor. The historic commercial district is located along Broadway, one block west of SR 99 and just
south of Pennington Road. Newer commercial development is located along SR 99 in the northern and
southern portions of the city. Small amounts of industrial development exist within the city core and at
the southern end of the city, along Larkin Road. The city has parks and a variety of civic land uses
(schools, churches, government offices and other public facilities, for example) scattered throughout the
community. A small amount of orchards, farmland, open space, and rural residential uses remain within
the existing City limits.
                                                          The General Plan Study Area represents lands
                                                          that most affect, and are most affected by,
                                                          the implementation of the General Plan. The
                                                          Study Area is used merely for the purposes of
                                                          study and analysis.
Study Area (highlighted in black)
                                                          The Sphere of Influence (SOI) represents the
                                                          future probable physical boundary and
                                                          service area of the City. The SOI identifies
                                                          future growth areas so that the City may plan
                                                          for efficient and orderly expansion of public
                                                          services and facilities.
Sphere of Influence (highlighted in black)
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    LU-2

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                           Land Use Element
                                                          The Planning Area represents lands with City
                                                          General Plan Land Use Designations.
Planning Area (highlighted in black)
Figure LU-1
Live Oak General Plan Study Area, Sphere of Influence, and Planning Area
The City’s sphere of influence (SOI) is bounded by the Sutter/Butte county line to the north, the Feather
River (also the county line) to the east, Paseo Road to the south, and Township Road to the west (see
Figure LU-1). The City’s Planning Area includes lands with City land use designations under this General
Plan, not including the Urban Reserve Designation. The General Plan Study Area includes lands that most
affect, and are most affected by the General Plan. The Study Area includes the existing city and SOI, as
well as additional lands to the south of Paseo Road and west of Township Road. The majority of lands
outside city limits are orchards, farmland, open space, and rural residential uses.
GENERAL PLAN BUILD-OUT ESTIMATES
This section describes the total estimated number of housing units, commercial square footage, and
acres of different land uses at build-out of this General Plan. The City has provided sufficient land to
accommodate housing and job growth through 2030, as well as parks, open space, civic uses, and other
required elements of a complete community.
The Live Oak Planning Area is estimated to accommodate a total population of between 45,000 and
53,000 at buildout of the General Plan (Table LU-1). If all land uses were fully developed as designated
under this General Plan, the City would have between 3 and 3.5 million square feet of building space in
Commercial Mixed Use development, between 2.3 and 2.9 million square feet of Downtown Mixed Use
development, between 500,000 and 750,000 square feet of Community Commercial development, and
2 to 2.5 million square feet of building space devoted to Employment development. At build-out of the
General Plan, Live Oak is estimated to have roughly 160 to 200 acres of parkland, 140 to 180 acres of
civic uses, and 60 to 70 acres of open space for buffering between incompatible land uses.
                                                  TABLE LU-1
    LAND USE ACREAGES, HOUSING UNITS, AND COMMERCIAL SQUARE FOOTAGE AT 2030 GENERAL PLAN BUILD-OUT
        Designation                    Acres                    Housing Units          Square Footage
Low-Density Residential             1,610–1,970                 5,290–6,460
Smaller-Lot Residential             1,310–1,610                 6,190–7,570
Medium-Density Residential            160–200                   1,200–1,460
Higher-Density Residential            100–130                   1,410–1,720
Commercial Mixed Use                  190–230                                       3,063,000–3,438,000
Downtown Mixed Use                     70–90                                        2,329,000–2,846,000
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
Community Commercial                   60–70                                            500,000–750,000
Employment                            190–230                                         2,042,000–2,495,000
Civic                                 140–180
Park                                  160–200
Buffer                                 60–70
The land use designations described in this General Plan are intended to be flexible in order to
accommodate changes in trends, demands, and the economy. Although the land use designations
provide broad, flexible ranges to suit this purpose, average densities and intensities are the most
appropriate method for determining build-out estimates. Actual population, square footage, or number
of dwelling units could be lower or higher than these estimates. The averages represent the best
possible estimates and are meant to provide guidance to City decision makers for planning purposes,
rather than set out mandated policies. Policies covering these topics are presented later within this Land
Use Element. It is important to note that although these estimates are based on the best available
assumptions, changes in the local economy and demographic trends will ultimately determine actual
future development and population. It is possible that these factors could prevent the development of
some areas that are slated for future urban development by 2030, as well as result in actual development
scenarios that vary from the assumed averages (i.e., housing units within a particular area are developed
at either the high or low ends of the density ranges). Because of changing conditions, it may be necessary
for the City to periodically amend this General Plan prior to subsequent comprehensive general plan
updates. For this reason, the City will continually monitor its progress toward achieving the goals set forth
in this General Plan and determine when amendments and updates are necessary.
LAND USE FRAMEWORK
The following sections describe land use within Live Oak’s Planning Area.
LAND USE DISTRIBUTION
The 2030 General Plan envisions the expansion of Live Oak, the revitalization and redevelopment of the
existing City, establishing a downtown core area centered on the Pennington Road/Live Oak Boulevard
intersection, and the preservation of agricultural lands and other open space around the City. A balance
of new growth and revitalization of the existing developed City is crucial for a strong and sustainable
economy and high quality of life.
Although downtown revitalization and infill is important to the city’s future, most growth during this
General Plan time horizon would occur through new growth on undeveloped lands. New growth areas
occur in the northeast, northwest, and southwest quadrants of the Planning Area. New development
will provide a diversity of housing choices, retail, commercial and public services, schools, parks, trails,
and amenities for new and existing residents.
This General Plan provides large land areas for single-family residences at a variety of densities. The
General Plan also provides for other housing types that will be needed to serve local needs, including
higher-density housing options. To create complete and vibrant neighborhoods, the City integrates
nonresidential uses into each neighborhood, including neighborhood-serving retail and commercial
services, and public and civic uses. A variety of parks will meet recreation needs, and a pedestrian/bicycle
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-4

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                            Land Use Element
network will connect neighborhoods, schools, and commercial areas. Neighborhood-scaled commercial
opportunities will be integrated into new neighborhoods, while communitywide and regional commercial
and employment uses will be located near SR 99 and other regional transportation corridors.
NEIGHBORHOOD CENTERS AND CIVIC CENTERS
One centerpiece of the 2030 General Plan is the development of “Centers.” This General Plan includes
two types of Centers:
     Neighborhood Center
     Civic Center
Each Center has a slightly different combination of land uses. Land uses in these Centers are described in
more detail in the section “Descriptions of Land Use Designations” below.
The intent of Live Oak’s Centers is to ensure that new neighborhoods have a mix of uses and that higher-
activity land uses (such as schools, parks, shopping, civic facilities, and medium- and higher-density
housing) are located near the core of each neighborhood. Neighborhood Centers will be designed to be
comfortable, convenient, and safe for pedestrians and bicyclists, and located within walking or biking
distance of the surrounding neighborhood.
Residential density and nonresidential development intensity will be highest at the core of Centers. Each
of the Centers will have one or more important public spaces, such as a town square, park, or plaza. In
addition to this central civic feature, Neighborhood Centers could accommodate shops, commercial
services, cafés or restaurants, professional offices, civic uses (such as community buildings, post office,
police or fire station), and other neighborhood-serving amenities. The number, spacing, high degree of
access to and from the surrounding neighborhood, and the number of households around each
Neighborhood Center is designed to ensure their economic viability.
ESTABLISHING A DOWNTOWN CORE
The 2030 General Plan envisions revitalization and redevelopment of property in the central portion of
Live Oak to create a downtown core. The historic downtown today consists of a three-block-long section
with one- and two-story buildings fronting Broadway and the Union Pacific railroad line. These attractive
historic buildings are prominently visible from SR 99, which is located just one block to the east. The City
envisions establishing a downtown core area centered on the historic downtown, but including many
other areas to the north, south, and east, as well. Today, the downtown core area lacks pedestrian
amenities that are important to the proper function of this area, such as sidewalks, benches, textured
crosswalks, and pedestrian-scale lighting. SR 99 and the Union Pacific railroad line are two physical
barriers that divide the community and create safety hazards for people downtown and in surrounding
neighborhoods. The community strongly supports redevelopment and revitalization to establish a
downtown core area, including public and private investment in buildings, streetscape elements,
transportation facilities, and other changes to create a more vibrant downtown (Figure LU-2).
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-5

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
Figure LU-2
Community Workshop Addressing Downtown Live Oak
The City will concentrate its efforts on potential redevelopment sites located within the downtown core
area (Figure LU-3). Vacant and underutilized sites in strategic locations will provide opportunities for
future housing, retail services, restaurants, parks and entertainment, and civic uses. The strategic
selection and development of catalyst sites, as well as public investment in streetscape and
infrastructure improvements in the downtown core area, will be intended to leverage private
investment in the area.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-6
                                         LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                  Land Use Element
Figure LU-3
Downtown Core Area
                   Live Oak General Plan
                           LU-7
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The following discussion defines land use designations in Live Oak (Table LU-2), describes the allowable
development and density, and illustrates the location of allowable land use within the Live Oak Planning
Area.
DESCRIPTIONS OF LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
Following are descriptions of the City’s land use designations. The designations are written to be broad
enough to provide the City flexibility in implementation, but clear enough to provide sufficient direction
to carry out the General Plan.
Inquiries regarding the development potential of a specific property should be determined by consulting
the City’s Zoning Map and Development Code. More than one zoning district may be consistent with a
General Plan land use designation. Development of a land use that is not consistent with the following
land use designations as specified on the Land Use Diagram would require a General Plan Amendment.
                                                  TABLE LU-2
                                           LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                          Low-Density Residential
                          Allows single-family, detached residences, second units, and other compatible uses.
                          This designation applies to many areas throughout the City.
                          Smaller-Lot Residential
                          Allows single-family, detached homes, second units, and other compatible land uses.
                          In general, the SLR land use designation occurs in areas immediately surrounding
                          Centers and near the downtown core area, although this land use could occur in other
                          compatible areas within Live Oak.
                          Medium-Density Residential
                          Allows small-lot and zero-lot line single-family homes, ‘pull-apart’ style and attached
                          townhomes, garden apartments, and other types of single-family homes and multi-
                          family housing and second units. The MDR designation occurs within Neighborhood
                          and Civic Centers and in and around the downtown core area.
                          Higher-Density Residential
                          Allows townhomes and other types of single-family housing, as well as apartments,
                          condominiums, and other types of multi-family housing. This designation occurs within
                          Neighborhood and Civic Centers and within and near the downtown core area.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                      LU-8

                                                              LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           Land Use Element
                         TABLE LU-2
                   LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
Community Commercial
Allows retail, various commercial services, restaurant, entertainment, office uses, and
other compatible uses. This designation could accommodate regional-serving retail or
entertainment centers. Areas designated for this purpose are located near SR 99
corridor and other major transportation routes.
Commercial Mixed Use
Allows commercial retail, service, office, and other compatible uses. Allows higher-
density residential uses in a mixed-use setting. Residential use can account for up to
50% of the total building square footage for projects developed on lands with this
designation. Ideally, mixed-use projects would integrate the commercial and
residential uses in a vertical configuration, where commercial/office uses are on the
first floor and residential uses are located on higher floors. Horizontal configurations,
where commercial/office and residential uses are located within different buildings on
the same property, are also allowed.
Downtown Mixed Use
Allows retail uses, commercial service, office, residential, civic, and other compatible
uses. Ideally, projects would combine one or more of the allowed uses in one or more
buildings, with retail uses on the ground floor fronting the street, and other uses on
upper floors or in areas not fronting the street. Horizontal configurations, where
different uses are located within different buildings on the same property, are also
allowed. Single-use projects are also allowed.
Employment
Allows professional office, light industrial, industrial, and other job-creating land uses.
This land use designation does not allow retail establishments as a primary use.
However, secondary retail sales are allowed, so long as the primary land use is allowed
under this designation.
Civic
Allows a variety of public facilities, such as schools, child care, agency offices and
service centers, health clinics, fire stations, police stations, and infrastructure, as well
as places of worship, community halls and centers, and other cultural and civic land
uses. These uses would ideally occur within Centers and in and around the downtown
core area, where residents of the surrounding neighborhood would have best access.
The City will encourage civic uses in these areas, but does not directly control the
location of churches, schools, or other similar civic uses.
                    Live Oak General Plan
                             LU-9
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
                                              TABLE LU-2
                                       LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                     Park
                     Allows active and passive parkland, linear parks, and associated recreation facilities
                     and services. Land within this designation may also be used for stormwater
                     management, natural areas, and buffering between incompatible uses. Open field
                     portions of Parks may be designed to be used as stormwater detention basins directly
                     following storm events and for recreation during dry periods. The City and Live Oak
                     Unified School District may share certain parks using a joint-use agreement. Please
                     refer to the Parks and Recreation Element for more information.
                     Urban Reserve
                     This area is not anticipated to be developed in the city through build-out of this
                     General Plan. When other planned development areas of the City approach build-out,
                     the City will comprehensively plan the Urban Reserve area.
                     Buffers
                     The Buffer land use designation identifies open space areas designed to separate
                     potentially incompatible land uses and activities from SR 99 and the Union Pacific
                     mainline railroad. The City’s intent is to set back future residential development from
                     these sources of noise and air pollution. Buffer areas would include landscaping and
                     earthen berms designed for noise attenuation, and could also include other
                     compatible land uses, such as drainage swales, and community gardens.
                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                 LU-10

                                                                              LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                         Land Use Element
LAND USE DENSITY AND INTENSITY STANDARDS
California planning law requires that density and intensity standards are presented for each land use
designation contained within a general plan. These standards simply describe the desired size of
buildings compared to the size of parcels of property.
Residential development is regulated according to density, which is expressed in the number of units per
gross acre. Nonresidential development is regulated according to development intensity. For Live Oak,
nonresidential development intensity standards use a combination of maximum lot coverage and
building height. Lot coverage is a comparison of the square footage of the footprint of proposed
buildings and parking areas to the square footage of the property as a whole. For example, if a parcel is
200,000 square feet in area, the proposed building footprint is 120,000 feet, and the proposed parking
area is 20,000 square feet, then the lot coverage of the parcel is 70 percent (120,000 + 20,000 =
140,000. 140,000 divided by 200,000 = 0.7, or 70 percent).
Although this General Plan presents standard for allowable density and development intensity, the
actual achievable development density and intensity will be contingent on City’s development
standards, which establish minimum setbacks, minimum lot sizes, maximum lot coverage, building
height, and other requirements.
Allowable density and intensity for each relevant General Plan land use designation is described in Table
LU-3.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                   LU-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
                                                                   TABLE LU-3
                                                   ALLOWABLE DENSITY AND INTENSITY
                                                                                                         Nonresidential Intensity 2
            Land Use Designation                               Residential Density 1                  Maximum Lot              Maximum
                                                                                                        Coverage            Building Height
Low-Density Residential                            2 to 6 units per gross acre
Smaller-Lot Residential                            4 to 10 units per gross acre
Medium-Density Residential                         8 to 15 units per gross acre
Higher-Density Residential                         15 to 25 units per acre
Community Commercial                                                                                       90%                   60 feet
Commercial Mixed Use                               Residential allowed (up to 50% of                       90%                   48 feet
                                                   building square footage) and
                                                   regulated according to intensity
                                                   (lot coverage and building height)
                                                   rather than density.
Downtown Mixed Use                                 18 to 25 units per gross acre for                      100%                   72 feet
                                                   residential-only project. Regulated
                                                   according to intensity (lot coverage
                                                   and building height) for mixed-use
                                                   (with residential) projects and
                                                   nonresidential projects.
Employment                                                                                                 90%                   72 feet
Civic                                                                                                      90%                   48 feet
Park                                                                                                       70%                   48 feet
Notes:
1
    Gross acreage and net acreage are commonly used measurements of area in planning and zoning. A gross acre is all land (including streets
    and rights-of-way) designated for a particular use, while net acreage excludes streets, rights-of-way, and other areas not included within
    lots. Gross acreages are more often used in general plan land use designations, and net acreages are typically used in zoning codes and
    other types of development standards. This General Plan uses gross acreage to regulate residential density.
2
    In part because nonresidential developments do not usually construct and dedicate internal public streets, the difference between gross
    and net acreage is not as important for nonresidential development as it is with residential development. The City has included flexible
    standards for nonresidential development intensity in this table that can be applied before or after public streets or other non-developed
    areas are considered. The building height standards presented in this table apply to the main portion of the proposed building, and not to
    antennae, spires, or other similar architectural features or equipment. Please refer to the City’s Zoning Ordinance, which provides much
    more specific guidance on lot size, lot coverage, building height, and other development standards.
3
    The effective building intensity for Employment-designated areas can vary, depending on the specific uses that are developed. In addition
    to the standards in this table, the allowable development intensity is contingent on performance of the proposed uses relative to water
    demand, wastewater demand, drainage, electricity, and other public infrastructure and service characteristics. The allowable intensity, use,
    and project configuration is also dependent on demonstration of compatibility with surrounding uses relative to light, glare, noise, air
    pollutant emissions, truck traffic, and other factors. Policies addressing these environmental issues are included in the balance of the
    General Plan.
                                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                                      LU-12

                                                                                        LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                    Land Use Element
OVERLAY DESIGNATIONS
Two overlay designations are used in the 2030 General Plan. These include:
      Neighborhood Center
      Civic Center
These Center overlay designations are not, in and of themselves, land use designations. Rather, Centers
are a tool to guide the distribution of land uses.
A mix of commercial, residential, and civic land uses will be provided within Centers, with a focus on
“higher-activity land uses” (Table LU-3). Higher-activity land uses are described throughout the General
Plan. They include small parks, shops and offices, schools, civic uses, and medium- and higher-density
housing. 1
The City requires these higher-activity land uses to be provided within Centers in the amounts specified
below, but provides great flexibility as to the exact arrangement and location of these land uses. Each
Center is shown graphically on the Land Use Diagram as having a 1/8th-mile radius, representing a total
land area of roughly 31 acres. Center land uses are to be provided on the parcel or parcels identified in
the Land Use Diagram, but can be anywhere within 1/4th mile of the middle of the Center, as shown on
the Land Use Diagram. The underlying land use for parcels with a Center is Small Lot Residential.
Therefore, areas in and around the Centers that are not developed with one of the specified higher-
activity Center land uses shall be developed with uses consistent with the Small Lot Residential land use
designation.
The design of the Centers is not specifically prescribed by the General Plan, but guidance is provided in
this Land Use Element, the Community Character Element, and the Circulation Element. Example layouts
for these Centers are illustrated conceptually in Figure LU-4. Applicants for projects that include a
Neighborhood or Civic Center will simply submit proposed maps or development plans showing
compliance with the flexible land use allotments presented in Table LU-4. There are a wide variety of
feasible layouts for Centers that would be consistent with General Plan policy.
Civic Centers are designed to accommodate a joint-use park adjacent to a public school. The City,
however, does not control the location of schools. Rather, the General Plan provides for viable locations
for schools in areas central to surrounding new neighborhoods, and where the City will ensure high-
quality pedestrian and bicycle connections. Development of Civic Centers requires coordination
between the City and the Live Oak Unified School District (the District). At the time development is
proposed, the City will offer the school site to the District. The District can require the site be set aside
for future school development by a specified date, or can identify other locations nearby that will be
used instead. If the schools sites identified in the Civic Centers are not required by the District, then uses
consistent with the underlying Small Lot Residential land use designation would be allowed.
1
  As noted throughout this General Plan, the City does not directly control the location of schools, but has
  nonetheless provided for potential school sites of appropriate sizes and in appropriate locations.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                       LU-13


               Figure LU-4
Example Layouts for Centers

                                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                    Land Use Element
                                                      TABLE LU-4
                               NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER AND CIVIC CENTER LAND USES
       Center                            Intent                           Allowable Land Uses     Allowable acreage
Neighborhood         Accommodate businesses, civic                  Commercial Mixed-Use          3 to 7 acres
Center               institutions, and service organizations
                                                                    Higher-Density Residential    2 separate areas
                     providing for daily needs of nearby
                                                                                                  of between 5 and
                     residents, as well as higher- and medium-
                                                                                                  7 acres each
                     density housing options.
                                                                    Park                          2 to 3 acres
                                                                    Civic                         1 to 3 acres
                                                                    Medium-Density Residential 10 to 15 acres
Civic Center         Establish an identifiable neighborhood         Higher-Density Residential    5 to 7 acres
                     core focused around civic uses, including a
                                                                    Civic                         1 to 2 acres
                     school, park, and other public services,
                     such as fire station, library, or post office. Civic/Park (joint-use school  10–12 acres
                     If the school district chooses not to locate   and neighborhood park)
                     a school within the Center, the required
                     school acreage will be developed as Small-     Medium-Density Residential 10 to 15 acres
                     Lot Residential. The Center would still
                     provide a Neighborhood Park, even
                     without school development.
                     Accommodate higher- and medium-
                     density housing.
LAND USE DIAGRAM
The Land Use Diagram (Figure LU-5) visually represents the general location, distribution, and extent of
land uses through build-out of the 2030 General Plan. The diagram identifies the distribution of
residential, commercial, industrial, civic, park, agricultural, and other open space uses within the City
and the Planning Area. While this information is useful for determining the future development patterns
and infrastructure needs of the City, the Land Use Diagram is general in nature, providing a somewhat
conceptual representation of the future distribution of land uses. The Diagram will be used and
interpreted in combination with the narrative policies and other information presented throughout the
General Plan in making decisions on land use change.
JOBS AND HOUSING
As stated at the beginning of this Element, one of the key land use issues facing Live Oak is the need to
create employment opportunities for residents. The City would like to match the number and types of
jobs available in the community with the size and skills of Live Oak’s labor force.
There are many benefits to having a balance between local jobs and housing. Matching jobs and
housing, as described in this General Plan, will provide a vibrant local economy, sustainable fiscal
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                         LU-17

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
conditions for City finances, and improved quality of life for local residents by reducing commuting time,
traffic congestion, and air pollution, among other benefits.
Providing jobs along with residential growth does not guarantee that all residents will chose to work
within Live Oak. Nevertheless, the City wants to provide for this opportunity, and will encourage
employment growth with residential growth, to the extent market conditions allow, increasing the
likelihood that more residents will work locally.
Many communities establish a numeric goal for jobs-housing balance. Sometimes the target is one job
for every employed resident. Since different cities have different labor-force participation rates, this
theoretical jobs-housing balance would vary. This target could also change over time, especially in a
community expected to grow as much as Live Oak.
Many other communities construct a jobs-housing goal based on the number of jobs-to-housing units.
Some cities target one job for each housing unit, while communities on the metropolitan fringe, such as
Live Oak, set lower goals under the assumption that they will continue to be bedroom communities in
the future. Even so, the tools available to the City through state planning and zoning law do not allow
for precise targeting and administration of a numeric jobs-to-housing match.
ESTIMATES OF JOBS AND HOUSING AT BUILD-OUT
The City could have as many as 17,000 to 21,000 housing units at full build-out of the General Plan. Full
build-out could add roughly 15,000 to 18,000 housing units between the present and 2030. The Land
Use Diagram provides various employment development opportunities in the Civic, Community
Commercial, Commercial Mixed Use, Downtown Mixed Use, and Employment land use designations
located throughout the Planning Area. Sufficient land is provided for the City to achieve an
approximately one-to-one relationship between new houses and new jobs.
In 1999, the city was estimated to have approximately 1,000 jobs and 2,800 housing units. Live Oak’s
jobs-to-housing ratio was approximately 0.5. Sutter County’s jobs-to-housing ratio in 1999 was also 0.5,
while Yuba City’s was higher—roughly 1.14 jobs per housing unit. The General Plan seeks to improve the
City’s jobs-housing balance through a diversity of employment options.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                   LU-18

      Figure LU-5
Land Use Diagram

                                                                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                Land Use Element
Employment estimates vary depending on the type of land use and the intensity of site development.
For example, large-scale retail and industrial development tend to have lower employment densities,
while office uses generally have higher employment densities.
Following are estimates of the jobs that could be added locally through build-out of the General Plan.
These estimates are based on development of both greenfield and infill sites between the present and
2030. The actual numbers of jobs produced depends on the types of businesses or agencies that locate
in the City, the intensity of this development, and employment densities (Table LU-5).
                                                  TABLE LU-5
                                         NEW EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT
               Land Use                                                 New Jobs
                                                                   (Estimated Range)
Commercial Mixed Use                                  4,700                                 5,800
Downtown Mixed Use                                     860                                  1,100
Community Commercial                                  1,100                                 1,500
Employment                                            6,500                                 8,000
Civic                                                  250                                   300
Total                                                13,700                                16,800
CITY’S INTENT FOR JOBS AND HOUSING RELATIONSHIP
Live Oak does not have a numeric jobs-housing target. Rather, the City’s qualitative goal is to manage
growth in a way that matches the types of jobs likely to be available with the skills and interests of the
labor force.
The City will provide opportunities for development of housing that is priced, sized, and located to serve
the needs of local employers and employees. The City will provide for varied housing opportunities for
the sorts of workers that industries of the future will require. The City will encourage a diversity of local
housing stock appropriate for local jobs and incomes, rather than housing built strictly for employees
working elsewhere. Where possible, the City will manage growth so that residential and job growth
occurs together, providing a better match between the number of employed residents with the number
of local jobs as the City builds out.
The City’s jobs-housing goals will require proactive monitoring by the City and updates to the Housing
Element, as necessary, to ensure this consistency. The City will make revisions to the Land Use Diagram
and zoning, as necessary, during build-out to improve the match.
The City will encourage employment development strategically, through coordinated use of:
    regulations (and policies);
    acquisition of property and investment in public infrastructure;
    fee programs and public facility financing; and,
    subsidies for job-creating projects.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-21

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
As the City’s residential population grows, retail and services will be developed to serve local needs.
Although these uses will provide jobs, the City cannot rely on service sector job growth exclusively.
To adequately provide for the local workforce, the City will need to target and attract local industries
that export products and services. The City, through its economic development strategy (see the
Economic Development Element), will identify and target employers that could thrive, based on Live
Oak’s locational advantages, such as:
 the rich agricultural lands that surround the city;
 the proximity to open space and recreational areas; and,
 the city’s proximity to SR 99 and the Union Pacific mainline, among other emerging advantages.
The City will identify nascent industries that could create, or be tied in with, new clusters of economic
activity.2 The City will encourage complete and intensive development of the areas designated as
Employment on the Land Use Diagram at relatively high development intensities (larger buildings
developed relative to parcels). The City will also help existing export businesses to expand within Live
Oak. Please refer to the Economic Development Element for more information.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
The goals and policies found in this section address the arrangement, orientation, and management of
land use change through buildout of the Live Oak General Plan in 2030.
Goal LU-1.                 Ensure orderly growth that provides homes and jobs for future residents.
    Policy LU-1.1          New development shall be phased and financed consistent with the City’s
                           master infrastructure plans, capital fee programs, and operations and
                           maintenance financing programs.
    Policy LU-1.2          The City will favor single annexation proposals involving relatively large land
                           areas that can be developed in a coordinated fashion.
    Policy LU-1.3          Incremental, multiple annexations involving smaller areas of land will not be
                           prohibited, although in such cases, the City will encourage that adjacent
                           properties be annexed concurrently through collaboration with other property
                           owners.
    Policy LU-1.4          Lands within Centers should be developed in a coordinated fashion where
                           multiple landowners are involved, wherever possible.
    Policy LU-1.5          Development shall not occur within the Urban Reserve area until the City
                           conducts a comprehensive planning and environmental review.
2
  “Nascent” industries are those that might have a small presence but could expand in the future. “Clusters” of
  economic activity are related industries that can tend to co-locate.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                        LU-22

                                                                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                              Land Use Element
   Policy LU-1.6           New development requiring annexation shall provide for ongoing operational
                           funding of public services and facilities through participation in a community
                           facility district or similar funding mechanism, as directed by the City.
Implementation Program LU-1.1
       The City’s zoning, subdivision, and other aspects of the City’s Municipal Code will be revised
       following this General Plan update. As a part of these revisions, the City will specify the process
       for development of the Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers (Centers). The City will create
       two or more zoning districts for Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers. Projects within
       properties that have a Center will be required to show the required range of land uses on
       submitted plans and/or proposed subdivision maps. Uses consistent with the Small Lot
       Residential land use designation are allowed for land not covered by the specified Center land
       uses. Consultation with the Live Oak Unified School District will also be required during the
       entitlement process for Civic Centers, which are identified as locations for joint-use schools and
       neighborhood parks.
Goal LU-2.                 Make improvements to existing developed areas as the city grows.
   Policy LU-2.1           The City will encourage the redevelopment of vacant and underutilized
                           properties within the City.
   Policy LU-2.2           The City will encourage infill development, which is defined as development
                           that has access to water and wastewater infrastructure in adjacent existing
                           streets, by:
                            analyzing infrastructure deficiencies in the existing City;
                            identifying infrastructure investment priorities needed to encourage
                                reinvestment in the existing city;
                            coordinating infill infrastructure priorities with redevelopment planning and
                                capital improvements planning; and,
                            exploring opportunities to provide incentives for infill development, such as
                                lower impact fees.
Implementation Program LU-2.1
       The City will maintain water, wastewater, and drainage master plans that identify and prioritize
       infrastructure improvements to the City. The City will incorporate improvements to existing City
       infrastructure in capital improvements planning, consistent with these master plans. The City
       also will identify federal, state, and regional grant and loan programs for infrastructure
       improvements in the existing developed City.
Implementation Program LU-2.2
       The City will update development impact fees, following the adoption of the 2030 General Plan
       update. The fees developed as a part of this update will take into account existing infrastructure
       availability. Infill development will have lower fees, where it is shown to have lower costs. Infill
                                                 Live Oak General Plan
                                                         LU-23

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
        development is defined as development that has access to water and wastewater infrastructure
        in adjacent existing streets.
Goal LU-3.                Provide a full-service community with a variety of employment, shopping,
                          services, housing, and recreational opportunities.
    Policy LU-3.1         The City will encourage existing businesses to expand and new businesses to
                          locate in Live Oak that provide high-quality employment opportunities for
                          residents.
    Policy LU-3.2         The City will encourage a wide range of employment-generating land uses,
                          such as business parks, office complexes, and other types of commercial, retail,
                          and industrial facilities, to encourage the creation of jobs in the service,
                          industrial, and professional sectors.
    Policy LU-3.3         New residential development shall provide for a broad range of housing types,
                          including multi-family housing, attached single-family housing, small-lot single
                          family detached housing, and larger-lot single-family detached housing in order
                          to meet the needs of a diverse labor force and to improve the City’s ability to
                          attract future employers.
    Policy LU-3.4         A variety of housing sizes targeting different income and age groups should be
                          encouraged in each neighborhood.
    Policy LU-3.5         Developments in areas designated for single-family development should
                          provide a variety of lot sizes, while still accommodating production home
                          development.
    Policy LU-3.6         Development in the downtown core area and in Neighborhood Centers should
                          include a mix of office, retail, and commercial and public services.
    Policy LU-3.7         Light industrial developments, office parks, research and development flex-
                          space, and other employment-generating uses should be developed along the
                          SR 99 corridor, the Union Pacific railroad line, or other major transportation
                          corridors.
    Policy LU-3.8         Community- and regional-serving commercial development should occur in
                          proximity to the SR 99 corridor and other major transportation corridors.
Implementation Program LU-3.1
        The City has provided adequate lands in the 2030 General Plan for Employment development
        during this General Plan time horizon. The City, however, will monitor build-out of areas
        designated for commercial and employment development during this General Plan time
        horizon. Should additional land be required to meet the needs of future employers in Live Oak,
        the City will consider designating lands in the Urban Reserve area for Employment use, subject
        to City-initiated planning and environmental analysis and mitigation.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     LU-24

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Land Use Element
Implementation Program LU-3.2
       Following the 2030 General Plan update, the City will comprehensively update the Zoning Code.
       The Code will be revised to ensure consistency with the Land Use Element’s land use
       designations, the Community Character and Design Element’s aesthetic policies, as well as the
       balance of the General Plan. As a part of these revisions, the City will provide land with zoning,
       as needed, to comply with lower-income regional housing allocations from the Sacramento Area
       Council of Governments and pursuant to state housing law.
Goal LU-4.              Revitalize downtown with a variety of options for residents and visitors to
                        gather, shop, eat, work, live, obtain commercial and public services, and
                        recreate.
   Policy LU-4.1        The City will encourage mixed-use development in the downtown core area,
                        with design elements intended to provide a comfortable and safe pedestrian
                        environment.
   Policy LU-4.2        The City will encourage and provide incentives for redevelopment of the
                        downtown core area with high-activity uses such as retail, public services,
                        parks, professional offices, and high-density residential development.
   Policy LU-4.3        The City will encourage the development of visitor-oriented uses downtown
                        that are also attractive to residents. These uses should be visible and easily
                        accessible to visitors and residents alike.
   Policy LU-4.4        To extent feasible, the City will provide on-street parking to serve the needs of
                        downtown establishments and will minimize off-street parking requirements
                        for downtown core area businesses and new high-density housing.
   Policy LU-4.5        The City will construct its new administrative facilities in the downtown core
                        area, and other public agencies should construct any new administrative
                        facilities in the downtown core area or in Centers.
   Policy LU-4.6        The City will encourage affordable housing development around the downtown
                        core area and in Centers, where people without a car can access services.
Implementation Program LU-4.1
       The City’s water, wastewater, and drainage master plans will provide for infrastructure
       improvements designed to induce redevelopment in the downtown core area. The City will
       incorporate downtown infrastructure in capital improvements planning. The City will identify
       federal, state, and regional grant and loan programs for design, planning, and implementation of
       the City’s polices for downtown core area redevelopment and revitalization, including
       infrastructure improvements. The City will consult with Sacramento Area Council of
       Governments to identify priority transit projects that serve development downtown.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    LU-25

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
Implementation Program LU-4.2
        The City will update the Zoning Code comprehensively following the 2030 General Plan update.
        As a part of these revisions, the City will identify flexibility in development standards in the
        downtown core area needed to encourage full redevelopment of targeted revitalization areas.
        For example, the City will reduce or eliminate off-street parking requirements, open-space
        requirements, off-street loading area requirements, and also will eliminate minimum parcel
        sizes and make other changes that may be needed to induce downtown development.
Goal LU-5.              Establish environmentally and economically sustainable land-use patterns.
    Policy LU-5.1       Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers will include higher-activity land uses,
                        such as neighborhood retail and commercial services, offices, parks, civic
                        buildings, schools, and higher-density housing, in order to accommodate
                        walking, bicycling, and viable transit provision.
    Policy LU-5.2       The City will promote redevelopment of already-developed areas, such as
                        downtown and properties along SR 99, where there is existing infrastructure,
                        and where development can be accommodated without losing agricultural land
                        to urban use.
    Policy LU-5.3       New developments shall be designed to be compact and make efficient use of
                        land in order to reduce up-front and ongoing infrastructure and service costs,
                        minimize environmental impacts, and enhance the livability of the community.
                        This may include, but will not necessarily be limited to:
                         The amount of land required to meet parking, internal circulation, and
                            delivery/loading needs should be minimized.
                         Land uses with different parking needs at different times of day should
                            locate close to one another in Neighborhood Centers to reduce land used
                            for parking.
                         Two-story construction of public and private buildings, including schools,
                            and smaller, neighborhood-oriented school sites should be encouraged,
                            where feasible.
                         Buildings in new developments should be built close to the sidewalk and
                            front property line, where feasible.
                         New development shall contribute toward meeting areawide drainage
                            needs in public rights-of-way and neighborhood and community parks, to
                            reduce the amount of land that must be devoted to stormwater
                            management.
                         New development (public and private) should use Low Impact
                            Development stormwater management methods, so that less land is
                            needed for drainage conveyance and detention.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                  LU-26

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                            Land Use Element
                         The City will promote joint-use of lands and facilities for multiple public
                            purposes, to promote land efficiency, including joint-use of drainage
                            corridors for linear parkland, joint-use of neighborhood parks and libraries
                            for school and community use, joint-use of land and facilities for law
                            enforcement/fire/civic uses, and other joint-use opportunities, as feasible.
   Policy LU-5.4        Commercial or industrial uses that create noise, air pollution, or other
                        substantial impacts for existing or planned residential uses shall be located,
                        buffered, or otherwise designed to minimize such impacts.
   Policy LU-5.5        New residential projects near the Union Pacific railroad line and SR 99 will
                        provide buffering and/or other mitigation from these rights-of-way, to avoid
                        adverse air quality, noise, and aesthetic issues.
   Policy LU-5.6        New residential development proposed adjacent to cultivated agricultural lands
                        outside the City’s Sphere of Influence shall provide buffers to reduce potential
                        conflicts. The width of such buffers will be determined on a case-by-case basis,
                        considering prevailing winds, crop types, agricultural practices, and other
                        relevant factors. Buffers should be designed to minimize adverse dust,
                        spraying, and noise impacts to newly established residents near ongoing
                        agricultural operations and to avoid nuisance complaints from these newly
                        established residents against farmers in the area. The width of public rights-of-
                        way, drainages, and easements may count as part of the buffer. Within
                        agricultural buffer areas, allowed land uses include drainage swales, trails, other
                        infrastructure, community gardens, landscaped areas, linear parks, roads, and
                        other uses that would be compatible with ongoing agricultural operations
                        (Figure LU-6).
Implementation Program LU-5.1
       Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will adopt changes to Municipal Code and
       Public Works Improvements Standards to accommodate more efficient use of land, consistent
       with the General Plan. For example, the City may revise the portion of the Municipal Code on
       Park Land Dedications/Fees to account for joint-use of parks for school and drainage. School
       impact fees and drainage impact fees should account for the cost savings related to joint-use of
       public lands and facilities, to the extent that these joint-use opportunities are realized.
Implementation Program LU-5.2
       The City will update development impact fees following the 2030 General Plan update. As a part
       of this update, the City will ensure that compact development has lower fees where it is shown
       to have lower costs.
Implementation Program LU-5.3
       The Planning Department will consult with Sutter County to determine the specific application
       of the City’s agricultural buffer policy. The City will consider developing an ordinance to apply
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    LU-27

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Land Use Element
        this policy in areas adjacent to long-term ongoing agricultural operations in the County
        unincorporated area.
REFERENCES
California Department of Finance. 2000 (April 1). Demographics Unit, Table 2: E-5 City/County
        Population and Housing Estimates, 4/1/2000 Benchmark.
California Department of Finance. 2008 (January 1). Demographics Unit, Table 2: E-5 City/County
        Population and Housing Estimates.
                                        Live Oak General Plan
                                                LU-28
                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Land Use Element
Source: Mogavero Notestine Associates, 2007.
Figure LU-6
Example Agricultural Buffer at the SOI Edge with Roadway
                                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                                 LU-29
                                         CIRCULATION ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Circulation Element addresses the movement of people, goods, and services within and around the
City of Live Oak. The State of California General Plan Guidelines indicate that a circulation element can
address energy, water, sewage, storm drainage, and communications. These topics are addressed
elsewhere in this General Plan. Please refer to the Public Facilities and Services Element for information
on water, wastewater, storm drainage, and communications. Please refer also to the Conservation and
Open Space Element for information on energy and additional information on water.
This Element contains goals, policies, and implementation programs that establish the City’s circulation
system to accommodate pedestrians, bicycles, motor vehicles, public transit, and other means of travel.
The Vehicular Circulation Diagram (See Figure CIRC-2) graphically depicts Live Oak’s major streets and
the Bicycle and Pedestrian Diagram (See Figure CIRC-5) illustrates the pedestrian and bicycle
infrastructure in the community. Together, the policies, implementation programs, and diagrams are
intended to ensure transportation connectivity within existing and new neighborhoods, between new
growth areas and existing developed areas, in and around the downtown core area, and between Live
Oak and other communities.
Transportation efficiency is directly tied to land use mix, density of development, urban design, and
other factors. The circulation system is significantly influenced by street pattern, block size, streetscape
improvements, and a variety of other community design features. There is intentional overlap and
careful consistency between the land use, circulation, and design policies in the Land Use, Circulation,
and Community Character and Design Elements of this General Plan.
KEY ISSUES
Residents of Live Oak have identified the following key circulation issues facing the City:
     Live Oak is bisected by State Route (SR) 99 and the Union Pacific Railroad, making east-west
         travel difficult.
     The lack of frequent railroad crossings and traffic along SR 99 cause congestion on local streets
         in the downtown area.
     Traffic congestion occurs around the City’s schools when parents drop off and pick up
         schoolchildren.
     Older parts of the city have a traditional street grid pattern, which provides many connections
         and good access throughout neighborhoods. Newer parts of the city depart somewhat from the
         grid pattern, using street networks that provide relatively fewer access points and fewer direct
         connections between neighborhoods.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CIRC-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
      Bicycle facilities are poorly marked or are lacking in much of the City.
      The older sections of town generally lack sidewalks.
      Many parts of the city lack safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle access across
           the highway and railroad.
      Public transportation in Live Oak is currently limited to a single bus route operated by Yuba-
           Sutter Transit that makes three round trips to Yuba City and Marysville each week. There are
           only three transit stops in Live Oak.
CIRCULATION FRAMEWORK
Live Oak’s circulation system in this General Plan is designed to accommodate multiple methods of
travel—automobile, pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit. Such a strategy is often called “multi-modal.”
The multi-modal emphasis of this General Plan deviates from many general plans and Live Oak’s
previous General Plan, which focus almost exclusively on automobile travel.
Live Oak’s transportation planning will encourage pedestrian and bicycle use for daily travel. The City
will not design roads simply to accommodate vehicular traffic during peak demand periods. The City will
also design its transportation infrastructure to facilitate a more sustainable proportion of vehicular to
non-vehicular trips (encouraging the latter). 1 The City will emphasize pedestrian and bicycle safety over
vehicular traffic speed in the downtown core area, in Centers (e.g., Civic Centers, Neighborhood
Centers), and in other areas where high pedestrian activity in anticipated (Figure CIRC-1).
1 Too much focus on automobile travel in transportation planning results in overly wide roads and large intersections designed
  to move a large amount of traffic during periods of peak demand. While such roadways may save drivers a few seconds
  during the morning and afternoon commute, they are more expensive to construct and maintain. Overly wide roads also
  create barriers for pedestrians, divide neighborhoods, increase stormwater runoff, contribute to the urban heat island effect,
  and generate noise. “Urban heat island effect” is the term used to describe the condition where temperatures in built areas
  with little vegetation are higher than those in nearby rural areas. In Live Oak the primary sources of the effect are likely to be
  roads, parking lots, roofs that are not shaded by trees or roofs that use dark roofing materials. Direct sunlight warms these
  surfaces significantly more than other surfaces. These higher temperatures can result in increased summertime peak energy
  demand, air conditioning costs, air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, heat-related illness and mortality, and water
  quality impacts.
                                                     Live Oak General Plan
                                                              CIRC-2

                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                              Figure CIRC-1
                       Downtown and Centers
Live Oak General Plan
       CIRC-1

                                                                                                              LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                           Circulation Element
STREET TYPES, FUNCTION, STANDARDS, AND DESIGN
STREET TYPES AND FUNCTION
Live Oak’s streets will be designed to serve the neighborhoods and commercial districts in which they
are located. This General Plan creates five types of streets, the functions of which are described below.
      Arterial streets provide relatively high-speed, high-capacity access to SR 99 and other major
            roads. Access to arterials is generally from collector and local streets and direct access to
            abutting land uses is limited.
      Major collector streets provide medium-speed, medium-volume access within and between
            neighborhoods. Major collector streets would limit direct property access somewhat more than
            minor collectors, and would not have on-street parking (whereas minor collectors would).
      Minor collector streets provide low-speed, medium-volume access within and between
            neighborhoods and nearby major collector and arterial streets. Minor collector streets would
            have frequent direct access points to properties, and would have on-street parking (whereas
            major collectors would not provide on-street parking).
      Local streets provide low-speed, low-volume, direct access to abutting land uses and
            connections to collector streets.
      Alleys provide very-low-speed, very-low-volume, direct access for residents and service
            providers to the rear of adjacent properties. Projects may use alleys to provide access and
            services for rear-loaded units.
STREET STANDARDS
New streets shall meet the standards contained in Table CIRC-1 (below). For improvements required for
redevelopment or infill projects, the City will allow flexibility relative to these street standards, where
required, due to physical constraints.
                                                                  TABLE CIRC-1
                                                              STREET STANDARDS
   Functional           Driveway        Sidewalk       Planted      Bike Street          Desired        On-Street          Preferred         # of
       Class              Access         Width1        Median      Lane2 Trees            Speed          Parking          Lane Width        Travel
                                                                                         (mph)3                                             Lanes
Arterial                 Limited           4–7’       Optional       Yes       Yes        30–45             No              11–12’           2–4
Major Collector          Limited          4–10’       Optional       Yes       Yes        25–35         Optional               11’           2–4
Minor Collector             Yes           4–10’           No         Yes       Yes         <30              Yes             10–11’             2
Local4                      Yes            4–6’       Optional       No        Yes         <25              Yes             10–11’             2
Notes: mph = miles per hour.
1
  Streets in Centers (e.g., Neighborhood Centers, Civic Centers), commercial areas, the downtown core area, and other areas where a high level of
  pedestrian activity is anticipated should have wider sidewalks.
2
  Streets that are located adjacent and parallel to proposed Class I bicycle/pedestrian paths do not require bike lanes.
3
  This is the intended speed at which most drivers will travel given the built environmental speed controls created by the street width and design.
  This is not meant to represent design speed for sight distance, cornering, or other geometric properties of the roadway.
4
  Local streets can be narrower, at the City’s direction, if alley access is provided for public services, utilities, and parking/garage access. Local
  streets in designated Employment areas may need to have wider lanes to accommodate heavy truck volumes.
                                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                                     CIRC-5

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
VEHICULAR CIRCULATION DIAGRAM
Figure CIRC-2 presents the 2030 General Plan circulation diagram, which depicts the locations of current
and planned future roadways within the City, as well as a new grade-separated crossing of the railroad
and Highway 99 in the northern portion of the Planning Area.
STATE HIGHWAY/ARTERIALS
The Circulation Diagram identifies SR 99 as the primary element of the City’s circulation system. This
street is expected to be widened to provide two through lanes in each direction, with auxiliary lanes at
major intersections. Access from SR 99 to new development is to be carefully controlled, with the intent
of achieving “Expressway” standards in the area south of the Live Oak downtown area.
The Circulation Diagram identifies other arterial streets that will serve as alternatives to SR 99. Most
arterials are expected to be two lanes, although some would have four lanes (Table CIRC-2). The design
of access and alignment of arterial streets will accommodate travel speeds that are higher than those
expected on lesser streets. Parking will be prohibited. The Circulation Diagram identifies the arterial
streets.
                                                              TABLE CIRC-2
                                                    STATE HIGHWAY AND ARTERIALS
             Arterial                              From                           To       Lanes
              SR 99                           Paseo Avenue                    Ash Street    4*
              SR 99                             Ash Street                    Kola Street    4
              SR 99                            Kola Street                   Riviera Road    4
       Township Road                      Planning Area limits               Riviera Road    2
        Paseo Avenue                         Township Road                       SR 99       2
       Sinnard Avenue                        99 Access Point                    Road C       2
  Apricot Street/Broadway                       Broadway                         SR 99       2
          connection
           Broadway                          Apricot Street –               Apricot Street   2
                                        Broadway Connection
          Larkin Road                             Road 5                        Road 3       2
* access to be limited to achieve Caltrans’ Expressway standards
                                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                                  CIRC-6

                                     Figure CIRC-2
                    Vehicular Circulation Diagram
Live Oak General Plan Update

                                                                             LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Circulation Element
MAJOR COLLECTORS
Major collectors provide greater amenities for non-automobile traffic than arterials, permit more local
access, and may include on-street parking. Major collectors are intended to promote city-wide
circulation to a greater degree than Minor Collectors and may be two or four lanes (Table CIRC-3). The
Circulation Diagram designates the Major Collector streets.
                                                  TABLE CIRC-3
                                               MAJOR COLLECTORS
    Major Collector Street             From                          To                 Lanes
       Sinnard Avenue             Township Road                Orchard Way                 2
       Sinnard Avenue              Orchard Way               Pennington Road               2
      Pennington Road             Township Road                   N Street                 2
      Pennington Road                N Street                       SR 99                  4
      Pennington Road                  SR 99                  Sheldon Avenue               2
         Larkin Road               Riviera Road                    Road 5                  2
         Larkin Road                  Road 3                   Paseo Avenue                2
MINOR COLLECTORS
Minor Collector streets provide both local access and community circulation and are two-lane facilities.
The Circulation Diagram identifies the location of Minor Collector streets.
INTERSECTIONS
The City will need to monitor traffic operations during buildout of this General Plan and implement a
series of roadway and intersection improvements consistent with City policy. Some of the needed
improvements are described below. Others, such as turning lanes, will surface as a result of project- or
plan-level review during this General Plan time horizon. The City will coordinate its traffic impact fee
program with ongoing transportation analysis to plan and fund necessary improvements.
Several intersections could require traffic signals or roundabouts to maintain acceptable LOS. The
specific type and timing of improvement will need to be analyzed at the time of implementation for
effects on nearby roadways and intersections. Intersections that may need improvement potentially
include:
        Riviera Road / Larkin Road
        Pennington Road / N Street
        Pennington Road / Larkin Road
        Pennington Road / Orchard Way
        Paseo Avenue / Larkin Road
        SR 99 / Road 2
        Larkin Road / Sinnard Avenue
        Larkin Road / Road 4
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CIRC-9

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
         SR 99 / Road 5
         Larkin Road / Road 5
         SR 99 / Road F
         Larkin Road / Road 3
         N Street / Kola Street
         Larkin Road / Kola Street
         Larkin Road / Road 11
         Richard Ave / Road 13
         N Street / Road 13
         Larkin Road / Road 13
         SR 99 / Riviera Road
         SR 99 / Ramsdell Drive
         SR 99 / Kola Street
         SR 99 / Bishop Avenue
         SR 99 / Paseo Avenue
While traffic signals may not prove to be warranted, at some intersections, it may eventually be
necessary to install all-way stops, roundabouts, or to add separate left turn lanes in order to deliver
minimum LOS, including:
      Township Road / Riviera Road
      Pennington Road / Sinnard Avenue
For SR 99 intersections, the City will need to collaborate with Caltrans on the installation and timing of
traffic signals, including signal timing for a new signal at Larkin Road and Pennington Road that would be
tied to the signal at Pennington Road and SR 99. It may be necessary to restrict one or more turning
movements at this intersection.
In order to maintain acceptable LOS and avoid queuing across the railroad, it may be necessary to
restrict left turns from westbound Pennington onto southbound Broadway in coordination with a
project to widen Pennington Road to four lanes.
Potential intersection improvements recommended by the traffic analysis conducted to support the
2030 General Plan and EIR are included in an Appendix to the General Plan.
RAIL TRANSPORTATION
The Union Pacific Railroad Company owns and maintains the railroad line that runs through the center
of Live Oak, parallel to SR 99 (Figure CIRC-3). While historically trains stopped in the city for freight
service purposes, stops are no longer scheduled within City limits. Frequency of trains depends on
market conditions and demand for consumer goods and energy. During the noise monitoring work
conducted to support this General Plan, 21 trains passed through Live Oak per day, with about half of
those passing through at night (between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.).
The railroad presents both challenges and opportunities for the City. Because there are a limited
number of at-grade crossings of the railroad, the tracks are a major barrier to east-west travel.
Construction of an over-crossing is planned in the northern portion of the Planning Area to serve the
needs of new growth on the north side of the City. The railroad is also a main source of noise and
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CIRC-10

                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                           Circulation Element
potential safety hazards (see the Noise Element and Public Safety Element for more information).
However, the tracks also present a potential opportunity for future industrial and agricultural processing
uses in the city. Depending on the type, weight, and frequency of the products that a business would
ship and the cost of trucking versus rail, access to rail freight service may provide Live Oak businesses a
competitive advantage in the future. The possible use of a railroad spur for freight is a resource the City
will consider in implementing its economic development strategy (see the Economic Development
Element for more information). The City may explore the potential of commuter rail services or freight
options in coordination with regional and state transportation agencies, as well as Union Pacific.
Figure CIRC-3
Union Pacific Railroad in Downtown Live Oak
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
The Draft Circulation Diagram continues existing railroad crossings and identifies a new grade separated
crossing over the UPRR (that also would cross SR 99). The new grade-separated overcrossing would be
located in the northern portion of the Planning Area, approximately 500 to 700 feet north of the
Campbell Road alignment. The precise location and design of this overcrossing will be determined based
on additional analysis and planning by the City and in coordination with future developments in this part
of the Planning Area.
Pennington Road is planned to be improved to a four-lane roadway in the area west of SR 99 across the
UPRR to N Street. Implementing this requirement will involve widening the existing UPRR crossing,
constructing new sidewalks, and installing new crossing hardware.
In order to improve intersection spacing along SR 99 and improve future connectivity across the
railroad, the City will collaborate with the California Public Utilities Commission, Union Pacific Railroad,
and Caltrans to install a new railroad crossing in tandem with the removal of the existing crossing north
of Apricot Street. This action would allow development of a new crossing with greater separation
between the railroad and SR 99at a location that can be controlled by a signalized intersection. If this
alternative is implemented, all public at-grade crossings would eventually be linked to SR 99
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CIRC-11
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
intersections that are controlled by traffic signals. Under this scenario, the existing Apricot Street-
Broadway railroad crossing would be closed and replaced with a new at-grade crossing. The locations of
the new crossing could be along the Road 11/Road 10/Coleman Avenue alignment, or at another
location south of Apricot Street. The Ash Street and Archer Avenue connections to SR 99 would, under
this scenario, be limited to right turns only. This alternative would eliminate the need for the Arterial
standard at the Apricot Street/Broadway connection across the railroad and the segment of Broadway
between this crossing and Apricot.
In addition to the public crossings listed in Table CIRC-4, there is an existing private railroad crossing
located approximately 200 feet north of Bishop Avenue that provides access to SR 99. The private access
is expected to be closed once alternative access is provided from the west and in conjunction with
improvements to railroad crossings in the Planning Area.
                                                  TABLE CIRC-4
                                           PUBLIC RAILROAD CROSSINGS
                           Street                                             Condition
                        Riviera Road                                      Existing at-grade
 Sinnard Avenue (roughly 600’ north of Campbell Avenue)              Proposed grade separation
                         Kola Street                                      Existing at-grade
                      Pennington Road                                     Existing at-grade
                         Elm Street                                       Existing at-grade
                 Apricot Street–Broadway                                  Existing at grade
                       Paseo Avenue                                       Existing at grade
                   South of Apricot Street                               Proposed at-grade
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN SYSTEM
Live Oak’s neighborhoods and business districts will be served by a system of on- and off-street
pedestrian and bicycle routes. The bicycle and pedestrian path system is intended to connect all areas of
the community to all major destinations.
Sidewalks, bicycle/pedestrian paths, and/or bicycle lanes will be required along public rights-of-way, as
directed by the City (please refer to Table CIRC-1, “Street Standards,” which provides general guidance).
Streets in areas with high pedestrian activity, such as Centers, the downtown core area, and commercial
districts will have wider sidewalks and separate bicycle lanes. Paths will be used in areas where there
are opportunities in the same corridor to circulate pedestrians, cyclists, and stormwater. As noted
throughout the General Plan, the City will encourage multi-use drainage, linear parks, open space
buffers, and bicycle/pedestrian pathways in new and existing development.
A simple classification system is often used in planning bicycle and pedestrian systems:
      Class I: Off-street bike paths are located within linear parks and on vacated rail lines, water
          corridors, or areas otherwise separated from streets.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CIRC-12

                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Circulation Element
     Class II: On-street bike lanes are located along arterial roadways that are delineated by painted
         stripes and other features.
     Class III: On-street bike routes share use with motor vehicle traffic. They provide a route that is
         signed but not striped.
This Circulation Element does not specifically dictate standards or classifications for the City’s future
bicycle/pedestrian system, although the City may adopt these standards as a part of the Municipal Code,
Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, or City Improvement Standards. Rather, the Circulation Element
provides more generalized guidance for sidewalks, paths, and bicycle lanes. Sidewalks and bicycle lanes
are required as described in Table CIRC-1, “Street Standards.” Bicycle/pedestrian paths and bicycle lanes
are described below (see also Figure CIRC-4):
     Bicycle/pedestrian path. This is an 8- to 12-foot-wide path along or separated from a street.
         This can be located within a linear park or alongside restored or newly constructed natural
         drainages. These features can also be located in an agricultural buffer.
     Bicycle lane. This is a 4 to 6-foot-wide lane painted on the outer portion of streets and through
         intersections. Bicycle lanes can be provided along with traffic circles, roundabouts, and other
         intersection configurations.
The City will implement the pedestrian and bicycle system, as illustrated on the Bicycle and Pedestrian
Diagram (see Figure CIRC-5). This diagram shows locations for off-street pathways and pathways along
public rights-of-way. This diagram also shows locations for bicycle lanes along streets. Sidewalks, which
are provided along all streets that don’t have a pathway system, are not shown on this diagram.
Figure CIRC-4
Bicycle/Pedestrian Path (left) and Bicycle Lane (right)
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CIRC-13

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
                      This page intentionally left blank.
                             Live Oak General Plan
                                    CIRC-14
                 Figure CIRC-5
Bicycle and Pedestrian Diagram

                                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                        Circulation Element
LEVEL OF SERVICE
Most communities use a measure of perceived travel convenience called level of service (LOS) for
transportation analysis and roadway design. The City will use LOS as one way to evaluate needed
transportation improvements. As noted earlier, the City will also account for pedestrian, bicycle, and
public transit needs when investing in local transportation improvements. This following section defines
LOS and describes the City’s LOS standards.
LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS
LOS describes roadway and intersection traffic conditions with a simple lettering system (A through F)
that accounts for average speed, congestion, queuing, intersection delay, and volume compared to
roadway capacity. LOS A represents free-flowing traffic conditions, while LOS F indicates the highest
levels of traffic congestion (system breakdown). LOS is presented below in Table CIRC-5.
                                                          TABLE CIRC-5
                                                 LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS
  Level of                                                                        Unsignalized
                                  Signalized Intersection                                               Roadway (Daily)
  Service                                                                         Intersection
              Uncongested operations, all queues clear in a single-        Little or no delay.       Completely free
 “A”          signal cycle.                                                Delay < 10 sec/veh        flow.
              Delay < 10.0 sec
              Uncongested operations, all queues clear in a single         Short traffic delays.     Free flow, presence
 “B”          cycle.                                                       Delay > 10 sec/veh and of other vehicles
              Delay > 10.0 sec and < 20.0 sec                              < 15 sec/veh              noticeable.
              Light congestion, occasional backups on critical             Average traffic delays. Ability to maneuver
 “C”          approaches.                                                  Delay > 15 sec/veh and and select operating
              Delay > 20.0 sec and < 35.0 sec                              < 25 sec/veh              speed affected.
              Significant congestions of critical approaches but           Long traffic delays.      Unstable flow,
              intersection functional. Cars required to wait through       Delay > 25 sec/veh and speeds and ability to
 “D”          more than one cycle during short peaks. No long              < 35 sec/veh              maneuver
              queues formed.                                                                         restricted.
              Delay > 35.0 sec and < 55.0 sec
              Severe congestion with some long standing queues on          Very long traffic         At or near capacity,
              critical approaches. Blockage of intersection may occur      delays, failure,          flow quite unstable.
              if traffic signal does not provide for protected turning     extreme congestion.
 “E”
              movements. Traffic queue may block nearby                    Delay > 35 sec/veh and
              intersection(s) upstream of critical approach(es).           < 50 sec/veh
              Delay > 55.0 sec and < 80.0 sec
              Total breakdown, stop-and-go operation.                      Intersection blocked      Forced flow,
 “F”          Delay > 80.0 sec                                             by external causes.       breakdown.
                                                                           Delay > 50 sec/veh
 Source: 2000 Highway Capacity Manual
                                                     Live Oak General Plan
                                                            CIRC-17

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARD
The City’s LOS standard for City streets is D. LOS D standard will apply to both average daily trip (ADT) and
peak-hour traffic estimates for City streets. This standard will be used to assess the City’s needs for
transportation improvements throughout this General Plan time horizon. The City may use the LOS
standard (with exceptions indicated below) for project level analysis, calculating fair-share impact fees, and
conditions of approval.
The standard is a part of the City’s overall intent to create an effective circulation system that balances the
demands of automobile, pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit travel modes. The City’s transportation
planning and investment will specifically consider the movement of people through intersections, not
just motor vehicles.
The City will use LOS D as a standard to be considered alongside other planning and environmental
objectives. The City may elect to allow the LOS D standard to be exceeded, if necessary, to achieve other
environmental, economic, and social objectives. This balancing will produce better results for residents in
the long term and will provide the City with the flexibility it needs to optimize a circulation system
constructed to support long-term buildout of this General Plan. The following principles will be applied
when considering a traffic improvement:
      Operations of motor vehicles are important, but improvements to motor vehicle access should
          be compatible with the needs of bicyclists, pedestrians, and transit vehicles.
      LOS standards are applied with consideration for the land use context and the street type.
          Pedestrian safety and convenience is a higher priority than vehicular LOS in residential
          neighborhoods, Neighborhood Centers, and areas near schools and parks.
STATE ROUTE 99 LOS STANDARDS
For projects where the City is the lead agency, a LOS E standard will be applied for local segments of SR
99 and intersections of City streets with SR 99 (consistent with the current Caltrans Transportation
Concept Report for this segment).
LEVEL OF SERVICE EXCEPTIONS
The Circulation Diagram has been designed to achieve the City’s LOS D standard and LOS E standard for
segments of, and intersections with SR 99. There are certain roadway segments where the desired LOS is
not feasible and where the City will accept LOS beyond the standards included in this Element. Please
see the discussion that follows.
CITY STREETS
Kola Street. The section of Kola Street from N Street to SR 99 would need to be improved to a Major
Collector standard in order to achieve LOS D. This would involve widening the roadway and removing
parking in a developed section of this roadway. The City does not currently consider this level of
improvement to be feasible with the level of development that currently exists along this roadway
segment. LOS E is acceptable for this roadway segment.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CIRC-18

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Circulation Element
N Street. The section of N Street from Fir Street to Pennington Road would need to be addressed
through improvements at N Street and California Street, which come together in the area just south of
Pennington Road. The Live Oak Community Trail would be located along the westerly side of California
Street in this vicinity. With implementation of the Community Trail, there would be no direct access to
California or Gum Street from N Street or Pennington. This will address impacts to N Street from
Pennington Road to Fir Street. Until these improvements are completed, the City considers LOS E to be
acceptable for this roadway segment.
Broadway. The segment of Broadway between Apricot Street and the connection across the railroad to
SR 99 would need to be widened to Arterial standards to ensure adequate LOS. This would likely involve
creating a northbound right turn lane on Broadway to provide storage for traffic that is waiting to turn
onto the connection to SR 99. However, Arterial standards would not be required to achieve satisfactory
LOS if the City was successful in closing the Apricot Street crossing in favor of a new at-grade crossing
south of Apricot Street. The improvements to Broadway will be considered by the City in coordination
with either improvements to the Apricot Street/Broadway railroad crossing or closing of this crossing in
tandem with construction of a new at-grade crossing south of Apricot Street. Until these improvements
are completed, the City considers the forecast LOS F to be acceptable for this roadway segment.
The Apricot Street/Broadway connection from Broadway across the railroad to SR 99 would need to be
widened to Arterial standards to deliver adequate LOS (LOS C). This change would involve widening the
existing railroad crossing and creating separate eastbound left turn and right turn lanes on the approach
to SR 99. Improvements to this railroad crossing would be subject to PUC approval. Because the City
cannot guarantee these improvements, the forecast LOS F in this location is considered to be
acceptable.
STATE ROUTE 99
Achieving acceptable LOS on SR 99 through the central portion of Live Oak would theoretically require a
6-lane arterial, reconstructing the road to Expressway standards for access and intersection spacing, or
developing regional alternatives to SR 99 for north-south travel. Expressway standards would have more
limited access and increased intersection spacing requirements, compared to arterial standards.
Widening or limiting access in the developed portion of SR 99 would present substantial challenges
given the level of existing local access, close intersection spacing, and proximity to the railroad. If the
City were able to construct a new railroad crossing in the Road 11/Road 10/Coleman Avenue alignment
and close the existing Apricot Street crossing, while restricting the Ash Street and Archer Avenue
intersections (and other appropriate intersections) to right turns only, this would increase the distance
between signalized intersections and potentially allow this segment of SR 99 to operate more like an
Expressway. While this can help reduce congestion on SR 99, development of an Expressway through
Live Oak is not consistent with the City’s objectives for this corridor. The City would not support
measures that would divide the community or create substantial barriers to safe and convenient bicycle
and pedestrian movements. As indicated in this Circulation Element, however, the City intends to
collaborate with Caltrans on an Access Management Plan intended to identify improvements that would
be acceptable to the community and that would improve operations along SR 99.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CIRC-19

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
REGIONAL ROADS
Traffic volumes forecast for Larkin Road north of Riviera Road are indicative of LOS E conditions, which
exceed the County’s minimum standard. To achieve LOS D on this rural road, it would be necessary to
widen the road to a four-lane highway, improve the road to Arterial standards, or develop alternative
north-south routes that draw traffic from Larkin Road. Historically, individual cities in Sutter County have
been primarily responsible for implementing roadway improvements within each city’s sphere of
influence. As development proceeds throughout the County, traffic volumes on regional roadways can
be anticipated to increase. It is possible that with the current arrangement (i.e., individual cities in Sutter
County implement roadway improvements within their own sphere of influence), roadway
improvements would not keep pace with regional growth, and may lead to LOS that is not consistent
with each agency’s standards. As noted in this Element, the City will collaborate with the County to
identify regional routes and improvement strategies for these routes. Larkin Road will be considered as
a part of this overall process. To achieve LOS D on this rural road, it would be necessary to widen the
road to a four-lane highway, improve the road to an Arterial standard, or develop alternative north-
south routes that draw traffic from Larkin Road.
STREET DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
The design of streets will play an important role in creating a multi-modal circulation system and quality
neighborhoods. Streets need to support a variety of ways to travel. All streets should support vehicles,
pedestrians, and bicycles to the greatest extent feasible. Street layout and block size should result in
multiple connections and travel routes, as well as include street trees and vegetation to create shaded
and aesthetically-pleasing travel routes.
CONTEXT-SENSITIVE DESIGN
Street design should consider the type and density/intensity of surrounding land uses. The following
bullets indentify different land use contexts occurring in the city and relevant considerations that should
be incorporated into a street’s design.
      Residential Areas: Minor collector and local streets are designed to emphasize walking and
          bicycling while also accommodating vehicle circulation and direct access to properties. Such
          streets should have narrow street widths and include traffic calming features (e.g., bulb-outs,
          islands) for pedestrian and bicycle safety and convenience.
      Mixed-Use Areas: Pedestrian, bicycle, and transit design elements will be emphasized in mixed-
          use areas. Narrower street widths (34 to 36 feet) are intended to reduce travel speeds on main
          street segments. Traffic-calming design features can be used where necessary, although narrow
          streets themselves have the effect of calming traffic. Streets in mixed-use areas should identify
          pedestrian crossings using alternative paving materials (e.g., pavers, brick, cobbles, colored
          concrete), and streetscapes may include architectural features and public art to provide a
          unique, high-quality pedestrian environment.
      Employment Areas: Employment areas should be designed to accommodate significant volumes
          of large vehicles. Wider lanes and wider parking areas may be required along local streets in
          Employment areas, depending on the type and frequency of anticipated truck traffic. Sidewalks
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CIRC-20

                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                   Circulation Element
  and bicycle lanes might be used less frequently compared to other areas, but should still be
  accommodated.
 State Route 99 Corridor: The SR 99 corridor plays an important role in Live Oak’s circulation
  system. This is a major state thoroughfare, but also is a main street serving commercial districts
  in Live Oak and a major gateway to the community. While traffic flow should be maintained,
  pedestrian safety and aesthetics must be priorities. There is an approximately 100-foot right-of-
  way for SR 99 within the Planning Area that currently includes between two and three 12-foot
  lanes, with turning lanes at major intersections. A more context-sensitive design could include
  narrower lanes within the downtown core area of Live Oak. In central Live Oak, safety and
  aesthetics would benefit from turning pockets in appropriate locations; wide, separated
  sidewalks, landscaping, including street trees; and other enhancements. The pedestrian
  environment would be further enhanced over time as the City encourages buildings that are
  closer to the highway right-of-way, with parking provided on local streets in the area and/or
  behind proposed buildings (Figure CIRC-6).
 SR 99 Gateway Corridors. At gateway points to the Planning Area, the SR 99 corridor could be
  designed to preserve the rural aesthetic. Just south of Riviera Road and just north of Paseo
  Road, some of the existing trees along SR 99 (including former orchards) could be preserved as
  new trees are planted (Figure CIRC-7 shows existing trees along SR 99 north and south of Live
  Oak). Setting urban development back from SR 99 in the new growth area, with planted,
  earthen berms along the highway would preserve a more rural aesthetic for drivers as they
  enter the City and provide necessary buffering between residential development and the
  highway. Gateway aesthetic themes should continue from the edge of the Planning Area to the
  north and south ends of the downtown core area, with attractive design features that let the
  traveler know they have entered the community (see the Community Character and Design
  Element for more information).
                                     Live Oak General Plan
                                            CIRC-21

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
          Figure CIRC-6
          Potential Future of State Route 99 through Downtown Live Oak
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CIRC-22
                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       Circulation Element
Figure CIRC-7
Orchard and Other Trees in State Route 99 Gateway Corridors
                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                CIRC-23
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
COMPLETE STREETS
Complete streets are those designed to support safe, attractive, and comfortable access and travel for
all users, whether in motor vehicles, on foot, on bicycle, or using public transit. The City will require
complete streets in all new neighborhoods and will improve existing streets to be more complete in
providing for bicycle and pedestrian movements, as funding is available. See Figure CIRC-8 (below left)
for an example of a complete street, as compared with an incomplete street (below right).
Figure CIRC-8
Complete Street (above left) versus Incomplete Street (above right).
Improvements required for complete streets depend on the type of the street (see Table CIRC-1 above).
While all streets will be required to have sidewalks for pedestrians, the required bicycle improvements
will vary. Public transit improvements, including bus stops and pullouts, should be focused in the
downtown core area, along SR 99, and in Centers.
STREET PATTERNS
A community’s street and block pattern defines the usefulness of its transportation network for multi-
modal mobility. The 2030 General Plan requires that development within the new growth area be
served by a well-connected street pattern with small blocks. The layout of Live Oak’s streets and blocks
will have a profound impact on the efficiency of the City’s circulation system for both automobile travel
and other modes.
The traditional grid street pattern is one approach for ensuring a highly connected neighborhood.
However, modifications to the grid pattern could also provide a highly connected transportation
network. In general, highly connected street patterns have:
      a dense system of parallel routes, both east-west and north-south, with many streets providing
          through connections;
      frequent intersections; and,
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  CIRC-24

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Circulation Element
      frequent points of access.
Highly connected streets are convenient for pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers. They reduce travel times
for emergency responders and increase public service efficiencies. With a highly connected street
network, traffic is dispersed and single streets are less likely to have high traffic volumes. With lower
traffic volumes, streets can be smaller, less expensive to construct and maintain, more pedestrian
friendly, and more pleasant public spaces. Figure CIRC-9 (below left) shows a well-connected street
pattern next to one without good connections (below right).
Figure CIRC-9
Connected versus Circuitous Street Patterns
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Following are goals and policies that address circulation through buildout of the Live Oak General Plan in
2030.
Goal CIRC-1.             Develop a highly connected circulation system.
     Policy CIRC-1.1     New development shall provide highly connected street and pedestrian/bicycle
                         networks, with many connections between neighborhoods, between new
                         neighborhoods and older neighborhoods, and between Neighborhood and
                         Civic Centers and the surrounding neighborhood.
     Policy CIRC-1.2     Block length should be limited in new residential and mixed-use development
                         areas to accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists, with smaller block lengths in
                         and around Neighborhood and Civic Centers.
     Policy CIRC-1.3     Where cul-de-sacs are allowed, they must allow                  emergency       and
                         bicycle/pedestrian through access, where appropriate.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  CIRC-25

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
     Policy CIRC-1.4 The maximum allowable length of a cul-de-sac is 500 feet unless an exception is
                     approved by the Community Development Director in consultation with
                     relevant emergency service providers.
     Policy CIRC-1.5 No property subdivision may have more than 25 percent of the total public
                     street length in cul-de-sacs unless an exception is granted by the Community
                     Development Director based on findings related to such issues as the small size
                     of the subdivision, the infill location, or the location of the subdivision next to
                     the railroad or Highway 99.
     Policy CIRC-1.6 New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis toward construction of
                     an overcrossing of the railroad and SR 99.
     Policy CIRC-1.7 The following local streets shall be extended into proposed developments, as
                     appropriate: Samuel Street to the south, Wooley Road to the north, and
                     Jasmine Drive and Heather Drive to the west.
Goal CIRC-2.         Improve the convenience and safety for multi-modal travel in existing
                     development.
     Policy CIRC-2.1 The City will seek funding for, and include pedestrian and bicycle
                     improvements in Capital Improvements Planning, as feasible. Such
                     improvements will include, but are not limited to:
                        construction of sidewalks where they do not currently exist,
                        widening of sidewalks in high pedestrian traffic areas,
                        installation of bike paths and lanes, and
                        improved crossings of roads and the railroad for bicycles and pedestrians.
     Policy CIRC-2.2 The City and Redevelopment Agency will prioritize transportation investments
                     that better connect neighborhoods to major destinations, with safer and more
                     convenient pedestrian, bicycle, and transit stops and routes.
     Policy CIRC-2.3 The City will seek funding and consult with property owners to increase
                     connectivity in existing neighborhoods by constructing new roads and/or
                     bicycle/pedestrian paths at the end of dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs in the
                     existing developed areas.
     Policy CIRC-2.4 The City will seek funding for and, as feasible, install traffic-calming measures,
                     such as planted medians, landscaped planter strips, landscaped traffic circles,
                     and other designs in areas with excessive traffic, as appropriate.
     Policy CIRC-2.5 The City and Redevelopment Agency will explore opportunities to construct
                     new, or improve the safety of existing east-west crossings, or may require such
                     improvements as a condition of new development, as appropriate.
     Policy CIRC-2.6 The City will consider its own operations and maximize opportunities to use,
                     and encourage employees’ use of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities.
                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                CIRC-26

                                                                           LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                    Circulation Element
Goal CIRC-3.       Ensure safe and convenient daily travel for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit
                   users, and drivers as Live Oak grows.
   Policy CIRC-3.1 New development shall construct and dedicate streets that accommodate the
                   full range of locally available travel modes.
   Policy CIRC-3.2 New development shall construct and dedicate and/or contribute to a
                   connected bicycle/pedestrian network that is designed to promote travel to all
                   schools, parks, and other major destinations.
   Policy CIRC-3.3 New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis to construct streets and
                   bicycle/pedestrian paths in new growth areas that serve areawide or citywide
                   travel needs.
   Policy CIRC-3.4 New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis to improve streets in
                   existing developed areas affected by new development traffic.
   Policy CIRC-3.5 In areas with high pedestrian activity, streets should be relatively narrow and
                   curb radii should be designed to promote pedestrian safety and convenience,
                   while also ensuring adequate emergency access.
   Policy CIRC-3.6 Bicycle parking should be provided as a part of all non-residential development.
Goal CIRC-4.       Provide parking in a way that balances the needs of motorists, pedestrians,
                   bicyclists, transit users, and community aesthetics.
   Policy CIRC-4.1 Projects located in Neighborhood Centers, Civic Centers, and areas with the
                   Downtown Mixed Use land use designation may have reduced off-street
                   parking requirements.
   Policy CIRC-4.2 New development, especially in Centers and within the Downtown Mixed Use
                   land use designation, should use shared parking, wherever possible, to meet
                   the City’s off-street parking requirements.
   Policy CIRC-4.3 New development will use on-street parking to meet parking needs, where
                   feasible, to reduce or avoid the need for off-street parking.
   Policy CIRC-4.4 As funding is available, the City will paint additional on-street parking spaces
                   along streets in existing developed areas to reduce the need for off-street
                   parking.
   Policy CIRC-4.5 Shade trees shall be provided in any proposed surface parking to achieve a
                   minimum of 50 percent canopy coverage at maturity. A ratio of at least one
                   tree for every six parking spaces is recommended, although 50 percent canopy
                   coverage will require more of some tree species and fewer of other species.
                                       Live Oak General Plan
                                              CIRC-27

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
Goal CIRC-5.         Allow for efficient delivery of materials and shipment of products for Live
                     Oak businesses without adversely affecting residents.
     Policy CIRC-5.1 The City will work cooperatively with the California Department of
                     Transportation (Caltrans), the Sacramento Area Council of Governments
                     (SACOG), and property owners to plan and fund improved access to and from
                     SR 99 for existing and future businesses, including:
                      Examine alternatives for improvements to Highway 99 (capacity and
                         bicycle/pedestrian safety improvements) and identify preferred conceptual
                         plans to provide certainty for existing and future property owners along
                         Highway 99;
                      Enhance and add cross-town circulation connections that make crossings of
                         SR 99 and the railroad easier and more convenient for Live Oak residents
                         and commerce; and,
                      Work cooperatively with Caltrans, SACOG, and Sutter County to examine
                         opportunities for a bypass around Live Oak in the Paseo Road/Township
                         Road corridor.
     Policy CIRC-5.2 The City will consult with Caltrans, Sutter County, the California Highway
                     Patrol, the California Public Utilities Commission, and the Union Pacific
                     Railroad Company to appropriately regulate the safe movement of truck traffic
                     and hazardous materials throughout the City.
Goal CIRC-6.         Provide convenient public transit service for Live Oak residents and
                     businesses.
     Policy CIRC-6.1 The City will consult with Yuba-Sutter Transit to maximize the availability of
                     public transit options for Live Oak residents. This will include the development
                     of local transit routes that provide frequent regular service to all areas of the
                     city and transit connections to nearby communities of Gridley, Yuba City, and
                     Marysville.
     Policy CIRC-6.2 The City will consult with Yuba-Sutter Transit to develop convenient commuter
                     routes from Live Oak to major employment areas, such as Yuba City,
                     Marysville, and Sacramento, and provide transit commuter routes serving Live
                     Oak Employment areas, as it becomes feasible.
     Policy CIRC-6.3 The City will consult with Butte Regional Transit to develop a transit route that
                     can stop in Live Oak on a regular basis and provide a connection to Butte
                     County communities and employment centers.
     Policy CIRC-6.4 New development shall provide transit stops and bus pull-out lanes, consistent
                     with City direction, long-range transit plans, and policies of local transit
                     providers.
                                        Live Oak General Plan
                                               CIRC-28

                                                                           LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                    Circulation Element
   Policy CIRC-6.5 Transit stops will be focused in Neighborhood Centers, Civic Centers, near
                   schools, employment centers, retail establishments, parks, retirement
                   communities, and in the downtown core area.
   Policy CIRC-6.6 Existing and future transit stops should have benches, covered sitting areas,
                   and other amenities that make public transit more comfortable and attractive
                   as a travel choice.
   Policy CIRC-6.7 The City will provide incentives to City employees for using public transit or
                   ridesharing, such as free or discounted transit passes and priority parking areas.
   Policy CIRC-6.8 The City will consult with Yuba-Sutter Transit regarding possible sponsorship of
                   bus routes for large employers in Live Oak.
   Policy CIRC-6.9 The City will provide incentives to local businesses that sponsor transit routes
                   or create their own travel demand management programs. Incentives may
                   include, but are not limited to, streamlined permitting, and reduction of parking
                   requirements.
Goal CIRC-7.       Redesign SR 99 within Live Oak to better meet local needs.
   Policy CIRC-7.1 The City will consult with Caltrans, SACOG, and other relevant agencies to plan,
                   fund, and implement context-sensitive design solutions along SR 99 that calm
                   traffic, enhance aesthetics, and improve pedestrian safety and convenience,
                   consistent with this General Plan.
   Policy CIRC-7.2 The City will encourage and support narrower lanes for SR 99 between Kola
                   Street and Archer Avenue, as one way to increase safety and encourage slower
                   traffic.
   Policy CIRC-7.3 As development occurs along SR 99, this should include construction of
                   separated sidewalks with street trees along property frontages.
   Policy CIRC-7.4 The City will limit new direct access points to SR 99 and will encourage new
                   development along SR 99 to provide driveway access from local streets instead
                   of the highway.
   Policy CIRC-7.5 The City will improve the safety and convenience of pedestrian activity along
                   SR 99 and crossings of SR 99 in and around the downtown core area, as funding
                   is available.
Goal CIRC-8.       Ensure seamless and effective transportation throughout the Planning Area
                   and the surrounding region.
   Policy CIRC-8.1 The City will consult with other local and regional transportation planning
                   agencies, including Sutter County, Butte County, Caltrans, and the Sacramento
                   Area Council of Governments, to ensure consistency among agencies’
                   transportation systems and plans.
                                       Live Oak General Plan
                                              CIRC-29

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
     Policy CIRC-8.2       The City will integrate local transportation planning with regional
                           transportation planning and provide direction to the state and SACOG
                           regarding community preferences for the design of regional transportation
                           routes within Live Oak.
     Policy CIRC-8.3       The City will consult with the California Public Utilities Commission, Amtrak,
                           Union Pacific Railroad Company, and any other relevant agencies to encourage
                           and accommodate any future opportunities for future regional bus transit and
                           rail stops in Live Oak.
Implementation Program CIRC-1
          The City will assess transportation impact fees and plan transportation improvements based, in
          part, on LOS analysis and standards described in this Circulation Element. The City will also
          explicitly consider the impact of traffic improvements on pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit
          safety and convenience. The City will allow exceedance of vehicular LOS for future development
          projects, if necessary. Transportation investments will be implemented according to the
          following guidance:
           Roadway or intersection widening is a less desirable type of mitigation for traffic impacts
               and generally should be considered after other options are exhausted.
           The City will seek to improve roadway capacity by timing lights to optimize LOS at congested
               intersections.
           The City will seek opportunities to decrease congested routes by providing more
               connectivity and route choice options.
          In areas where proposed development would result in exceeding the local LOS standards, the
          developer(s) shall redesign the project to increase connectivity, enhance bicycle/pedestrian/
          transit access, or through other means to meet LOS standards. After all feasible site planning
          approaches are exhausted, if LOS is still exceeded, projects will contribute on a fair-share basis
          for street improvements required to bring the areas roadways to within the City’s LOS
          standards. Improvements needed to accommodate new growth shall not be funded by existing
          city residents or businesses.
          In general, traffic mitigation programs in Live Oak will be structured to provide incentives for
          projects to reduce their per-unit and per-employee trip generation rates. Traffic impact fees for
          new developments in Live Oak shall not be calculated simply on a per-unit basis, but will
          consider the number of bedrooms and type of home (townhome, apartment). It is important to
          take into account the substantial variations in actual trip generation of the full range of
          residential types. Commercial traffic impact fees shall not be calculated simply on a square-
          footage basis, but will take into account whether the commercial project is designed to attract
          drivers or oriented toward pedestrians and neighborhoods. Projects that rely on highway traffic
          have higher traffic generation rates, and therefore relatively higher contribution toward
          roadway improvements. Retail and service establishments located and designed for pedestrian,
          transit, and bicycle access will have comparatively lower traffic impact fees. This approach
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CIRC-30

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Circulation Element
      applies to new development rather than redevelopment or the change of use or user in existing
      developments.
Implementation Program CIRC-2
      The City will consult with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments to revise the local
      approach to traffic impact analysis to take advantage of emerging, more sophisticated, land use,
      density- and design-sensitive modeling techniques. The City will promote the use of land
      use/transportation modeling that is sensitive to not only land use, but also pedestrian-oriented
      design. When calculating traffic impacts of development projects, the City will encourage the
      use of models that show reduced trip-generation rates for higher residential densities. Traffic
      modeling will be sensitive to the travel demand benefits of building homes and destinations
      near each other, projects that reduce parking and bring buildings to the street, and other proven
      land use planning and site design techniques. Modeling and impact assessment will show
      transportation benefits for projects that provide and promote convenient transit access. Other
      future methods to reduce Live Oak residents’ need to drive will be included in City-approved
      traffic reports, as appropriate. Projects located and designed to manage travel demand in the
      City will enjoy correspondingly lower traffic impact fees.
Implementation Program CIRC-3
      Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will revise its development impact fees
      based on a Nexus Study, including areawide serving transportation facilities, such as a railroad
      and Highway 99 overcrossing in the northern portion of the City.
Implementation Program CIRC-4
      Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will revise the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
      Ordinance, and Public Works Improvement Standards, as necessary, to ensure a highly
      connected transportation system. Revisions to these implementing documents will be
      consistent with Circulation Element, and will include such item as:
       establish maximum block sizes in residential, mixed-use, and commercial areas;
       require stubbing of streets to adjacent planned development areas;
       establishment of a minimum connectivity index, particularly near Neighborhood Centers
           and Civic Centers, in order to ensure multiple route choices and emergency access; and,
       specify exceptions to connectivity standards.
Implementation Program CIRC-5
      Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will revise the off-street parking requirements,
      as necessary, based on policy in this Circulation Element. Since different land uses have different
      peak demand periods, it is often cost-effective in the short- and long-term for property owners,
      land developers, end users, and the City alike to encourage joint- or shared-use parking,
      particularly in mixed use areas. Revisions in the off-street parking standards required to better
      optimize the amount of surface parking provided in different areas of the City will be
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  CIRC-31

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
          considered. The following guidelines should be considered in revisions to implementing
          documents:
           Off-street parking requirements may be reduced for projects located in Centers (e.g.,
               Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers) and in the downtown core area, as well as for
               affordable housing projects.
           Consider opportunities to reduce residential off-street parking requirements for multifamily
               units and/or other medium and high density housing.
           Consider reducing or eliminating off-street parking requirements for guest parking in
               locations where on-street parking is provided.
           Parking for nonresidential development may be reduced if located in Centers, where on-
               street parking is provided, or if parking can be shared with adjacent uses with different
               timing for parking needs.
           Parking requirements should specify minimum parking, as with the current code, as well as
               parking maximums, in order to create a pedestrian-friendly environment. The City will retain
               the discretion to approve projects proposing parking above the maximum with conditions,
               such as providing parking lot shading beyond that required by City standards.
Implementation Program CIRC-6
          Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will analyze future mixed-use development
          potential in the downtown core area and the ability to accommodate new parking needs
          through provision of on-street parking. Both existing and future street connections will be
          considered for adding on-street parking. Wide streets might accommodate diagonal parking on
          one or both sides. Narrower streets might only accommodate parallel parking. The future
          amount of on-street parking will be compared with the parking demand of future mixed-use
          development, considering the different daily periods of peak demand for different land uses.
          The findings of this study should inform changes to the City’s off-street parking requirements
          and Improvements Standards for downtown core area streets, as appropriate. The City may also
          choose to instead conduct the above parking analyses as a part of an overall downtown core
          area plan.
Implementation Program CIRC-7
          Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will revise the Street Design Criteria, as
          necessary, to implement policy of this Circulation Element. As a part of these revisions, the City
          will consider pedestrian-friendly street standards, especially for areas where high pedestrian
          activity is anticipated. The following guidelines should be considered in revisions to the City’s
          Improvement Standards:
           Driveways may be constructed using pervious surfaces (such as porous concrete, porous
               cement, pavers, turf-blocks), or other designs and materials that reduce stormwater runoff.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CIRC-32

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                           Circulation Element
       Shared driveways are encouraged in zero lot line, courtyard, and other compact single-
           family residential designs, as well as in multifamily housing.
       Curb radii in new growth areas should be reduced. Consider 15–20 feet for local streets,
           20–25 feet for minor collectors, and 25–30 feet for major collectors.
       Street intersections should follow a four-way grid or modified grid pattern.
       Roundabouts and traffic circles can be used to control traffic at intersections, particularly
           those without a perfect 90-degree orientation.
Implementation Program CIRC-8
      The City will seek funding to work collaboratively with Caltrans (and SACOG, as appropriate) to
      prepare a conceptual corridor plan for SR 99. The plan should include such design components
      as wide, separated sidewalks, street trees and other landscaping, street furniture, and other
      amenities, as appropriate. The plan will provide conceptual design guidance for SR 99 property
      frontage, as well as the SR 99 right-of-way. The plan will identify priorities for phasing and
      financing of these improvements. This conceptual corridor plan will identify local preferences
      for improvements to the highway itself, which would be pursued by Caltrans in coordination
      with the City later. The City will accommodate Caltrans design and engineering standards, but
      will not include preliminary engineering as a part of this corridor plan, which is meant instead to
      identify preferred conceptual approaches, consistent with the General Plan. With this
      conceptual corridor plan, the City will proactively seek funding to implement segments of
      corridor improvements over time. Aspects of this streetscape plan will be integrated into the
      City’s Improvement Standards, as appropriate. The City and Redevelopment Agency may fund
      and/or implement sections of this streetscape plan in advance of development, with fair-share
      contribution of benefiting properties to reimburse the City or Redevelopment Agency when they
      develop. The City will consider ongoing reimbursement payments rather than a single up-front
      payment where necessary to encourage redevelopment of the SR 99 corridor.
Implementation Program-CIRC-9
      On an ongoing basis, the City will identify priority transportation improvements in the existing
      developed City consistent with the Circulation Element and include such improvements in grant
      applications, capital improvements planning, and through other funding mechanisms, as
      appropriate.
Implementation Program-CIRC-10
      Following General Plan adoption, the City will identify and restrict truck traffic to designated
      truck routes. The City will allow truck traffic by direct route to and from restricted streets, where
      required for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods. The City will sign and
      enforce designated truck routes, as appropriate.
Implementation Program-CIRC-11
      Following General Plan adoption, they City will collaborate with Caltrans, the Public Utilities
      Commission, Union Pacific Railroad, local property owners and businesses, and other relevant
      agencies to develop and implement an Access Management Plan for SR 99 and railroad
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  CIRC-33

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Circulation Element
          crossings in the Planning Area. This Plan will address forecast level of service issues along SR 99
          and City streets with forecast LOS issues. The Access Management Plan will consider the
          location and design of a new railroad crossing south of Apricot Street to be constructed in
          tandem with the closing of the Broadway/Apricot Street crossing. The Access Management Plan
          will identify a phased and logical approach to improving operations of SR 99 while ensuring
          ongoing local access, including the area between Ash Street and Ramsdell Drive. To the extent
          that this Access Management Plan includes removal or construction of crossings of the Union
          Pacific Railroad line, the City will consult with the Public Utilities Commission.
Implementation Program-CIRC-12
          Following General Plan adoption, the City will monitor the number of pedestrians crossing the
          railroad at Kola Street, Pennington Road, and Elm Street, Riviera Road, the new Road 11/Road
          10/Coleman Avenue crossing (if constructed), and Paseo Avenue. As necessary, the City will
          pursue improvements and maintenance of adequate traffic and pedestrian controls at each
          location, including installation of fencing to limit access to the railroad, in order to ensure safety.
          The City will seek funding for safe pedestrian and bicycle crossings of the railroad and/or SR 99
          at approximately Epperson Way, Road F, and Road 10/Bishop Avenue/Coleman Avenue, among
          other appropriate locations.
Implementation Program-CIRC-13
          Following General Plan adoption, the City will collaborate with Sutter County to identify regional
          routes that would serve traffic generated under the 2030 General Plan. The City will collaborate
          with Sutter County and other relevant agencies on funding, planning, and improvement
          strategies for these routes. Larkin Road will be considered as a part of this overall process. To
          achieve LOS D on this rural road, it would be necessary to widen the road to a four-lane
          highway, improve the road to an Arterial standard, or develop alternative north-south routes
          that draw traffic from Larkin Road.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                       CIRC-34
                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                            Circulation Element
This page intentionally left blank.
       Live Oak General Plan
              CIRC-35
                                    COMMUNITY CHARACTER
                                                                                  ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Community Character Element builds on the positive existing qualities of Live Oak. This Element also
reflects Live Oaks cultural history, which has been shaped by agriculture and the railroad. It introduces
policies aimed at protecting the natural resources of the City and enhancing its livability in the future.
Within the city, this Element advances a model (carried through the entire General Plan) of
neighborliness, environmentally and economically sustainable design, and freedom in transportation
mode choice.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
“Community character” refers to the physical characteristics that lend shape, form, and identity to a
community. Concepts such as “small town,” “quality of life,” “living environment,” “neighborhood,” and
“community” are, to a large extent, expressions of familiar physical characteristics—landmarks, streets,
buildings, parks, and natural features that create a unique identity in every community. “Community
design” refers to the architectural and development design principles that create the shape, form, and
appearance of both new development and the redevelopment of existing districts and neighborhoods.
Community design principles and policies are intended to ensure that the community character of the
future reflects the vision and goals of residents and decision makers.
Live Oak envisions itself as a livable place with the character and qualities of a traditional small town. As
envisioned in the future, neighborhoods in Live Oak help support a sense of community, with homes
arranged and designed to encourage healthy interaction between neighbors. Commercial centers,
employment centers, and schools will be located conveniently for residents and visitors. All of the
elements that make up Live Oak will be connected by a well-designed circulation network. Streets will
be safe, walkable, and accommodate all modes of travel. An open space system includes enjoyable parks
that are well-connected by greenbelts and trails. Through its planning policies, Live Oak will be a livable
place that can sustain itself well into the future.
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The goals and policies in this Element complement goals and policies from other elements of the
General Plan that affect community character, particularly the Land Use and Circulation Elements. City
goals for air quality, transportation, and land use require more efficient use of land, mixing of land uses,
a high-quality multi-modal transportation system, and other planning concepts that will shape Live Oak’s
character in the future. The City recognizes that design is very important for ensuring public acceptance
for more compact and land efficient development patterns, neighborhood centers, mixed-use
development, and other concepts introduced in this General Plan. This Element is the basis for guiding
the appearance and aesthetic considerations of public and private land development.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                    DESIGN-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
While the Land Use Element describes the location and distribution of uses within the City, the Community
Character Element emphasizes:
     how development should relate to the user;
     how development can contribute to the City’s visual character and create an attractive place for
        residents, workers, and visitors; and,
     how buildings and other improvements should function in relation to one another, to streets
        and other public places, and in the greater context of the community.
COMMUNITYWIDE POLICIES AND FOCUS AREAS
The Community Character Element provides general design guidance through policies and examples of
design concepts regarding the form and character of development and public improvements citywide.
The Element also provides guidance for areas of particular importance in the City, such as (see Figure
DESIGN-1):
     Downtown core area;
     Highway 99/Live Oak Boulevard;
     the Pennington Road corridor; and,
     Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers (Centers).
Unless specified otherwise, the goals and policies that follow apply citywide.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-2

              Figure DESIGN-1
Downtown Core Area and Centers

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Community Character
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
STREETS AND STREETSCAPES
Streets comprise the majority of the accessible public spaces in most communities and can be the
liveliest and most memorable public spaces. Streets are the main way that we connect physically
between homes and the broader community. The quality of the streetscape environment substantially
affects the quality of interactions with a community.
The Circulation Element provides guidance for the circulation network itself. This Element focuses on
streetscapes and the overall layout of neighborhoods, of which the circulation system is an important
part. Goals, policies, and design guidelines provided in this Element are aimed at balancing the need for
motor vehicle movement and parking with the community’s desire to create a sense of place. This can
be accomplished by improving the connectivity of the street network; by providing amenities for people
using the streets; and by making streets pleasant and attractive places to be. Thoughtful street layout
and high-quality streetscapes will improve the character of Live Oak and make travel through the city
more pleasant and convenient for drivers, transit users, cyclists, and pedestrians.
Goal DESIGN-1.            Provide connected streets with features and amenities that accommodate
                          many travel modes.
     Policy DESIGN 1.1 Streets should be located and oriented to define the edges of neighborhoods,
                          frame scenic views, and provide civic landmarks as focal points.
     Policy DESIGN 1.2 Civic Centers and Neighborhood Centers; parks; civic landmarks; and schools
                          shall be connected by streets, multi-use trails, and pedestrian paths, so that
                          people may comfortably and conveniently reach these destinations by foot,
                          bicycle, car, and bus.
     Policy DESIGN 1.3 New development shall provide a well connected street system with simple and
                          direct routes and connections to existing roadways and neighborhoods (see
                          also the Circulation Element).
     Policy DESIGN 1.4 If cul-de-sacs are used, they should allow pedestrian and bicycle through
                          connectivity to adjacent trails or streets.
     Policy DESIGN 1.5 The City will require block sizes based on location and land use to encourage
                          pedestrian and bicycle travel, shorten vehicle trips, and ensure adequate
                          emergency access (see also the Circulation Element). Shorter blocks and
                          greater connectivity are appropriate in Neighborhood and Civic Centers and
                          other areas where a high volume of pedestrian travel is anticipated (see also the
                          Circulation Element). Larger blocks are appropriate in industrial and some
                          commercial areas where uses are not expected to attract large numbers of
                          pedestrians.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   DESIGN-5

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
    Policy DESIGN 1.6 If any soundwalls are used, they should provide frequent breaks for pedestrian
                       and bicycle access to adjacent areas and incorporate screening and landscaping
                       to minimize their visual impact.
Figure DESIGN-2
Where used, cul-de-sacs should allow for through connections
    Policy DESIGN 1.7 Alleys may be used in new development to provide access to nearby uses, to
                       minimize street congestion, and to allow for the potential location of
                       residential garages, secondary units (“granny flats”), and waste collection
                       services off public streets.
Figure DESIGN-3
Alleyways may be provided for garage access, second units, and services
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-6

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                      Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-1.8 Street intersections in areas with high pedestrian traffic or high vehicle traffic
                       should have distinctive crosswalks with different paving patterns, painting,
                       landscaping, and other aesthetic/safety enhancements.
Figure DESIGN-4
Example of a pedestrian-friendly intersection
    Policy DESIGN-1.9 The City encourages the use of traffic calming devices, such as bulb-outs,
                       crosswalks, pedestrian refuges, planted medians, speed humps, traffic circles,
                       and other passive speed control measures, where appropriate.
    Policy DESIGN-1.10 As funding permits, the City will seek to install traffic calming and pedestrian
                       and bicycle improvements in existing neighborhoods and commercial areas
                       where high traffic speeds are a problem.
    Policy DESIGN-1.11 The City will coordinate with Union Pacific and the Public Utilities Commission
                       to install and improve safe and accessible railroad crossings.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-7
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-5
Example of accessible pedestrian train crossing
Goal DESIGN-2.         Design streetscapes to create attractive and comfortable spaces for people.
    Policy DESIGN 2.1 New streets shall provide comfortable travel areas for pedestrians, bicyclists,
                       and drivers to facilitate multi-modal travel.
    Policy DESIGN 2.2 Local and minor collector streets should have narrower travel areas for vehicles
                       than arterial streets in order to provide safe and comfortable environment for
                       pedestrians and bicyclists.
    Policy DESIGN 2.3 Local streets and setbacks should not be overly wide. Street width should be
                       proportional with building setbacks and heights to create “outdoor rooms,”
                       emphasizing comfort of pedestrians and bicyclists.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-8

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Community Character
Figure DESIGN-6
Excessively wide local street with little pedestrian appeal should be avoided (Left);
Narrower street that provides better aesthetic value (Right)
Figure DESIGN-7
Overly wide collector streets should be avoided (Left);
Collector streets can function well with narrower travel lanes for vehicles (Right)
    Policy DESIGN-2.4 New developments should attempt to preserve as many existing mature trees
                         as feasible and plant additional street trees to eventually create a complete
                         canopy.
    Policy DESIGN-2.5 The City will add street trees in existing developed areas, as feasible, with the
                         goal of a complete tree canopy.
    Policy DESIGN-2.6 Trees in commercial areas should be located and selected to shade sidewalks.
    Policy DESIGN-2.7 Trees in residential areas should shade both the sidewalk and the street and
                         provide a visual buffer between streets and homes.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   DESIGN-9
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-2.8 Benches, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, bus shelters, signage, and other
                         improvements should be located and designed to enhance the visual
                         environment.
Figure DESIGN-8
Collector street with landscaped median and planting strip, street trees, and separated sidewalk
Figure DESIGN-9
A well-designed transit shelter enhances community character and the transit experience for users
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                DESIGN-10
                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Community Character
COMMUNITY GATEWAYS
Gateways are important entry points distinguished by a combination of natural features, landscaping,
buildings, streetscapes, signage, and/or other physical clues that one has entered a community or
neighborhood. Community gateway points to the City along Highway 99 from the north and south at
Paseo Road and Riviera Road, and on Pennington Road at Township Road to the west and Metteer Road
to the east are important visual gateways to the community. Gateway points at Nevada Street and Allen
Street are important visual gateways to the downtown core area (See Figure DESIGN-10.)
Goal DESIGN-3.           Provide a visual environment at important gateways that gives visitors to
                         Live Oak an immediate positive impression of the community.
    Policy DESIGN 3.1 Important visual gateways should be designed to:
                              Provide an attractive streetscape environment for visitors;
                              Preserve vegetation and add new landscaping to enhance aesthetics;
                              Preserve or enhance views of the Sutter Buttes, where possible;
                              Visually “announce” to the visitor their arrival in Live Oak and the
                                 downtown core area;
                              Have attractive civic landmarks and public spaces; and,
                              Ensure, for developed properties, the visual prominence of attractive
                                 building façades rather than surface parking or signage.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Live Oak’s residential areas include older, traditional residential neighborhoods east and west of the
downtown core area and newer development to the north and west. Older neighborhoods generally
have tree-lined streets with sidewalks and detached garages. More recently constructed single-family
neighborhoods have wider streets and cul-de-sacs and homes with garage doors that are very
prominent as viewed from the street.
The character of residential neighborhoods is a product of the design of their public and private
elements. In addition, the quality of homes and the relationship they have to each other have a strong
impact on the character of the community. Public spaces, including streets and parks, should provide a
pleasant and safe atmosphere for neighbors to walk, to meet, and to gather. Private homes should
provide overlook, or “eyes” on the street and should be designed with quality materials and at a scale
and orientation that is pedestrian-friendly.
A sense of community can be fostered within the public spaces of a neighborhood (such as streets,
sidewalks) and in the transition spaces that are located between public and semi-public spaces and
private homes (such as front yards and front porches). These spaces can provide opportunities for
neighbors to meet and create their own communities.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
One part of the vision for Live Oak is to provide for a variety of housing types in each neighborhood,
including multi-family housing. Such housing, if well designed, can be an asset to a neighborhood.
Through careful design, multi-family projects can add value to a community through its architectural
character and through site planning that respects it surroundings and provides a safe and pleasant
environment for residents and neighbors. The safety of a neighborhood can be enhanced when its
design provides opportunities for residents to watch over its public and semi-public spaces.
Goal DESIGN-4.          Neighborhoods that foster a sense of community and support pedestrian
                        activity.
    Policy DESIGN-4.1 Residential sites and building frontages should create an attractive, pedestrian-
                        friendly environment along neighborhood streets.
    Policy DESIGN-4.2 Residential developments should incorporate porches, stoops, active rooms,
                        and operable windows that face and are visually prominent from the street.
    Policy DESIGN-4.3 The City will be flexible in allowing reduced front-yard setbacks with recessed
                        garages, rear-lot garages, alley-loaded garages, and other approaches that
                        promote an inviting human scale.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                DESIGN-12
        Figure DESIGN-10
Important Visual Gateways

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Community Character
Figure DESIGN-11
An inviting street frontage enhances neighborhood character and sense of community (Left);
A garage-dominated façade with no porch provides little social space and is less attractive (Right)
Figure DESIGN-12
Examples of residential design with pedestrian friendly frontages
    Policy DESIGN-4.4 Residences should be designed and configured to integrate with open spaces,
                         such as parks or greenbelts, using design methods such as those described
                         below.
                              Parks and open space in residential neighborhoods should provide
                                convenient and safe pedestrian access.
                              Residential development should front onto parks and open space
                                whenever possible. If homes must back onto open spaces, the homes
                                should be designed to allow for community surveillance of the park or
                                open space.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                DESIGN-15

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-13
Houses facing open spaces should be encouraged (Left);
Houses with sides or rears facing onto open spaces should allow for surveillance (Right)
Figure DESIGN-14
Clockwise (top left): cottage homes, attached single-family homes, “6-Pack” homes, and rowhomes
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                DESIGN-16

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                     Community Character
Goal DESIGN-5.         Encourage quality single-family residential site design and architecture.
    Policy DESIGN-5.1 The City will allow a variety of lot configurations that accommodate higher
                       densities and preserve yards and privacy.
    Policy DESIGN-5.2 The City will allow cottage, cluster, and attached single-family housing and will
                       ensure that the development of such housing is in scale with the neighborhood
                       context.
    Policy DESIGN-5.3 New residential projects should provide diversity among dwelling units in the
                       use of color, building materials, floor plan layouts, square footages, and roof-
                       lines. Projects should maintain continuity of overall design features to provide
                       context between individual units and the neighborhood.
    Policy DESIGN-5.4 The architectural style, exterior materials, roof form, and other design features
                       of accessory buildings, including garages and dwelling units, should be
                       compatible with the primary structure.
Figure DESIGN-15
Diversity among dwelling units in color, materials, floor plans, and size
Goal DESIGN-6.         Encourage high quality multi-family residential site design and architecture.
    Policy DESIGN-6.1 Multi-family housing should incorporate building forms and architectural
                       features that are consistent with or complementary to adjacent single-family
                       houses.
    Policy DESIGN-6.2 Multi-family developments should complement residential neighborhoods and
                       surrounding single-family development through high-quality site and building
                       design, pedestrian connectivity, and landscaping.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                DESIGN-17
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-16
Multi-family projects with varied massing, projections, recesses, and color to mitigate their size
    Policy DESIGN-6.3 Multi-family development projects should break up and distribute surface
                        parking around the project site, wherever possible. Surface parking should be
                        located and landscaped to reduce its visibility from streets and other public
    areas.
Figure DESIGN-17
Parking designed to reduce its visibility from public areas (Left);
Pedestrian walkway that provides safe passage and reduces conflicts with cars (Right)
    Policy DESIGN-6.4 For multi-family projects, the City will require convenient vehicular access and
                        parking that neither limits pedestrian access nor endangers pedestrian safety
                        and integrates parking areas with residential structures.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   DESIGN-18
                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-6.5 Multi-family housing projects should be located next to or near parks. On larger
                         properties, multi-family projects should include open spaces, such as plazas,
                         courtyards, or small parks, where residents can interact with one another and
                         the community at large.
Figure DESIGN-18
Internal open space in a multi-family project (Left);
Multi-family project next to a public park and integrated into the park design (Right)
Goal DESIGN-7.           Neighborhood design promotes safety and surveillance of public and semi-
                         public spaces.
    Policy DESIGN-7.1 The City will incorporate Crime Prevention through Environmental Design
                         (CPTED) strategies in new developments and in existing neighborhoods to
                         improve safety for residents and visitors. CPTED principles emphasize
                         traditional surveillance, territoriality, defensibility, access control, and target
                         hardening to reduce opportunities for criminal behavior.
Figure DESIGN-19
Balconies in this multi-family building provide “eyes on the street” to improve safety (Left)
Second units with windows facing the alley and low fences for a visually defensible space (Right)
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-19

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-7.2 The City will encourage the use of porches, stoops, and other elements that
                         provide a place to comfortably linger and thereby provide “eyes on the street,”
                         helping to maintain a sense of security within neighborhoods.
    Policy DESIGN-7.3 Windows and active rooms in new buildings should allow occupants to view
                         yards, corridors, entrances, streets, alleys, and other public and semi-public
                         places.
    Policy DESIGN-7.4 Bicycle and pedestrian paths shall be well lit and located where there is casual
                         surveillance.
Figure DESIGN-20
Pathways benefit by surveillance from adjacent buildings
DOWNTOWN CORE AREA
A city with a thriving downtown has the potential for bolstering community spirit and contributing to a
healthy local economy. Through innovative design programs, as well as various land use and economic
strategies, Live Oak could create a more vibrant and attractive downtown core area. The downtown
core area could be an attractive place for businesses to locate, as well as for residents to live. The City
will plan for increased development downtown, promote design that enhances the public realm,
improve streets and sidewalks, and encourage better building and site design in the downtown built
environment. The downtown core area has some good historic remnants, but in the future, it will
become a more vital, active, and economically successful place through the implementation of this
General Plan. Please refer also to the Land Use and Economic Development Elements.
Goal DESIGN-8.           Promote Downtown as a vital, people-oriented place.
    Policy DESIGN-8.1 The City will maintain and enhance a strong pedestrian orientation downtown
                         through the design of buildings, streets, and open spaces.
    Policy DESIGN-8.2 Durable, high quality building materials should be used in buildings downtown
                         to lower maintenance and replacement needs and ensure the aesthetic appeal
                         of new development and rehabilitation.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-20

                                                                             LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                    Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-8.3 The City will encourage construction of continuous building facades downtown
                        with minimal or no setback from sidewalks for most buildings.
    Policy DESIGN-8.4 The City will encourage multi-story buildings downtown.
Figure DESIGN-21
Multi-story buildings help create a sense of enclosure
    Policy DESIGN-8.5 The City will require ground floor building façade treatments and activities that
                        generate pedestrian interest and comfort. Large windows, canopies,
                        appropriate signage, arcades, plazas and outdoor seating are examples of such
                        amenities.
    Policy DESIGN-8.6 The City will design streets and other public spaces downtown that can be used
                        for seasonal celebrations and special events.
    Policy DESIGN-8.7 The City will support connectivity between public spaces and semi-public
                        spaces on private land in the downtown core area.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-21

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-22
Public and semi-public spaces can enhance a downtown experience
Figure DESIGN-23
Establish a portion of downtown streets that can be closed for special events
    Policy DESIGN-8.8 The City will support efforts to reduce the visual impact of surface parking in
                         the downtown core area by providing on-street parking spaces throughout the
                         area and making this parking available for use by adjoining properties.
    Policy DESIGN-8.9 The City will promote the installation of public art within the downtown core
                         area to enhance its character and to support local artists.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-22
                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Community Character
Goal DESIGN-9.            Preserve historic features so they can continue to add to the character of
                          downtown Live Oak.
    Policy DESIGN-9.1 The City should retain as many key character-giving features as possible in the
                          restoration or renovation of historical buildings. Wherever possible, maintain or
                          restore original proportions, dimensions, and elements. Historic preservation
                          techniques and Secretary of the Interior standards should be used to maintain
                          the historical integrity of buildings that are designated as city, state, or federal
                          landmarks, wherever feasible.
    Policy DESIGN-9.2 New buildings in the downtown core area shall be compatible with the scale,
                          proportions, massing, general architectural elements, and materials of
                          neighboring buildings of historical quality or significance.
Figure DESIGN-24
Existing historical buildings should be preserved and adaptively reused
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   DESIGN-23
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-25
Example of infill buildings that are compatible with a historical fabric
     Policy DESIGN-9.3 The City will encourage preservation and upgrades of the physical appearance
                          and usability of buildings and sites with special historic and/or architectural
                          interest, insofar as these improvements maintain the historical registry status
                          of subject buildings and sites.
     Policy DESIGN-9.4 The City will celebrate the history and cultural diversity of Live Oak by
                          encouraging buildings, uses, and events that reflect that history and cultural
                          diversity.
NEIGHBORHOOD CENTERS, CIVIC CENTERS, AND COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT
The City of Live Oak seeks to grow in a pattern that allows many residents to be within walking distance
of daily destinations (school, shops, parks, etc.). To achieve this goal, new growth areas of Live Oak will
cluster higher-activity land uses, such as schools, parks, retail and commercial services, small offices,
civic uses, and apartments, into Centers (Neighborhood Centers and Civic Centers – see the Land Use
Element for more details). Some Centers will have commercial uses surrounded by higher density
housing, while other centers will have civic uses surrounded by higher density housing. Centers will
represent “nodes” of development where intensity and density is increased relative to the surrounding
area. For example, the neighborhood center may contain apartments or condominiums. Surrounding
areas will contain medium-density housing types, such as townhomes or small lot homes. These areas
will, in turn, be surrounded by lower-density housing. Neighborhood Centers will be small in scale, but
sized according to the needs and size of the surrounding neighborhood. Centers will be pedestrian- and
bicycle-friendly areas, and will provide the opportunity for transit access.
There are widely used design approaches for larger-scale commercial areas, also, to make them more
pedestrian friendly, while also ensuring vehicular access. To become more inviting for pedestrian and
transit users, both community commercial and Neighborhood Centers will need wider sidewalks and
pedestrian ways furnished with benches and street trees. These areas should also have well-marked
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   DESIGN-24

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Community Character
crosswalks and transit stops, buildings that are oriented to the streets rather than to parking lots, and
compact development patterns which decrease walking distances between retail outlets.
Commercial centers are often the largest and most noticeable buildings within a community. As such,
their character can contribute to or detract from the overall image of the city. Live Oak seeks to enhance
its character by encouraging high standards of quality for the architecture and site planning of its
commercial centers.
Highway 99 is the spine of the community and is currently the primary commercial corridor in Live Oak.
Highway 99 is populated with multiple uses and architectures, including historical buildings, public
buildings, industrial properties, commercial buildings, and even housing. Many of these properties are
amenities to the community and should be preserved and enhanced. Other properties demand more
attention as they are redeveloped so that they can add more to the character of Live Oak.
Goal DESIGN-10.          New and existing commercial centers accommodate multiple travel modes.
     Policy DESIGN-10.1 The City will require a strong pedestrian orientation through the design of
                         buildings, streets, and sidewalks in neighborhood centers and commercial and
                         mixed-use projects.
     Policy DESIGN-10.2 Site and building access for pedestrians and bicyclists should be provided as
                         directly as possible from sidewalks and parking areas to building entrances,
                         while minimizing conflicts with motor vehicle traffic.
     Policy DESIGN-10.3 The City will encourage connected streets and shorter blocks in Neighborhood
                         Centers and Civic Centers in order to create a pedestrian-scale street
                         environment.
     Policy DESIGN-10.4 The City will require new development to incorporate design amenities into
                         parking lots, including landscaping to screen views of parking areas, trees to
                         provide shade, pedestrian paths to provide safe and convenient access, and
                         treatment of surface parking areas.
Figure DESIGN-26
Parking areas should include generous landscaping and features that accommodate pedestrians
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-25
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-27
Commercial building with a front entrance and parking on the side (Left);
Neighborhood center with reduced parking between the street and commercial buildings (Right)
    Policy DESIGN-10.5 In Neighborhood and Civic Centers, encourage construction of continuous
                        building facades with attractive window treatments, shade awnings, and
                        minimal, or no, setback distance from sidewalks.
    Policy DESIGN-10.6 New development should encourage ground floor building façade treatments
                        and activities that generate pedestrian interest and comfort. Large windows,
                        canopies, arcades, plazas and outdoor seating are examples of such amenities.
    Policy DESIGN-10.7 New development should encourage seating areas, such as plazas within new
                        commercial projects. Commercial projects and commercial development in
                        Neighborhood Centers should provide sheltered seating areas at plazas and
                        other appropriate locations, such as along pedestrian walkways.
    Policy DESIGN-10.8 Commercial projects and commercial development in Neighborhood Centers
                        shall provide awnings and other forms of pedestrian shelter along building
                        faces that front on sidewalks.
    Policy DESIGN-10.9 The City will require incorporation of architectural and landscape features that
                        allow for secure locking of bicycles in locations easily observed from indoors.
                        These features must be located to minimize interference with pedestrian areas,
                        evacuation routes, cargo loading areas, and utilities accesses.
    Policy DESIGN-10.10 As demand for transit increases, the City will coordinate with Yuba-Sutter
                        Transit to locate and provide attractive and distinctive shelters and seating for
                        transit stops serving mixed-use areas.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-26

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-10.11 The City will encourage the use and viability of transit by surrounding transit
                         stops with activity-generating land uses.
Figure DESIGN-28
Retail uses should face and open onto sidewalks and plazas
Figure DESIGN-29
Create environments that generate pedestrian interest and comfort
Goal DESIGN-11.          Site design and architecture of commercial projects and centers enhance
                         the character of the City.
    Policy DESIGN-11.1 New commercial projects should be designed with a scale, massing, and
                         architectural detailing that is complementary to the scale of the adjacent
                         neighborhood.
    Policy DESIGN-11.2 New commercial projects shall screen utilities, air conditioning units (HVAC),
                         and waste collection service areas from street frontage.
    Policy DESIGN-11.3 Signage shall be designed to provide wayfinding and visibility for pedestrians,
                         bicyclists, and motorists, while remaining consistent with the design theme and
                         scale of the community.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-27
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-11.4 The City will encourage the development of recreational and quasi-public
                        facilities such as, but not limited to, gymnasiums, community centers,
                        recreation centers, libraries, post offices, within mixed-use areas in order to
                        establish these places as community destinations.
    Policy DESIGN-11.5 Small parks will be focused in and around Neighborhood and Civic Centers and
                        other high activity areas, to allow pedestrians to rest and interact.
Figure DESIGN-30
Provide small parks and neighborhood town squares
Goal DESIGN-12.         Improve the Live Oak Boulevard/Highway 99 corridor and existing
                        commercial areas to provide attractive focal points of community activity.
    Policy DESIGN-12.1 The City will work with Caltrans, the business community, and residents to
                        make aesthetic and functional improvements to the highway corridor, including
                        landscaping, trees, accessible sidewalks, automobile and pedestrian-scaled
                        lighting, bus shelters, trash receptacles, crosswalks, and other streetscape
                        amenities.
    Policy DESIGN-12.2 The City will establish flexible setback requirements, including zero setbacks, to
                        promote sidewalk activity in the downtown core area and to allow retail uses to
                        face and open up to front sidewalks and plazas.
    Policy DESIGN-12.3 Buildings and other structures along Highway 99 should have windows or
                        decorative treatments in order to maintain the pedestrian’s interest.
    Policy DESIGN-12.4 The City will encourage, through incentives, streamlining, flexibility in
                        development standards, and other means, infill buildings along vacant or
                        underutilized sections of the highway designed to improve the environment for
                        pedestrians.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 DESIGN-28

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Community Character
Figure DESIGN-31
Street that is able to carry traffic but is scaled to the pedestrian (Left);
Live Oak Boulevard/Highway 99 is unattractive and inhospitable to pedestrians (Right)
EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT
The following policies encourage the development or redevelopment of employment centers (office,
business park, and light industrial developments) that relate positively to the surroundings and are of a
scale and character that are attractive and accessible by all applicable modes of travel.
Goal DESIGN-13.           New employment centers address the human scale.
    Policy DESIGN-13.1 Large buildings should decrease perceived size and scale through building
                          articulation, breaking up building massing, organization of buildings, the use of
                          different color and materials, and the use of landscape screening.
    Policy DESIGN-13.2 New employment buildings should be designed with a scale and building
                          massing that is complementary to the scale of the adjacent neighborhood.
    Policy DESIGN-13.3 New employment buildings should screen utilities, air conditioning units
                          (HVAC), and waste collection service areas from the street frontage.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                     DESIGN-29
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
Figure DESIGN-32
Reduce the perceived scale of buildings through massing, articulation, and color (right)
or through landscape screening (left)
     Policy DESIGN-13.4 The City will encourage the use of public art, in particular murals and integrated
                         designs in wall architecture, to add visual interest and to break up the
                         monotony of unarticulated walls of large buildings.
     Policy DESIGN-13.5 When new development or re-development of employment areas occurs, the
                         City will require landscaping improvements that will maintain or strengthen
                         existing aesthetic qualities and environmental functions.
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
The preservation and enhancement of the natural environment is of vital importance as Live Oak grows.
Citizens place a high priority on preserving the rural character and believe it is a major component of
Live Oak’s identity. The natural landscape that surrounds Live Oak contributes to the character of the
community. It should be enjoyed by residents and visitors. The City will continue to protect sensitive
environments and habitats, as well as provide open spaces for passive and active recreation.
Goal DESIGN-14.          Incorporate Live Oak’s natural amenities into the community’s built
                         environment.
     Policy DESIGN-14.1 New developments shall retain and enhance scenic views of the Sutter Buttes
                         to the extent possible.
     Policy DESIGN-14.2 The City will encourage the preservation of healthy, attractive vegetation
                         during land development. Significant existing trees shall be preserved
                         whenever possible.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-30

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Community Character
    Policy DESIGN-14.3 The City will encourage the use of site landscaping that uses appropriate native
                          plant materials in order to enhance the natural character of the region; to
                          reduce water and pesticide use; and to provide habitat to native species.
Figure DESIGN-33
Maintain views of the Sutter Buttes
Implementation Program DESIGN-1
        Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will adopt changes to Municipal Code and
        revisions to the Public Works Improvements Standards for consistency with the 2030 General
        Plan, including any changes needed to be consistent with the Community Character and Design
        Element. Such changes may include revising the maximum block size to encourage pedestrian
        and bicycle convenience, shorten vehicle trips, and ensuring adequate emergency access.
        Standards for cul-de-sacs may need to be revised to show pedestrian and bicycle through
        connections. The City will adopt standards for alleyway design that provides flexibility for
        creative project design. Landscaping standards will be revised to encourage the use of drought-
        tolerant, low-maintenance plants. Street tree standards may also be revised according to the
        direction in this Element.
        The Zoning Ordinance will be revised to provide flexibility in setbacks and other components of
        development standards in order to accommodate zero-lot line projects, z lots, zipper lots, and
        other creative site design approaches. The Zoning Ordinance will also be revised to implement
        new land use designations, such as Downtown Mixed Use and Neighborhood Commercial Mixed
        Use. Within these designations, the Zoning Ordinance will include development standards that
        encourage outdoor seating. The City will also establish more flexible setback requirements along
        Highway 99 to promote sidewalk activity and site retail uses facing and opening up onto
        sidewalks and plazas.
Implementation Program DESIGN-2
        Following adoption of the General Plan, either as a part of the Zoning Ordinance update or as a
        separate process, the City will consider drafting a design manual or design guidelines. The design
        manual will specifically implement goals and policies of this Community Character Element. The
        City’s intent with respect to the design manual is to provide certainty for landowners and the
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-31

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
       development community, as well as ensure compliance with the City’s community character and
       design policies. The City’s Design Review Board currently consists of the Planning Commission.
       The City will consider whether a discretionary or administrative process will be used for design
       review and ensuring compliance with the Community Character and Design Element.
Implementation Program DESIGN-3
       Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will explore funding opportunities for a
       downtown strategic plan to implement the General Plan. This follow-on planning effort could
       have many different components, including but not limited to:
             Analyze parking that could be provided in diagonal and parallel parking spaces on-street
                downtown and compare to anticipated future residential and nonresidential buildout to
                determine what, if any, surface parking may be needed to meet future demand
                (including an analysis of different peak demand periods for different land uses);
             Implement downtown core area improvements, including street tree planting,
                landscaped planters, street furniture, Highway 99 re-design elements, sidewalks,
                enhancements to pedestrian crossings; downtown theme for signage and other
                streetscape amenities; and other improvements.
Implementation Program DESIGN-4
       Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will consider preparation of a plan for
       improvements along Highway 99. This plan will describe improvements, including landscaping,
       trees, accessible sidewalks, automobile and pedestrian-scaled lighting, bus shelters, trash
       receptacles, crosswalks, and other streetscape amenities. Where appropriate opportunities and
       sufficient right-of-way exists, the City will work with Caltrans to modify Live Oak
       Boulevard/Highway 99 with landscaped strips between the roadway and sidewalks to visually
       and functionally enhance streets for pedestrian use. The City will coordinate with Caltrans on
       this plan, as well as the business community and property owners along Highway 99. If
       appropriate, this improvement plan may become a part of the City’s Public Works
       Improvements Standards and/or Capital Improvements Programming.
Implementation Program DESIGN-5
       The City will actively seek funding to assist in the preservation and upgrades of the physical
       appearance and usability of buildings and sites with special historic and/or architectural interest.
       If funding is available, the City will explore opportunities to provide property owners with
       matching funds to help facilitate historic-resource-sensitive rehabilitation projects, and will seek
       other opportunities to upgrade historic properties.
Implementation Program DESIGN-6
       The City will pursue streetscape improvements including sidewalks, street trees and additional
       landscaping throughout the existing developed community.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  DESIGN-32

                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                  Community Character
Implementation Program DESIGN-7
      Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan update, the City will seek funding to prepare
      comprehensive streetscape plans for Pennington Road. Plans will include elements such as
      street trees, distinctive crosswalks and sidewalks, traffic calming elements, street lighting,
      benches, shelters, fountains, bike racks, trash receptacles, and public art. Existing plans for
      improvements to Pennington Road would be included in this comprehensive streetscape
      planning process.
                                        Live Oak General Plan
                                              DESIGN-33
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Community Character
                      This page intentionally left blank
                        Live Oak General Plan
                              DESIGN-34
                                                 CONSERVATION AND
                                           OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
This Element combines two mandatory General Plan Elements: Conservation and Open Space. This
Element describes the conservation, development, and use of natural resources. Management
strategies for water, energy, and air quality and for biological, mineral, farmland, and cultural resources
are identified. This Element also describes the City’s strategies for preservation and conservation of
open space lands. Important open spaces are identified and policies designed to protect these valued
landscapes.
The Conservation and Open Space Elements are combined due to the close connection in the Live Oak
Study Area between the location and the use of many of the important resources addressed in this
Element. In other words, the need to conserve these resources and their location on undeveloped lands
are directly linked.
The purpose of this Element is to identify the goals, policies, and implementation programs that will be
used by the City to protect natural, cultural, and open space resources. The chapter focuses on
conserving, preserving, and enhancing these resources to ensure a high quality of life for current and
future residents. Specifically, the Element provides policies and programs that cover the following
conservation topics:
       protection or improvement of water quality;
       conservation of farmland;
       preservation of wetlands consistent with federal and state requirements;
       protection of special-status species and their habitats;
       implementation of water conservation programs;
       promotion of energy conservation and renewable energy;
       improvement of air quality and reduction of the City’s greenhouse gas emissions; and,
       conservation of important mineral and soil resources.
California Government Code Section 65560 stipulates that open space be maintained for the
preservation of natural resources, managed production of resources, recreation, and public health and
safety. This Element provides policies and programs to fulfill the following open space goals:
    preservation of existing agricultural, biological, and recreation resources; and,
    protection of archaeological sites and historically or culturally important sites.
Other required conservation and open space topics are addressed in the Land Use, Public Safety, and
Park and Recreation Elements. The Land Use Diagram in the Land Use Element identifies Buffer areas to
remain in open space between State Route (SR) 99 and the railroad and adjacent residential
development to ensure public health and safety. Open space is addressed in other ways in the Land Use
Element, including policies that promote efficient use of land. Using land more efficiently ensures that
the City can provide for growth needs without unnecessarily converting agricultural land and other
important open spaces to urban use. Open space for the purpose of recreation and the development
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
and improvement of recreational trails and related facilities are addressed in the Land Use and the Parks
and Recreation Elements. Policies addressing water supply are addressed in the Public Services and
Facilities Element. Policies concerning open space for public health and safety are also included in the
Public Safety Element. Taken together, the General Plan Background Reports, various elements of the
General Plan, and the policy diagrams address all state law–required topics for open space and
conservation that are relevant to Live Oak.
KEY CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ISSUES
During a series of General Plan workshops, residents of Live Oak identified several key issues facing the
City. The following issues are related to conservation and open space:
    Farmland surrounds Live Oak, provides scenic open space, and contributes substantially to the
         local and regional economy. This valuable resource should be protected even as the City
         accommodates outward growth.
    Water supply and quality is a precious resource. Water, stormwater, and wastewater should be
         managed in an environmentally effective and cost-efficient manner.
    The Sutter Buttes are a globally unique natural feature, views of which should be provided and
         protected as the city grows.
    The City’s urban tree canopy is important to our air quality, climate, and aesthetic enjoyment.
         Maintaining and improving this resource will improve the overall quality of life in Live Oak.
    Air quality in the region does not meet State of California standards. Additionally, the state has
         established a mandate to reduce total statewide greenhouse gas emissions generated to 1990
         levels by 2020.
    Energy prices are expected to increase substantially over the time horizon of this General Plan.
         These increases will challenge residents and the City’s growth objectives. Live Oak must embrace
         energy conservation and alternative transportation strategies to remain an economically
         competitive and livable community.
    The City will need to protect species and their habitats in compliance with federal and state laws.
CONTENTS OF THIS ELEMENT
As stated above, this Element describes both the City’s approach to the conservation of natural
resources and the management of open spaces. Conservation strategies are presented first and are
divided into eight separate topic areas; open space management is discussed later in the Element. The
discussion includes the following topic areas:
        biological resources;
        air quality/climate change;
        cultural resources;
        energy resources;
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-2

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                          Conservation and Open Space Element
      agricultural resources;
      mineral/soil resources; and,
      water resources.
Each topic area includes a description of the context, identification of key issues, and a presentation of
goals, policies, and implementation programs.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
BIOLOGICAL CONTEXT
The majority of the land within the Study Area either has been converted to agricultural or urban uses or
has experienced some level of disturbance that has compromised its habitat value. While these land
uses dominate the area, isolated pockets of native and nonnative vegetation do provide limited habitat
for wildlife species (Figure CO-1). Riparian areas along the west bank of the Feather River contain most
of the native plant species within the Study Area. Irrigation canals and the Live Oak Slough provide
habitat for other important species. A limited number of valley oak trees are found along these canals.
The biological resources setting of the Environmental Impact Report prepared to evaluate this General
Plan update identified 27 special-status plant and wildlife species that have potential, or are known to
occur in the Study Area. The observed or potential locations of these species are illustrated in Figure CO-
2.
Pasture supports a variety of wildlife, particularly ground-nesting birds such as killdeer and western
meadowlark. Birds that forage in open grasslands, including raptors, horned lark, northern mockingbird,
loggerhead shrike, black phoebe, American crow, blackbirds, and finches, may also use pastures.
Croplands generally provide less suitable habitat for wildlife than do pastures because of weed control,
tilling, and insect control practices. Amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals may disperse across
croplands on a seasonal basis. Most notably, rice fields that become flooded during winter rains may
provide foraging habitat for herons, egrets, white-faced ibis, sandhill crane, and other wading birds and
shorebirds. Most orchards provide minimal habitat. Irrigation channels provide water, cover, and
foraging habitat for wildlife in adjacent habitats. These canals provide habitat for mammals, including
raccoon, river otter, striped skunk, and muskrat. Aquatic species include mosquito fish, carp, and
common garter snake. It is possible that the federally listed giant garter snake exists in the channels
anywhere within the Study Area, but particularly on the west side of the Study Area. Red-winged
blackbirds and tricolored blackbirds may also nest along these irrigation channels, in stands of hard-
stemmed bulrush, cattails, or Himalayan blackberry.
Riparian habitat along the Feather River provides extensive habitat. Wildlife species occurring in this
habitat type include white-tailed deer, coyote, wild turkey, opossum, striped skunk, beaver, western
gray squirrel, screech owl, great horned owl, red-tailed hawk, Swainson hawk, California quail, and
valley elderberry longhorn beetle.
Native trees and large nonnative trees scattered throughout the Study Area, and growing along
roadsides and on the edges of agricultural fields, provide habitat for both sensitive and common wildlife
species.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
KEY ISSUES
The following key issues related to biological resources in the Study Area were identified in the
Background Biological Resources Inventory report (City of Live Oak 2006).
    Special-status species are those plant and animal species that are designated by federal or state
       regulatory agencies as needing protection due to rarity or threats to their existence. A number of
       special-status plant and wildlife species, such as Swainson’s hawk, giant garter snake, valley
       elderberry longhorn beetle, and bank swallow, have the potential to occur or are known to occur
       within the Study Area.
    Sensitive habitats are those designated by federal or state agencies as such because they are
       either rare or play an especially valuable role in the larger ecosystem. Sensitive habitat areas
       within the Study Area include riparian forest habitat along the Feather River and portions of Live
       Oak Slough and wetlands along waterways in the Study Area.
    In addition to the large native trees found with the riparian forest habitat along the Feather
       River, there are scattered native trees and large nonnative trees along roadsides and agricultural
       fields throughout the Study Area. These trees provide not only habitat for wildlife species, but
       also have important historic and aesthetic value for city residents.
BIOLOGICAL GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goals and policies for the Open Space and Conservation Element, aimed at protecting significant
biological resources present within the Study Area boundaries, include the following:
Goal BIOLOGICAL-1. Protect and enhance habitat suitable for special-status species that can
                          occur in the Study Area.
   Policy Biological-1.1 Applicants of projects that have the potential to negatively affect special-status
                          species or their habitat shall conduct a biological resources assessment and
                          identify design solutions that avoid such adverse effects. If adverse effects
                          cannot be avoided, then they shall be mitigated in accordance with guidance
                          from the appropriate state or federal agency charged with the protection of
                          these species.
Goal BIOLOGICAL-2. Protect native oak and other large tree species occurring throughout the
                          Study Area that provide valuable habitat for wildlife species and contribute
                          to the historic and aesthetic character of the city.
   Policy Biological-2.1 New developments shall preserve all native oaks with a diameter at breast
                          height (dbh) of 6 inches or greater and all other trees that have a dbh of 30
                          inches or greater, to the maximum extent feasible.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-4

Figure CO-1
Land Cover

                                     Figure CO-2
Locations of Special-Status Species and Sensitive
         Natural Communities in the Study Area

                                                                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             Conservation and Open Space Element
Goal BIOLOGICAL-3. Protect and enhance existing riparian habitat within the Study Area.
   Policy Biological-3.1 Where feasible, the City will require that new developments avoid the
                           conversion of existing riparian habitat and require that an adequate buffer of
                           the associated riparian areas be established to protect this resource. Where
                           feasible, the riparian buffers shall be incorporated into open space corridors,
                           public landscapes, and parks. Riparian buffers shall be designed to preserve
                           existing wildlife habitat; restore degraded habitat; provide habitat conditions
                           favorable to native local wildlife; restrict activities that may adversely affect
                           wildlife habitat quality within the established buffer zone; and provide
                           interpretive features educating the public about the beneficial effects of native
                           riparian habitat and activities that adversely affect wildlife.
   Policy Biological-3.2 The City will take advantage of opportunities to enhance and restore existing
                           riparian areas along Live Oak Slough and other drainage canals. Where feasible,
                           these resources shall be incorporated into open space corridors, public
                           landscapes, and park during the preparation of the Parks and Recreation
                           Master Plan. 1
   Policy Biological-3.3 The City will require new developments to avoid the loss of federally protected
                           and state-protected wetlands. If loss is unavoidable, the City will require
                           applicants to mitigate the loss on a “no net loss” basis through a combination of
                           avoidance, minimization, and/or compensation in accordance with federal and
                           state law.
   Policy Biological-3.4 If development or expansion of the Live Oak Park and Recreation Area on the
                           Feather River occurs, the City will encourage designs, construction, and
                           operation to protect sensitive riparian habitat.
Implementation Program Biological-1
        The City’s survey and mitigation requirements for special-status wildlife species shall be
        consistent with current guidance from the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S.
        Fish and Wildlife Service. For federally listed wildlife species with potential to occur in the
        vicinity of proposed projects, the following guidelines are provided (project applicants will be
        required to use the most current version of survey protocol available at the time of project-level
        environmental review):
         Conservation Guidelines for the Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle (USFWS 1999)
         Programmatic Formal Endangered Species Act Consultation on Issuance of 404 Permits for
             Projects with Relatively Small Effects on Listed Vernal Pool Crustaceans Within the
             Jurisdiction of the Sacramento Field Office, California (USFWS 1996)
         Programmatic Formal Consultation for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 404 Permitted Projects
             with Relatively Small Effects on the Giant Garter Snake within Butte, Colusa, Glenn, Fresno,
1
  Please refer to the Parks and Recreation Element for more detail.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                       CO-9

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
             Merced, Sacramento, San Joaquin, Solano, Stanislaus, Sutter and Yolo Counties, California
             (USFWS 1997).
         Staff Report Regarding Mitigation for Impacts to Swainson's Hawks (Buteo swainsoni) in the
             Central Valley of California (CDFG 1994).
         Staff Report on Burrowing Owl Mitigation (CDFG 1995 as updated)
        For other wildlife species, the following guidance is recommended for pre-construction surveys:
         Raptors (including long-eared owl, northern harrier, white-tailed kite): for activities in
             suitable habitat during the breeding season (March through August), pre-construction nest
             surveys with minimum buffers of 250 feet on active nests.
         Tricolored blackbird: for activities in suitable habitat during the breeding season (March
             through August), pre-construction nest surveys with minimum buffers of 250 feet on active
             nests.
         Other migratory birds (loggerhead shrike, Song Sparrow “Modesto population”), for
             activities in suitable habitat during the breeding season (March through August), pre-
             construction nest surveys with minimum buffers of 10 feet on active nests.
         Northwestern pond turtle: pre construction surveys in suitable aquatic habitat with
             relocation of turtles found in the work area into nearby suitable aquatic habitat.
         Special-status mammals (pallid bat, ringtail, silver-haired bat, western red bat, and American
             badger): for activities in suitable habitat, pre-construction surveys with minimum buffers of
             10 feet on occupied habitat.
Implementation Program Biological-2
        The City will develop and adopt an ordinance requiring preservation of all heritage trees within
        the Study Area. Heritage trees will include native oak trees greater than 6 inches dbh and all
        other trees greater than 30 inches dbh. The ordinance shall require a certified arborist to
        evaluate any trees proposed to be removed or disturbed and work with the City to develop
        measures to preserve the trees or mitigate their loss. The ordinance will provide an exception to
        projects where any economically viable development is precluded by the existence of a heritage
        tree.
Implementation Program Biological-3
        The City will adopt development standards that require a riparian protection buffer (RPB)
        specifying an appropriate setback distance from existing riparian habitat or natural water bodies
        for development or other significant disturbance. This habitat is known to occur near the west
        bank of the Feather River. In areas with existing development, the RPB shall not be less than 25
        feet, measured from top of the bank. In all other areas, the RPB shall not be less than 100 feet,
        measured from top of bank. If existing riparian vegetation is greater than 100 feet in width, the
        RPB shall encompass all of the riparian habitat; however, in no case shall the RPB be required to
        exceed 250 feet. Where feasible, the riparian buffers shall be incorporated into open space
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-10

                                                                                        LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                 Conservation and Open Space Element
          corridors, public landscapes, and parks. Trails and other recreation development should be
          designed and constructed to be compatible with riparian ecosystem.
AIR QUALITY
AIR QUALITY CONTEXT
Air pollution affects human health, harms the natural and the built environment, damages crops, and
changes the climate of the earth. Air pollution can have localized, regional, and global sources and
effects.
Toxic air contaminants (TACs) are airborne substances that can cause acute (short-term) and chronic
(long-term) health problems, including cancer. TACs include a variety of substances from many different
sources, such as gasoline stations, highways and railroads, dry cleaners, industrial operations, power
plants, and painting operations. The effects of TACs are mostly experienced locally (close to the source).
Particulate matter (dust) and ozone (“smog”) can also have adverse human health effects. The Live Oak
area experiences exceedances of California ambient air-quality standards for concentrations of these
pollutants, and is classified as nonattainment for ozone and particulate matter of less than 10
micrometers in diameter (PM10) (ARB 2008a).
In addition, emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) could have catastrophic impacts related to flooding,
habitat suitability, agriculture, and the global economy. The primary GHGs of concern include carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated compounds. GHGs emitted around the world all
contribute to global climate change. 2 In California, the transportation sector is the largest emitter of
GHGs, followed by electricity generation. 3
Addressing the public and environmental health issues related to air quality requires not only
conservation policies, but coordination between land use, circulation, health and safety, and community
design policies. The location of highways, railroads, and industrial sources compared to houses, schools,
and other sensitive land uses is an important consideration in land use planning. Since transportation is
the largest source of ozone precursors in the region and of GHGs in California, land use and
transportation planning to reduce the need for driving is a fundamental focus for jurisdictions that have
air quality goals (ARB 2008b, 2008c). 4
There are a variety of feasible and routinely used land use, transportation, and design approaches that
reduce vehicular travel (and thus preserve air quality). For example:
2
   Please refer to the “Air Quality” section of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report, under separate cover,
   for more detailed information on climate change-related legislation, emerging climate change-related
   regulations, climate change science, detailed presentation of primary sources of greenhouse gas emissions, and
   related topics.
3
   California Air Resources Board. California Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory. Available at:
   <http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/data.htm>. Accessed February 9, 2009.
4
   Please refer to the California Air Resources Board Web sites for more information on sources of air pollution:
   http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/data.htm and http://www.arb.ca.gov/aqd/almanac/almanac08/
   almanac2008all.pdf.
                                                  Live Oak General Plan
                                                         CO-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
    Placing residential development within walking distance of daily destinations, such as schools,
       jobs, shops, parks, and where public transit is available reduces reliance on cars and makes
       vehicle trips shorter.
    Connected street networks (those that provide many route choices for each destination) also
       encourage walking and bicycling and reduce trip lengths.
    The City can coordinate with Yuba-Sutter Transit and other transit providers to make public
       transit a more viable option for commuting in the short term (see the Circulation Element).
    The City can identify and work to attract employers to Live Oak in the future and better match
       the types of housing available locally with the jobs available locally (see the Land Use, Economic
       Development, and Housing Elements).
KEY ISSUES
The following key issues relate to air quality in the Study Area:
    Vehicle emissions are a primary source of air pollutants in Live Oak and the Sacramento region.
       By attempting to create a more balanced jobs-housing ratio, the City could reduce a large
       amount of commute-generated vehicle trips and emissions.
    A number of TAC sources exist within the city. Appropriate planning, design, and mitigation
       practices will need to be implemented to ensure residents are protected from these potentially
       hazardous land uses.
    California has passed legislation aimed at addressing the threat that climate change poses to
       California’s economic, social, and environmental well-being. Live Oak, along with all other local
       jurisdictions, must coordinate land use and transportation planning according to the state’s GHG
       reduction objectives.
AIR QUALITY GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goals, policies, and implementation programs included below have direct and indirect air quality
benefits, and address a broad range of planning and air quality issues facing Live Oak. The Circulation
Element, Land Use Element, and Community Character Element each have extensive policy that would
also address air quality issues. There are also some air quality benefits to energy conservation strategies.
Energy conservation is addressed later in this Element.
Goal AIR-1.               Plan and design the community to encourage walking, bicycling, and use of
                          transit.
   Policy Air-1.1         New neighborhoods will include a mix of land uses, including pedestrian-
                          friendly Civic Centers and Neighborhood Centers (“Centers”) that
                          accommodate destination land uses (e.g., local-serving retail, neighborhood
                          services, employment uses, and entertainment uses) to allow neighborhood
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-12

                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   Conservation and Open Space Element
                 residents to meet daily needs without the use of an automobile, and also to
                 provide supportable locations for future transit stops. (See also the Land Use
                 Element.)
  Policy Air-1.2 New development shall provide highly connected street networks, which
                 provide many route choices between any given origin and destination point,
                 encourage alternatives to vehicular travel, and shorten trip lengths for vehicular
                 travel. (See also the Circulation Element.)
  Policy Air-1.3 City administrative facilities and other government offices established in Live
                 Oak should be located downtown or in Centers, to be accessible by transit,
                 walking, and bicycling.
  Policy Air-1.4 The City will encourage and provide incentives for infill development, defined
                 as development that has water and sewer infrastructure available in adjacent
                 streets and does not require extension of such infrastructure to serve the
                 subject project. (See also the Public Utilities, Services and Facilities Element
                 and the Land Use Element.)
Goal AIR-2.      Use construction practices and operational strategies that minimize air
                 pollution.
  Policy Air-2.1 New development shall implement standard emission control measures
                 recommended by the Feather River Air Quality Management District for
                 construction, grading, excavation, and demolition, to the maximum extent
                 feasible.
  Policy Air-2.2 The City will identify a preference for contractors that use low-emission
                 equipment and other practices with air quality benefits (e.g., using locally
                 produced and/or recycled construction materials, recovering demolition
                 materials for reuse, or otherwise diverting refuse or waste from a landfill) for
                 City-sponsored construction projects.
  Policy Air-2.3 The City will encourage the prevailing local solid waste disposal provider to use
                 low-emission vehicles and other equipment, and future contracting with solid
                 waste handlers should identify a preference for solid waste contractors that use
                 air quality best management practices.
  Policy Air-2.4 City parks and open space will use low-maintenance, drought-tolerant
                 landscaping, except in the case of playing fields. For landscape maintenance
                 that is required, the City will encourage use of low-emission equipment.
  Policy Air-2.5 The City will replace its fleet vehicles with low-emission vehicles, as funding is
                 available and as fleet turnover warrants.
  Policy Air-2.6 New development shall, as a condition of project approval, implement feasible
                 elements from Feather River Air Quality Management District’s standard and
                                     Live Oak General Plan
                                            CO-13

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
                           supplemental mitigation measures, where required to reduce project level
                           operational impacts to a less-than-significant level.
Goal AIR-3.                Prevent local exposure to harmful and hazardous air pollutants and
                           substantial exposure to odors.
    Policy Air-3.1         Development of sensitive uses (such as residences and schools) shall be located
                           an adequate distance from existing and potential sources of air pollutant
                           emissions (including TACs), such as SR 99.
    Policy Air-3.2         The City will ensure that industrial, manufacturing, and processing facilities
                           that may produce toxic or hazardous air pollutants are located at an adequate
                           distance from residential areas and other sensitive receptors, taking into
                           consideration weather patterns, the quantity and toxicity of pollutants emitted,
                           and other relevant parameters.
    Policy Air-3.3         The City will coordinate with the Feather River Air Quality Management District
                           to identify sources of TACs and determine the need for health risk assessments
                           for proposed development.
    Policy Air-3.4         The City will continue to work with local businesses and other agencies to
                           monitor and provide rapid response and communication with the public in the
                           event of an emergency involving air pollution.
    Policy Air-3.5         Odor controls should be installed on new and existing sources, as feasible, to
                           reduce exposure for existing and future residents.
Implementation Program Air-1
Following General Plan adoption, the City will develop a GHG reduction program. This program will be
tied to estimates of existing and General Plan buildout GHG emissions presented and evaluated in the
Live Oak 2030 General Plan EIR (under separate cover). The GHG reduction program will be structured to
implement the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), as appropriate, within Live Oak.
Policies included in the Circulation, Land Use, Conservation and Open Space, Public Utilities, Services,
and Facilities, and Community Character Elements of the 2030 General Plan that have GHG-reducing
effects will be analyzed and considered as a part of the City’s GHG reduction target. The GHG benefits of
these policies are estimated at a programmatic level in the General Plan EIR.
The City may need to revise its quantified emissions reduction target as new information becomes
available as a result of a Sustainable Communities Strategy, Alternative Planning Strategy, or other
guidance from the State of California or the Regional Transportation Planning process related to Senate
Bill 375 (signed September 2008). 5
5
  SB 375 aligns regional transportation planning efforts, regional GHG reduction targets, and land use and housing
  allocation. SB 375 requires Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) to adopt a Sustainable Communities
  Strategy (SCS) or Alternative Planning Strategy (APS) for that MPO’s Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). ARB, in
  consultation with MPOs, will provide each affected region with reduction targets for GHGs emitted by passenger
  cars and light trucks.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                       CO-14

                                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                  Conservation and Open Space Element
As more sophisticated transportation modeling becomes available (modeling is more sensitive to
development density, urban design for pedestrian, bicycle, and transit accessibility, and other factors),
the City may elect to re-analyze GHG emissions associated with General Plan buildout against the City’s
GHG reduction target.
In addition to policies included in the General Plan, future regulations would have the effect of reducing
GHG emissions associated with General Plan implementation. 6 The effect of future regulations will be
analyzed, quantified, and considered as a part of Live Oak’s GHG reduction target through
implementation of this GHG reduction program.
In addition to policies included in the General Plan and future state regulations, additional plans,
projects, or regulations may be necessary to achieve the City’s objective of consistency with AB 32. As
necessary, the City will identify additional measures that are necessary to reduce GHG emissions and
achieve the City’s GHG reduction target. Each additional required measure should be enforceable,
include a timeline, describe financing mechanisms, and assign responsibility to relevant agencies and
departments. The City will consider a broad range of regulatory changes; infrastructure investment
strategies; incentives for infill, residential and employment density, and mixing of land uses;
contributions to carbon off-set programs; and other measures, as appropriate. The City could consider
financing programs for installation and use of renewable energy infrastructure in new and/or existing
development, green building codes to further increase energy efficiency in new buildings, travel demand
management programs for new nonresidential projects, and other mechanisms that would reduce GHG
emissions at General Plan buildout.
The City will identify periodic check-in points for monitoring the effectiveness of policies and measures
relative to quantified targets. The first such check-in year shall be no later than 2015. The City will
modify policies and measures, as necessary, to achieve the GHG reduction target.
Implementation of this program will require the cooperation of other agencies, private businesses, and
residents, and will be implemented over a period of several years. The City will monitor changes in the
regulatory and technological environments, as well as grant and other funding programs that could be
used to fund this program or implement components of this program. The City will monitor and comply
with relevant local, regional, statewide, and federal legislation related to GHG emissions, land use
planning, and environmental review, and will make changes to its GHG reduction program accordingly.
Implementation Program Air-2
The City will identify, pursue, and use federal and state funds for bicycle and transit improvements,
transit-oriented planning and development, and other planning and improvement grant programs
intended to encourage alternatives to automobile transportation.
6
   For example, the California Air Resources Board has drafted an AB 32 Scoping Plan that identifies expected GHG
   emissions reductions from regulations, such as those that would reduce emissions from vehicles (e.g., AB 1493,
   Executive Order S-1-07 [i.e., the Low Carbon Fuel Standard]) and utilities (e.g., SB 1368 and companion
   legislation). If a low carbon fuel standard is implemented, this would reduce emissions associated with the
   General Plan, along with development throughout California. Other regulatory measures identified under the
   Scoping Plan could reduce emissions associated with the General Plan (as compared with what is estimated in
   the General Plan EIR).
                                                   Live Oak General Plan
                                                          CO-15

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
Implementation Program Air-3
The City will require implementation of measures to reduce exposure of sensitive receptors to odorous
emissions, where necessary, to avoid significant impacts. Odor controls will be required on existing and
proposed major odor sources, as feasible, to reduce exposure to existing and future residents. The
deeds to all properties of proposed residential uses located near substantial odors shall include a
disclosure clause advising buyers and tenants of the potential adverse odor impacts from major sources
of odors.
Implementation Program Air-4
The City shall continue to coordinate with FRAQMD to ensure that assumptions and control measures
from new air quality plan updates are implemented, as appropriate, as part of General Plan
implementation.
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Cultural resources are reminders of the history of the Live Oak area and can be important amenities for
the present-day community. The adaptive re-use of buildings in Live Oak’s Historic Commercial District
demonstrates the community’s interest in preserving the history of Live Oak. A review of known cultural
resources is essential to understanding the City’s history and to evaluating similar types of resources.
This information will assist in land use planning, construction, and infrastructure planning. Knowing
cultural resource site locations is the key to being able to develop or protect resources, as appropriate,
to enhance knowledge and understanding of the City’s past.
CULTURAL CONTEXT
During the prehistoric era, the Live Oak Study Area would have been a very productive environment,
one well-suited to a hunting-gathering economy with a variety of water birds, small and large mammals,
fish, reptiles and amphibians, and edible plant species. Live Oak is in an area historically occupied by two
Native American groups: the Konkow (also known as the Northwestern Maidu) and the Valley Nisenan
(also known as the Southern Maidu) (Kroeber 1925, Riddell 1978, Wilson and Towne 1978).
Ethnographically known Konkow villages on the Feather River were south of the confluence with Honcut
Creek (Riddell 1978:371). Valley Nisenan villages near the project area also have been found on the
Feather River (Wilson and Towne 1978:388). More such sites could easily be located along the Feather
River banks, where they would have been buried by flood deposits.
Before the construction of levees and ditches, the Sacramento Valley frequently turned into an inland
sea during winter rainy periods and spring runoff. The Sutter Buttes, immediately southwest of the
project area, was an island refuge for indigenous Californians (California Parks 2005). The Maidu called
the Buttes “Histum Yani,” which translates as “Middle Mountains of the Valley” or “Spirit Mountain.” As
an important part of their religious beliefs, the spirits of the Maidu people rest in the Buttes after death,
before the journey to the afterlife.
During the Gold Rush, nearby Marysville became a large trading center because of its proximity to the gold
fields and its accessibility on the Feather River. In 1848, Marysville became the third largest settlement in
California. Although gold mining (placer, hydraulic, and dredging) continued for decades as a significant
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CO-16

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                            Conservation and Open Space Element
economic activity in the area, the miners and immigrant families turned to farming for subsistence.
Settlers began to farm the fertile agricultural lands along the west banks of the Feather River.
The town of Live Oak was settled in 1866 by A. M. McGrew, and was named for the local groves of oak
trees by H. L. Gregory in 1871. Railroads established in the mid- to late 19th century helped Live Oak
become a major shipping point for agricultural products.
The small settlement prospered after the California and Oregon Railroad laid tracks in the area in 1869,
after which Live Oak became the main point in Sutter County for shipping agricultural produce (Napoli
1997). A store, railroad siding, warehouse, blacksmith shop, post office, and saloon had been
constructed by 1874. Five years later, the town had many new businesses and a population of about
125, including 25 Chinese residents. During this period of commercial growth, the first railroad depot
was constructed in 1876. This first depot was replaced by a second depot in 1882, which, along with Live
Oak Hall (constructed in 1875), is still standing in today’s Live Oak Historic Commercial District, a
National Register Historic District listed in 1998 (Figures CO-3 and CO-4).
Figure CO-3
Historic Commercial District
The growth of the community slowed during the economic depression near the turn of the century, with
the population of Live Oak at only about 400 in 1910 (Napoli 1997). With the construction of the Butte
County Canal by Duncan McCallum and Thomas Fleming in 1905–1907, however, local agricultural
practices flourished (Butte Creek Watershed Project 1998:150). Now known as the Sutter Butte Canal,
this conduit brought water from the Feather River for irrigation. New settler-farmers arrived in the area,
producing two agricultural colonies for Mormons and Germans (Napoli 1997). In addition, the arrival of
the Northern Electric Railroad (later the Sacramento Northern) to Live Oak in 1906 and the paving of a
state highway in 1915 (designated State Route 99 East) brought more settlers and commerce to the
town. The community prospered again until the Great Depression of the 1930s. The Second World War
revived the economy of Live Oak (Napoli 1997). After this period, businesses were constructed along
SR 99. Live Oak was incorporated in 1947.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-17

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
Figure CO-4
Live Oak Historic Commercial District
                                      Live Oak General Plan
                                             CO-18
                                                                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             Conservation and Open Space Element
The history of Live Oak can be seen in the various buildings and sites scattered through the city. The
Historic Commercial District, with its palm trees, is certainly the most visible, but historic houses,
bridges, and canals also contribute to the landscape. The Live Oak Cemetery is located on Pennington
Road, approximately 800 feet west of Luther Road. The cemetery was officially named in 1905 and is still
in use today. The earliest tombstone recorded at this historic cemetery marks the grave of Katherine
Kustokowick and is dated August 1858 (Sutter County 2005), 8 years prior to the settlement of Live Oak
in 1866. In addition to the physical remnants of the past, Live Oak’s history is also celebrated in events,
such as the annual Peach Festival. This festival is held in the Live Oak Historic Commercial District and
highlights the agricultural heritage of the city and Sutter County.
By definition, in order to be considered a fossil, an object must be more than 11,000 years old. Portions of
the Planning Area are underlain by Holocene-age (less than 11,000 years old) basin geologic deposits, and do
not have important paleontological resources. However, much of the Planning Area is underlain by
Pleistocene-age sediments of the Modesto Formation, which is considered a paleontologically sensitive rock
unit.
Numerous of vertebrate fossil specimens have been recorded from the Modesto Formation in Yuba City,
Woodland, and Davis. Vertebrate fossils have been recovered near the Planning Area and other areas
throughout the Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys. Areas of important finds have sediments related to the
Modesto Formation. This suggests that areas with the Modesto Formation have potential for additional fossil
remains during construction-related earthmoving activities, including trenching for utilities and other types of
earth disturbance and excavation.
KEY ISSUES
The following key issues relate to cultural resources in the Study Area:
    Along with substantial growth and change in the community is the opportunity to maintain links
        to the history of Live Oak, including its agricultural heritage.
    Live Oak does not have a large stock of historic buildings, but the historic buildings that do exist
        and their context should be preserved to maintain the character of the community.
CULTURAL GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
The following goals and policies are intended to protect historic and cultural resources within the
boundaries of the City’s Study Area.
Goal CULTURAL-1.          Identify, protect, and preserve Live Oak’s prehistoric resources.
    Policy Cultural-1.1   New development projects involving the movement, scraping, or leveling of soil
                          should conduct archeological background research to determine if the project
                          is likely to disturb a prehistoric site or traditional-use area. 7 If disturbance is
7
  Traditional-use areas include important places to Native American people, such as spiritual sites,
  known seasonal gathering areas, and other places that may or may not have remnants.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CO-19

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
                          likely, site analysis will be conducted to identify resources of concern. The
                          project will make all reasonable efforts to use site design to avoid impacts to
                          any prehistoric site or traditional-use area.
   Policy Cultural-1.2 The City will use state legislation as a guideline for the identification and
                          protection of prehistoric cultural resources or traditional-use areas.
   Policy Cultural-1.3    The City will keep the locations of archaeological sites confidential in order to
                          prevent vandalism and looting.
   Policy Cultural-1.4 New developments shall be designed to provide view corridors to the Sutter
                          Buttes by orienting major and minor collectors southwest to provide a valuable
                          community aesthetic amenity and maintain vistas that were important to local
                          Native American populations.
   Policy Cultural-1.5    if potential paleontological resources are detected during construction, work
                          shall stop and consultation with the City is required to avoid further impacts.
                          Actions after work stoppage will be designed to avoid significant impacts to the
                          greatest extent feasible. These measures could include construction worker
                          personnel education, consultation with a qualified paleontologist, coordination
                          with experts on resource recovery and curation of specimens, and/or other
                          measures, as appropriate.
Goal CULTURAL-2.          Identify, protect, and enhance Live Oak’s historic resources and
                          associations.
   Policy Cultural-2.1 The City will encourage private property owners to preserve and maintain
                          historic structures.
   Policy Cultural-2.2 Roadway and other infrastructure shall be located to avoid taking any property
                          within, or otherwise adversely affecting the Live Oak Cemetery.
   Policy Cultural-2.3 The City will encourage adaptive reuse of historic structures where as much of
                          the historic character as possible is preserved. Structures that are grouped in
                          close proximity, particularly rural, agricultural, and structures associated with
                          the railroad, will receive special emphasis.
   Policy Cultural-2.4 Infill structures built in the Live Oak Historic Commercial District shall be
                          designed so that their size, shape, design, color, and detail are architecturally
                          compatible with the surrounding buildings.
   Policy Cultural-2.5 The City should preserve views of the historic building frontages along SR 99.
   Policy Cultural-2.6 The City will establish educational and awareness programs to promote
                          understanding and foster support for preservation of important cultural
                          resources.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CO-20

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                        Conservation and Open Space Element
Implementation Program Cultural-1
      The City will require development projects to protect Native American and prehistoric resources
      through the following actions or those deemed equally effective by the City:
       Identify and protect significant archaeological or traditional sites.
       Request information from the Native American Heritage Commission and the North Central
           Information Center (NCIC) to determine if prehistoric sites or traditional use areas exist in
           the project site.
       Avoid potential impacts to significant cultural resources whenever possible. If impacts are
           unavoidable, mitigate to a less-than-significant level. Determination of impacts, significance,
           and mitigation shall be made by a qualified professional archaeologist or architectural
           historian, as appropriate.
       Involve the local Native American community in determining the appropriate mitigation of
           impacts to significant prehistoric sites.
       Provide the North Central Information Center with appropriate Department of Parks and
           Recreation site record forms and cultural resources reports.
       Require a professional archaeologist to monitor all City-sanctioned ground-disturbing
           activities proposed within 150 meters of the Feather River, (agricultural uses are exempted).
Implementation Program Cultural-2
      The City will require development projects to preserve the community’s historically significant
      sites and buildings, whenever feasible, through the following actions or those deemed equally
      effective by the City:
       Request information from the North Central Information Center about sites where the
           proposed development may disturb historic sites or structures.
       Protect historically significant structures by following state Historic Building Code for all
           retrofit, remodels or similar construction activities.
       Leave existing orchard trees in place wherever feasible; plant smaller in-fill trees so that as
           trees age they can be removed without leaving large gaps.
       Ensure that roads planned around the Live Oak Cemetery are located to avoid noise and
           visual impacts to the cemetery.
Implementation Program Cultural-3
      The City will investigate and provide information to property owners regarding tax incentives
      and other federal and state programs that are offered for rehabilitation of historic structures.
      The City will explore opportunities to also participate financially or otherwise in historic
      rehabilitation projects consistent with General Plan policy, with the focus of such efforts being
      in the Live Oak Historic Commercial District.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                   CO-21

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
Implementation Program Cultural-4
         If potential paleontological resources are detected by construction workers or City staff during
         construction, work shall stop and consultation is required to avoid further impacts. Actions after
         work stoppage will be designed to avoid significant impacts to the greatest extent feasible.
         These measures could include construction worker personnel education, consultation with a
         qualified paleontologist, coordination with experts on resource recovery and curation of
         specimens, and/or other measures, as appropriate.
ENERGY
ENERGY CONTEXT
Energy used in Live Oak comes from several sources, including oil, natural gas, hydroelectric, solar, and
wind. Major uses of energy in the city include transportation, building operations, and commercial,
agricultural, and industrial production purposes. For much of Live Oak’s history, energy has been
relatively abundant, cheap, and hassle free. Today, non-renewable fossil fuels provide the majority of
the energy required for the movement of goods and services, commuting, and many agricultural and
industrial operations.
During the planning horizon of the 2030 General Plan, it is likely that a variety of energy-related
challenges will face not only Live Oak, but also the State of California and the nation. How Live Oak plans
for, and responds to, these potential challenges will influence the quality of life for its residents and
competitiveness of local businesses.
Fossil fuel costs could increase substantially over the next three decades. The U.S. Department of
Energy’s 2004 report, “Long-Term World Oil Supply Scenarios,” indicates that oil production will most
likely peak by the middle of this century. Increasing global demand and market speculation can also
raise prices. In addition to future price increases, regulatory changes will greatly affect energy use during
buildout of this General Plan. Sources and uses of energy are being closely examined by the State of
California and many other governments in relation to global climate change. In California, vehicle
emissions are the largest contributor to regional air quality problems and climate changing GHG
emissions. Energy use and associated greenhouse gas emissions related to building operations are
secondary to those related to transportation, but still are important. The state has enacted numerous
laws and regulations to clean the air and avoid economically and environmentally dangerous levels of
climate change. The state’s response to climate change is evolving as of the writing of this document,
but there is enough information currently available to inform the City’s land use, transportation,
community design, conservation, and related policies.
Energy policies that relate to transportation are discussed in the Circulation and Land Use Elements and
are highlighted in the “Air Quality” section of this Element. Policies and measures related to energy
efficiency and renewable energy production are provided below.
Energy efficiency measures provide city residents and businesses substantial cost-saving opportunities
with reduced energy consumption. Energy efficiency retrofits could substantially improve the energy
performance of the city’s existing building stock. State regulations will require new development to
meet increasingly stringent energy efficiency requirements. The 2007 California Green Building
Standards Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11) is mandatory as of 2010 (Department
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-22

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         Conservation and Open Space Element
of General Services 2009). The amended code is expected to reduce building energy consumption by 15
percent, water consumption by 20 percent, and landscape water consumption by 50 percent. New
residential buildings will be required to use zero net energy by 2020, and commercial buildings will need
to achieve this target by 2030. In addition to buildings, there are a variety of strategies for design and
construction of infrastructure and public facilities that can provide energy conservation benefits.
Production and purchasing of renewable energy is another effective way for the community to reduce
energy demand (and provide local cost savings). Recent advances in technology provide Live Oak with a
variety of feasible options for renewable energy production. Technologies, such as solar photovoltaic,
solar hot water, and geothermal systems, will play important roles in achieving this goal. By purchasing
renewable energy, many utilities are increasing their renewable energy portfolios. The Pacific Gas &
Electric Company, the City’s primary energy supplier, offers renewable energy purchasing options to
residential and commercial customers. Assembly Bill 2466 authorizes local governments to receive a
utility bill credit for surplus renewable electricity generated at one site against the electricity
consumption at other sites.
KEY ISSUES
The following key issues relate to energy use in the Study Area:
     Energy conservation strategies are a part of the state’s greenhouse gas reduction legislation and
        will be a part of regulations for building construction;
     Energy conservation in the built environment will provide residents and businesses with long-
        term cost savings;
     There are widely available, widely used, and effective energy conservation strategies for building
        materials and design, as well as site planning measures that can feasibly be incorporated in Live
        Oak; and,
     Energy efficient practices can be accomplished with little additional up-front cost, which over the
        long term can be recovered.
Further discussion of the City’s approach towards energy conservation, including additional goals and
policies, can be found in the Land Use, Circulation, and Community Character Elements.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-23

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
ENERGY GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
The following goals and policies are intended to provide for the conservation of energy within the City’s
Study Area.
Goal ENERGY-1.            Pursue energy-efficient technology, best practices, and materials.
   Policy Energy-1.1      The City will encourage new developments to use building orientation and site
                          design that optimizes opportunities for on-site solar generation. The City will
                          encourage new developments to use street and lot orientation and lot
                          dimensions that facilitate the use of solar energy and climatically appropriate
                          design.
   Policy Energy-1.2      The City will encourage new developments to orient as many buildings as
                          possible with the longer axis of the building, also known as the ridge line,
                          oriented east-to-west, in order to maximize the potential for passive solar
                          heating in the winter and to minimize heat gain from the afternoon summer
                          sun.
   Policy Energy-1.3      Shade trees or other appropriate plantings should be used in new lower-density
                          residential development (e.g., trellises) to protect buildings from unwanted
                          solar gain in summer months (see Figure CO-5). Trees and plantings should be
                          located on the east and west sides of each home. Shade trees should be located
                          at an appropriate distance from buildings to provide adequate shading, while
                          reducing potential damage to buildings. Shade trees need to be located so that
                          active and passive solar energy systems are not diminished. Using deciduous
                          trees on the southern side of the structure is encouraged, to allow cooling in the
                          summer and solar gain in winter.
   Policy Energy-1.4      Development plans should demonstrate preservation of solar access for
                          residential buildings within and adjacent to the project. The City will waive this
                          requirement in medium-density and higher-density residential projects and
                          mixed-use projects if needed to achieve the densities allowed by the General
                          Plan.
   Policy Energy-1.5      New buildings should enhance natural ventilation and promote effective use of
                          daylight, to reduce use of energy. Designs should emphasize ventilation
                          strategies such as natural convection and push-pull ventilators. Structures
                          should be designed to provide abundant natural light through high-
                          performance glazing systems, skylights, light ducts, light shelves, and other
                          strategies (see Figure CO-6).
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-24

                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                          Conservation and Open Space Element
Figure CO-5
Shading Orientation
                    Live Oak General Plan
                           CO-25
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
Figure CO-6
Examples of skylights and the use of daylighting in building design
   Policy Energy-1.6      The City will also provide incentives, such as expedited permitting or density
                          bonuses to developers that design and construct net zero energy residential
                          prior to 2020, and commercial and institutional buildings prior to 2030.
   Policy Energy-1.7      New City-owned buildings and major remodels and additions should be
                          designed to achieve the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and
                          Environmental Design (LEED®) certification or better, where funding allows.
                          Financial analysis of both first costs and long-term operational costs should
                          guide the City’s evaluation of LEED certification.
   Policy Energy-1.8      The City will promote Build-it-Green or LEED–Homes certification of new
                          single-family properties.
   Policy Energy-1.9      The City will promote LEED or equivalent certification of multiple-family,
                          commercial, and industrial properties.
   Policy Energy-1.10 The City will provide incentives, such as expedited permitting or density
                          bonuses to development with over 75 percent of the units achieving LEED-
                          certification or equivalent performance standards achieving these performance
                          standards.
   Policy Energy-1.11 The City will encourage energy efficiency audits of existing buildings and help
                          facilitate the implementation of identified efficiency improvements. The City
                          will conduct energy efficiency audits of all City-owned buildings.
   Policy Energy-1.12 The City will encourage the retrofitting of existing buildings throughout Live
                          Oak with energy efficient systems, energy-efficient appliances, insulation,
                          energy-efficient doors and windows, and other elements that conserve
                          resources.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-26

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                        Conservation and Open Space Element
  Policy Energy-1.13 New commercial, institutional, and industrial development should reduce
                       potential urban heat island effect by using U.S. Environmental Protection
                       Agency–ENERGY STAR®-rated roofing materials and light colored paint, using
                       light-colored paving materials for internal roads and parking, and by using
                       shade trees to shade south and west sides of new or renovated buildings, to the
                       greatest extent feasible.
  Policy Energy-1.14 New commercial, institutional, and industrial development shall incorporate
                       shade trees or shade structures in any newly constructed surface parking areas.
                       The minimum requirement is 50 percent shading (at maturity where trees are
                       used) for all new parking lots.
Goal ENERGY-2.         Support the use of renewable energy technologies within the City.
  Policy Energy-2.1    The City will explore the installation of renewable energy systems on City
                       buildings and properties.
  Policy Energy-2.2    New construction or major renovation of commercial and industrial buildings
                       over 10,000 square feet shall incorporate renewable energy generation, where
                       feasible, to provide for the project’s energy needs.
  Policy Energy-2.3    The City will maximize the use of renewable energy in meeting City building
                       energy needs with a goal of 50 percent or more renewable energy by General
                       Plan buildout.
  Policy Energy-2.4    The City will evaluate the operational cost-savings and feasibility of installing
                       solar hot water systems to heat the community swimming pool.
Implementation Program Energy-1
       The City will create permitting-related and other incentives for energy-efficient building
       projects. These should include, but are not be limited to giving projects that exceed Title 24
       Standard by 10 percent or more priority in plan review, priority in processing and field
       inspection services, and density bonuses.
Implementation Program Energy-2
       Amend subdivision standards to ensure that street and lot orientation facilitates buildings that
       incorporate solar design and renewable energy systems. Street and lots shall be designed in a
       way that allows residential lots to accommodate a building’s long axis in an east-west direction.
Implementation Program Energy-3
       The City will amend the zoning and subdivision ordinances to provide regulatory guidance for lot
       and building orientation to allow passive solar and renewable energy systems use.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  CO-27

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
Implementation Program Energy-4
         The City will proactive identify and take advantage, where possible, of state and federal grants,
         low-interest financing, and other funding mechanisms for energy efficiency retrofits and
         alternative energy projects for civic, residential, and commercial buildings.
Implementation Program Energy-5
         The City will allow solar financing programs designed to facilitate the installation of solar energy
         systems on residents’ homes. Such programs would establish a sustainable energy financing
         district and would allow property owners to borrow money from the City to install solar energy
         systems. Property owners would voluntarily participate in the program and would repay the cost
         of the solar energy system over a 20-year period through a special annual tax on their property
         tax bill. Only property owners who participate in the program will pay the sustainable energy
         financing district tax. Non-participants would experience no change in taxes due to the program.
Implementation Program Energy-6
         The City will provide public outreach to support reduced energy consumption, the use of alternative
         and renewable energy sources, green building practices, recycling, and responsible purchasing.
AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
AGRICULTURAL CONTEXT
Live Oak is located in the Sacramento Valley, an area renowned for the quality of its farmland (Figure
CO-7). The City and the surrounding area contain some of the richest soils in California. Additionally,
reliable water supplies and the long growing season make the City’s farmland very productive and
profitable.
Agriculture is a fundamental part of the landscape, economy, and culture of the Live Oak area. Orchards
occur throughout much of the Study Area. Crops such as plums, peaches, apricots, almonds, walnuts,
citrus, and alfalfa provide jobs and income for a number of Live Oak residents and businesses. Farmland
frames the city and provides valued scenic vistas.
Eighty-three percent of Sutter County’s land area is devoted to agricultural production, and the county is
one of the state’s premier agricultural counties. While agricultural production has fallen in many other
counties in California, Sutter County farm production continues to rise. Local agricultural revenues
continue to rise in the county. In 2006, agriculture generated $358,845,200 in revenue for county
farmers and ranchers.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-28

                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           Conservation and Open Space Element
KEY ISSUES
The following key issues relate to agriculture in the Study Area:
   Agriculture is a vital component of the character, economy, history, and culture of Live Oak and
       Sutter County.
   Farmland and other open space around the edges of the community should be protected as the
       City accommodates new growth.
   Land-efficient development practices are needed to avoid unnecessary or premature conversion
       of agricultural lands to urban use.
AGRICULTURAL GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
The following goals and policies are intended to protect agricultural resources.
Goal AGRICULTURAL-1. Preserve agricultural resources and support the practice of farming.
  Policy Agriculture-1.1 Preserve agricultural enterprises by supporting right-to-farm policies.
  Policy Agriculture-1.2 Ensure that residential development in the City is located and designed to be
                          compatible with adjacent, ongoing agricultural activities.
  Policy Agriculture-1.3 As a part of the City’s economic development strategy, the City will focus on
                          efforts to attract industries related to, and supportive of, the local agricultural
                          economy.
  Policy Agriculture-1.4 The City will coordinate with Sutter County in a way that provides mutual
                          benefits regarding establishment of agriculture processing and handling
                          industries in the Study Area that would not adversely affect residents and that
                          could benefit local farm operations.
  Policy Agriculture-1.5 The City will work with farmers, property owners, extensions, agencies, and
                          agricultural organizations to enhance the viability of agricultural uses and
                          activities.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     CO-29


                                 Figure CO-7
                      Farmland Classifications
Live Oak General Plan
       CO-31

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                          Conservation and Open Space Element
Implementation Program Agriculture-1
         The City will adopt and maintain a “right-to-farm” ordinance (or adopt appropriate portions of
         Sutter County’s right-to-farm ordinance) to inform residents of ongoing agricultural practices
         and protect farmers and other agriculture interests from dumping, nuisance complaints, and
         other problems typically associated with new residents living in agricultural areas.
MINERAL AND SOIL RESOURCES
The Study Area does not contain any known mineral resource zones (MRZs). The California Surface
Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA) requires cities to incorporate mapped mineral resource
designations approved by the State Mining and Geology Board in their general plans. SMARA limits new
development in areas with important mineral deposits. Due to lack of MRZs within Live Oak, the General
Plan does not contain a mineral resource map.
The community’s numerous orchards and farms are testament to the quality of Live Oak’s soils. The
Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program of the California Department of Conservation classifies the
majority of the city’s soils as either Prime Farmland or Farmland of Statewide Importance. Soils in the
Live Oak Study Area generally have a low risk of erosion because the city is mostly flat.
MINERAL AND SOIL GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal MINERAL-1.          Protect soil and mineral resources in the Live Oak Study Area consistent
                         with other environmental, social, and economic goals.
    Policy Mineral-1.1   The City will coordinate with the state to incorporate, as necessary, any policies
                         for conservation and possible future extraction of mineral or soil resources of
                         regional or statewide significance.
WATER RESOURCES
WATER CONTEXT
Water is critical to the existence and vitality of any community. Live Oak recognizes the importance of
this resource and seeks to ensure a reliable supply of high quality water for residents, businesses,
agriculture, and ecosystems in the community. The development envisioned in the 2030 General Plan
would result in increased water consumption, and wastewater and stormwater generation.
SURFACE WATER RESOURCES
Sutter County lies within the Feather River watershed, which in turn is located within the Sacramento
River watershed. The most notable hydrologic feature in the Study Area is the Feather River, which
borders the entire eastern boundary of the Study Area. Other notable hydrologic features within the
Study Area are irrigation laterals, canals, and sloughs that are used for water supply and flood control.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-33

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
The Feather River watershed is located in California’s northern Sierra Nevada and encompasses a broad
variety of terrain, climate, historic use, and flora and fauna. It drains 3,222 square miles of land base
from the Sierra Nevada crest westward into the Sacramento River. Elevation ranges from 50 to over
10,000 feet, and annual precipitation varies broadly from more than 70 inches on the wet western
slopes to less that 12 inches on the arid east side. The Plumas National Forest manages over 80 percent
of the watershed, while alluvial valleys are predominantly privately owned and are grazed by livestock.
GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
The Live Oak Study Area lies within the Sacramento Valley groundwater basin. The Sacramento River,
which forms the western border of Sutter County, the Feather River, which forms a portion of the
eastern boundary, and the Bear River, which forms the border in the southeastern part of the county
(between Yuba County and Sutter County), are sources of groundwater recharge for the groundwater
basin. Other sources include deep percolation of precipitation and water applied for agriculture, and
subsurface inflow from adjacent groundwater subbasins within the Sacramento Valley. Groundwater
outflow from Sacramento Valley groundwater basin results from pumping and subsurface outflow to
rivers and adjoining areas of the Sacramento Valley. The Sutter Buttes lie between the Sacramento River
and Feather River in the northern part of the county, and form a barrier to groundwater flow.
In the Study Area, groundwater flows from north to south at a relatively flat gradient. The general
direction of groundwater flow and the depth to groundwater have remained somewhat stable since the
mid 1940s. Groundwater has been measured at a depths ranging from 1 to 5 feet near the west end of
the Study Area, extending to approximately 16 to 20 feet below the surface. To the west of the current
city of Live Oak, groundwater has been encountered at approximately 7.5 feet below the surface.
Detailed information about groundwater recharge sources and about flood protection can be found in
Appendix C, “Background Information, SB 5 General Plan Amendment for 200-Year Flood Protection.”
HYDROLOGY AND WATER QUALITY GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The following goals and policies provide for the conservation and protection of water resources within
the Study Area.
Goal WATER-1.             Maintain and improve groundwater and surface water quality.
    Policy Water-1.1      New development shall incorporate drainage system design that emphasizes
                          infiltration and decentralized treatment (rather than traditional piped
                          approaches that quickly convey stormwater to large centralized treatment
                          facilities), to the greatest extent feasible.
    Policy Water-1.2      Existing swales and sloughs should be preserved, restored, and used for
                          stormwater drainage whenever possible.
    Policy Water-1.3      The City will require developments to use best management and design
                          practices to reduce stormwater runoff levels, improve infiltration to replenish
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                      CO-34

                                                                             LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
                    groundwater sources, and reduce pollutants close to their source. The City will
                    require new development to use permeable surfaces for hardscape wherever
                    possible. Impervious surfaces such as driveways, streets, and parking lots
                    should be interspersed with vegetated areas that allow for infiltration of
                    stormwater. LID techniques, such as rain gardens, filter strips, swales, and
                    other natural drainage strategies, should be used to absorb stormwater, reduce
                    polluted urban runoff, recharge groundwater, and reduce flooding (see Figure
                    CO-8).
   Policy Water-1.4 The City will require development projects to incorporate appropriately scaled
                    stormwater facilities. The City will place emphasis on making these holding
                    areas serve multiple functions, such as soccer fields or passive recreation areas.
Goal WATER-2.       Ensure adequate and efficient long-term water supply.
   Policy Water-2.1 The City will incorporate into its entitlement review process compliance with
                    portions of state law that require demonstration of adequate long-term water
                    supply for large development projects (Senate Bills 610 and 221).
Figure CO-8
Low-Impact Development Examples
   Policy Water-2.2 The City will condition approval of new development on the availability of
                    sufficient water supply, storage, and fire flow (water pressure), per City
                    standards.
   Policy Water-2.3 The City will encourage the use of native, drought-tolerant landscaping
                    throughout the City to conserve water and filter runoff.
   Policy Water-2.4 Native and drought-tolerant landscaping should comprise at least 50 percent of
                    landscapes in commercial and industrial projects and 100 percent of all medians
                    and right-of-way landscaped areas along public streets.
   Policy Water-2.5 The City will require the use of water conservation technologies, such as low-
                    flow toilets, efficient clothes washers, and more efficient water-using industrial
                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                CO-35
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and Open Space Element
                          equipment, in all new construction and retrofitted and substantially remodeled
                          buildings, consistent with building code requirements.
   Policy Water-2.6       The City will support the retrofitting of existing buildings throughout Live Oak
                          with water-saving fixtures.
   Policy Water-2.7       The City will participate in regional groundwater basin planning and regional
                          water-management planning efforts to ensure that future demand for water
                          does not overdraft the groundwater supply.
   Policy Water-2.8       The City will adopt water conservation pricing (e.g., tiered rate structures) to
                          encourage efficient water use.
Implementation Program Water-1
        The City will revise the Public Works Improvement Standards, as necessary, to encourage use of
        natural drainage systems and low impact development principles in order to reduce stormwater
        infrastructure costs and improve water quality. The City will make revisions required to
        emphasize the slowing down and dispersing of stormwater by using existing landscaped swales
        and constructing new swales to convey stormwater runoff, encouraging sheet flow and the use
        of landscaped infiltration basins in planter strips along roadways, and employing other best
        management practices, as appropriate. The City will establish standards and fee programs to
        require and/or provide incentives for methods to slow down and filter stormwater, as outlined
        in this Element. These measures include, but are not limited to, reduced pavement, permeable
        pavement, vegetation that retains and filters stormwater, and the use of drainage sheet flow
        and filtration.
Implementation Program Water-2
        The City will revise landscaping requirements to include drought-tolerant, low-maintenance
        plants.
Implementation Program Water-3
        The City will participate, as appropriate in the Sutter County Groundwater Management Plan to
        ensure perennial sustainable yield and avoidance of overdraft and long-term drawdown within
        and adjacent to the East Butte subbasin, while accommodating land use change as described in
        the 2030 General Plan.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-36
                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           Conservation and Open Space Element
REFERENCES
ARB. 2008a. Attainment Designations. Available: http://www.arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/adm.htm. Accessed
         December 15, 2008.
ARB.       2008b.        Emissions      Inventory.      Available:      http://www.arb.ca.gov/app/emsinv/
         emssumcat_query.php?F_DIV=-4&F_DD=Y&F_YR=2006&F_SEASON=A&SP=2007&F_AREA=CO&F_
         CO=51. Accessed December 15, 2008.
ARB 2008c. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Data. Available: http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/
         data/graph/graph.htm. Accessed December 15, 2008.
Butte Creek Watershed Project 1998. 1998 Butte Creek Watershed Project, Existing Conditions Report.
         Chapter 8, Historical Uses and Cultural Resources. California State University, Chico.
City of Live Oak. 2006 (January). Biological Resources Inventory for the City of Live Oak General Plan
         Update Sutter County, California. Prepared by SCWA Environmental Consultants, Sacramento,
         CA.
California Parks 2005. Sutter Buttes: Maidu’s Spirit Mountain. Excerpt from Sutter Buttes Project:
         Classification and Naming Document, March 2005. California State Parks. Electronic document,
         http://www.parks.ca.gov, accessed January 3, 2006.
Department        of     General     Services     2009.    Green      Building     Standards.       Available:
         <http://www.bsc.ca.gov/prpsd_stds/default.htm> Accessed February 12, 2009.
Kroeber, Alfred L. 1925. Handbook of the Indians of California. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
         78. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Napoli, Donald S. 1997. Live Oak Historic Commercial District. National Register of Historic Places,
         Registration Form, completed August 11, 1997.
Riddell, Francis A. 1978. Maidu and Konkow. In California, edited by R. F. Heizer, pp. 370–386. Handbook
         of North American Indians, Vol. 8. William C. Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institution,
         Washington, D.C.
Sutter     County.      2005.    Sutter    County     Historic     Cemeteries.     Electronic      document,
         http://www.visityubasutter.com/destinations/sc_cemeteries.htm, accessed December 20, 2005.
Wilson, Norman L. and Arlene H. Towne. 1978. Nisenan. In California, edited by R. F. Heizer, pp. 387–
         397. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 8. William C. Sturtevant, general editor.
         Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    CO-37

                                   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                   ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
This Element describes the City’s goals, policies, and implementation programs to address job creation
and other aspects of economic development between the present and 2030. Under California law,
(Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code Section 65000 et seq.) economic development is not a
mandatory element of a general plan. However, under California law, each community may decide the
need for policy direction. Optional general plan elements may be prepared to address issues of
particular local importance.
During the public outreach for this General Plan update, citizens, the General Plan Steering Committee,
and decision makers determined that job generation and other economic development goals are some
of the most important contributors to the local quality of life. The inclusion of this optional Economic
Development Element is a reflection of the high priority of these issues for the community.
KEY ISSUES
A number of key issues guide the content and focus of this Economic Development Element:
   High unemployment. The city has the highest annual average unemployment rate in Sutter County.
    In part, this is a reflection of the predominance of agriculture in the local economy, a sector in which
    seasonal unemployment is high. The city is estimated to have fewer than 1,100 jobs to serve a local
    labor force of 2,700 people.
   Jobs/housing balance. With a jobs/housing balance of 0.48, many employed residents in the city
    commute to job centers as far away as the Sacramento region. In addition to contributing to traffic
    congestion and air quality problems, Live Oak is missing out on tax base that would be available if
    there was more local employment for residents.
   Locational assets. As a business location, Live Oak offers access to the northern California market
    along State Route (SR) 99. However, given the proximity of Yuba City at the junction of SR 99 and SR
    20, as well as the larger cities in Butte County, Live Oak serves primarily a local market. However, it
    has a growing, skilled workforce and would be a suitable location for businesses interested more in
    telecommunications access to their markets than in physical transportation of goods.
   Lack of retail base. An important segment of the tax base is the retail sector, which generates sales
    taxes. In today’s fiscal environment, the sales tax is a critical part of the City’s revenue base. A
    healthy sales tax base is important for maintaining adequate community services. A vibrant and
    diverse commercial sector also contributes to the quality of life in the community and the appeal of
    Live Oak to residents and visitors alike. Live Oak retail businesses are primarily local serving, with
    grocery stores and eating places composing more than 50 percent of retail sales.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                      ED-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Economic Development
    Need to create a downtown core area. The city’s historic downtown, centered primarily on the
     three-block frontage along Broadway between Pennington and Elm, contains historic buildings
     relevant to the City’s past. In and around this existing historic downtown are vacant and
     underutilized properties. Looking beyond the very small historic downtown, the City envisions the
     creation of a vibrant downtown core area that could provide a central gathering place for residents,
     businesses, and visitors. However, the low levels of retail spending in the community and the lack of
     investment in the buildings and other improvements in this area today create challenges for
     redevelopment of the community’s core. As new neighborhoods are created around the edge of the
     community and neighborhood commercial centers are developed to serve these new residential
     areas, it will be particularly important to maintain focus on the function, importance, and quality of
     the emerging downtown core. The City will need to provide many connections to and from the
     newly created downtown area from new neighborhoods. The City will need to increase
     development and activity in and around the downtown core area commensurate with the eventual
     overall size of the community.
    Fiscal condition. The economic development program should be geared to improving the fiscal
     strength of the community, so that City services can be maintained and expanded with population
     growth. The City will need a strategy to attract businesses and structure the development process to
     enhance the tax base and provide a positive net fiscal impact for the community.
CONTEXT
The City of Live Oak envisions substantial growth during the time frame of this General Plan (2030). As
the Sacramento metropolitan area grows, Live Oak will see increased demand for new residential
neighborhoods and business growth. Historically, development in Live Oak has been predominantly
residential, while commercial growth has lagged behind population growth.
In terms of employment-producing industries, the city has a few agricultural processing facilities, but no
major manufacturing industries. The Leo Chesney Center (a minimum security women’s prison) is the
city’s largest employer, followed by the Live Oak Unified School District.
According to the 2000 Census, about 25 percent of the local labor force is employed in professional
services, education, health, and public administration businesses and agencies. An additional 25 percent
of the labor force is employed in manufacturing and distribution, while 25 percent are in farming. The
remaining Live Oak workers are employed in various types of retail and service businesses.
One of the most important objectives of this General Plan is to ensure that economic development
occurs along with residential growth. Economic development is required as the city grows to maintain
and improve the fiscal balance, provide jobs for local workers, and enhance shopping opportunities and
services available to city residents.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                      ED-2

                                                                             LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                    Economic Development
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation programs addressing economic
development. This information is presented according to five major topics, including: downtown and
retail development, business attraction and job development, workforce development, business
retention and expansion, and fiscal improvement.
DOWNTOWN CORE AREA AND RETAIL DEVELOPMENT
Goal ED-1.             Encourage development and redevelopment to create a vibrant commercial
                       and civic center in the City’s downtown core area.
    Policy ED-1.1      The City will promote multiple functions (e.g., retail, entertainment, civic,
                       cultural) that can contribute to the focus and depth of activities in the
                       downtown core area (Figure ED-1).
    Policy ED-1.2      The City will encourage and provide incentives for mixed-use development in
                       the downtown core area that adds nighttime, as well as daytime traffic and
                       activities.
    Policy ED-1.3      The City will encourage multi-story development in the downtown core area in
                       order to increase activity and market strength.
Implementation Program ED-1.1
        The City will conduct a market analysis to determine the appropriate business mix in the
        downtown core area and throughout the community.
Implementation Program ED-1.2
        The City will prepare urban design guidelines or a design manual addressing streetscapes,
        building façades, way-finding signs, and public space to enhance the attractiveness of the
        downtown core area.
Implementation Program ED-1.3
        Following General Plan adoption, the City will comprehensively revise the Zoning Code and
        Public Works Improvement Standards. As a part of this effort, the City will make any necessary
        changes to encourage and incent mixed-use and higher-density development in the downtown
        core area.
Implementation Program ED-1.4
        The City Redevelopment Agency will use authority and funding available under California
        Redevelopment Law to stimulate catalyst projects in the downtown core area.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                  ED-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Economic Development
Figure ED-1
Live Oak Downtown Core Area
                            Live Oak General Plan
                                    ED-4
                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Economic Development
Implementation Program ED-1.5
       The City will explore opportunities with merchants and property owners to implement a main-
       street style approach to revitalization of the downtown core area. If practical, this approach can
       help coordinate business enhancements with design improvements to create a more vibrant
       downtown environment.
Goal ED-2.              Promote retail development in appropriate locations in the city to provide
                        the maximum feasible shopping opportunities for local residents, visitors,
                        and travelers along SR 99.
   Policy ED-2.1        The City will provide for sites of appropriate size and location for neighborhood
                        and community-serving retail centers, phased in accordance with residential
                        growth.
Implementation Program ED-2.1
       The City will prepare marketing materials to demonstrate to targeted retailers the business
       potential, both currently and in the future, of locations in Live Oak.
BUSINESS ATTRACTION AND JOB DEVELOPMENT
Goal ED-3.              Attract and develop new employment uses in Live Oak that can provide jobs
                        for local workers, enhance the City’s tax base, and diversify the local
                        economy.
   Policy ED-3.1        The City will provide for suitable business sites and locations to support a
                        variety of business types, including manufacturing, office development, and
                        visitor-serving businesses.
   Policy ED-3.2        The City will coordinate with Sutter County to ensure a mutual City-County
                        benefit from agricultural processing plants that locate near Live Oak.
   Policy ED-3.3        The City will identify and proactively engage agricultural service businesses that
                        could locate in Live Oak and support nearby agricultural processing and sales.
   Policy ED-3.4        The City will encourage development of lodging and restaurants in Live Oak to
                        better capture the benefit of tourism in the region, particularly as new visitor
                        attractions are developed at Sutter Buttes and along the Feather River.
   Policy ED-3.5        The City will identify creative approaches to funding and constructing
                        necessary infrastructure improvements in advance of business growth and
                        development in the community.
   Policy ED-3.6        The City will target attracting the types of industries that are not only suited to
                        the assets offered by Live Oak’s location, but also industries that will provide
                        viable career ladders for local workers, from entry level through management
                        positions.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                   ED-5

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Economic Development
    Policy ED-3.7         The City will maintain and enhance a strong business climate in the community
                          through a high level of customer service from City departments involved in
                          business development and expansion projects.
Implementation Program ED-3.1
        The City will maintain cooperative working relationships with regional economic development
        partners, including the Yuba-Sutter Economic Development Corporation and other appropriate
        regional entities, to help leverage the City’s limited marketing resources.
Implementation Program ED-3.2
        Following General Plan adoption, the City will develop an economic strategic plan that
        inventories the City’s locational assets, such as access along SR 99 and a diverse workforce, and
        identifies potential target industries. The City will explore business opportunities related to
        specialty food processing, new energy technologies, health care, agricultural services, and other
        potential local growth industries. The City will consider strategies to address wastewater
        demand associated with new industries as a part of the wastewater master plan (see the Public
        Utilities, Services, and Facilities Element).
Implementation Program ED-3.3
        The City will consider establishing funding mechanisms in which residential and mixed-use
        development contribute fair share fees toward the development of facilities and infrastructure
        needed to create a job base for the new resident workforce.
Implementation Program ED-3.4
        The City will develop and publish a one-stop guide using a web-based format or other
        appropriate technology for businesses needing to secure project approvals and permits for new
        development and existing business expansion projects.
Implementation Program ED-3.5
        The City will continue to use the Community Development Block Grant program and other
        economic development funding sources to improve the capacity of sites and infrastructure to
        support economic development.
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
Goal ED-4.                Promote job opportunities in the community that provide sustainable
                          career opportunities for local workers.
    Policy ED-4.1         The City will encourage growth in businesses that provide primary jobs with
                          career ladder opportunities, particularly for workers transitioning from
                          agricultural industries.
    Policy ED-4.2         The City will leverage existing workforce training and job referral services
                          provided by other agencies to help match job opportunities with local workers.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                       ED-6

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        Economic Development
   Policy ED-4.3        New development shall provide a diverse range of housing types to provide
                        residential opportunities for the full range of workers in the community.
Implementation Program ED-4.1
       Following General Plan adoption, the City will prepare an economic strategic plan that provides
       information about skills and occupational requirements of target industries. Action steps of the
       economic development strategic plan should involve necessary education and training to
       provide the local workforce with skills appropriate for target industries.
Implementation Program ED-4.2
       The City will maintain and disseminate at City Hall current contact information for the major job
       training and referral agencies, including the State Employment Development Department, local
       colleges, and private agencies.
Implementation Program ED-4.3
       The City will explore funding sources and partnerships with workforce agencies to conduct a
       survey of the commuter workforce in Live Oak to determine what skills and experience levels
       can be marketed to prospective business targets.
BUSINESS RETENTION AND EXPANSION
Goal ED-5.              Foster growth and expansion among existing businesses in the community
                        as a primary strategy for improving the economic health of the City.
   Policy ED-5.1        The City will engage the business community in preparing an economic
                        development strategy so that growth plans of local business can be anticipated
                        and incorporated.
   Policy ED-5.2        The City will accommodate, wherever possible, the needs of local business
                        expansion, including adequate sites and designs for infrastructure and
                        community facilities.
   Policy ED-5.3        The City will provide timely and effective information to businesses to help
                        them access services and resources needed to pursue expansion plans or
                        maintain stable operations.
Implementation Program ED-5.1
       The City will maintain a business resource guide, with assistance from the Yuba-Sutter Economic
       Development Corporation, to help local businesses network with available agencies that can
       provide assistance for access to capital, workforce training, planning, and other business needs.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                   ED-7
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Economic Development
FISCAL IMPROVEMENT
Goal ED-6.                Attract and develop businesses that will enhance the tax base and provide a
                          positive net fiscal impact for the community.
    Policy ED-6.1         The City’s economic development program should prioritize businesses that
                          will help create a strong tax base for the community, particularly those that
                          generate sales taxes.
    Policy ED-6.2         City fee and funding programs will be structured to ensure that new
                          development pays for its share of the cost of City services and facilities.
    Policy ED-6.3         The City may consider the fiscal impact of proposed projects in its approval
                          process to allow off-setting of fees and/or to establish a priority system for
                          projects.
Implementation Program ED-6.1
        Following General Plan adoption, the City will prepare an economic strategic plan that identifies
        and targets businesses that would have a strong potential to generate sales taxes and/or
        property taxes.
Implementation Program ED-6.2
        The City will evaluate all its fee and assessment programs and make updates to ensure that user
        charges and fees keep pace with rising costs. The City may consider including escalation clauses
        in fee programs and user charges, if appropriate.
Implementation Program ED-6.3
        The City will periodically review its fee and assessment programs to ensure they are reflective of
        the full cost of facilities and services.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                       ED-8

                                PUBLIC UTILITIES, SERVICES,
                                        AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities Element of the General Plan establishes goals, policies, and
implementation programs for planning, financing, and implementing City services, facilities, and utilities.
These include, water, sewer, and drainage. This Element also provides direction for services, facilities,
and utilities provided by other agencies within Live Oak: schools, libraries, and social services. Finally, this
Element includes policies for fire protection and law enforcement, which are currently provided by other
agencies under contract to the City. Delivery of public services requires construction and operation of
facilities and infrastructure to accommodate new development, as well as the maintenance, expansion,
and/or replacement of existing facilities to meet changing needs in developed neighborhoods.
To support the General Plan update, the City embarked on a parallel process to develop and adopt
master plans for water, wastewater, and stormwater management. These master plans will implement
the goals, policies, standards, and programs outlined in this Element, but will also provide more detailed
criteria, standards, phasing, and cost information. Please refer to these master plans for more detailed
information on infrastructure planning consistent with the General Plan. City facilities and utilities are
also subject to the requirements of the City’s Public Works Improvement Standards, which are revised
following General Plan updates to ensure consistency.
Parks and recreation programs are addressed in their own Element. Please refer to the Circulation
Element for information on streets and related infrastructure. The Safety Element contains information
on emergency services and disaster preparedness. For additional information on public utilities, services,
and facilities in Live Oak, please refer to the Public Services and Facilities General Plan Background
Report, under a separate cover, and the Public Utilities and Public Services and Facilities section of the
General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR).
KEY ISSUES
The City faces important issues that include the following:
         Storm drainage and sewer facilities in older parts of town are in need of repair.
         Water quality issues have arisen at the same time the City is expanding utilities to serve new
          growth.
         The wastewater treatment plant has experienced problems caused by high contamination levels
          in the effluent. The City will need to identify financing and phasing strategies for adding
          treatment capacity to serve new growth without affecting the sewer rates of existing residents.
         Live Oak residents are concerned about rising utility rates for water, sewer, and storm drainage,
          and the City should actively seek cost savings through efficiency in public provision and
          interagency funding for needed improvements.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                    PUBLIC-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
         New development must be planned, phased, and financed to pay for itself so it does not
          adversely affect existing quality of public services.
         Barriers, such as Highway 99, the railroad, and a lack of street connectivity were identified by the
          General Plan steering committee as potential issues for emergency response. Therefore,
          emergency service responders should have multiple emergency access points within the city,
          even when Highway 99 is congested, to Live Oak neighborhoods and businesses.
         Increased gang activity, vehicle theft, violent crime, and traffic violations have put new demands
          on law enforcement personnel. Citizens of Live Oak are also feeling the effects of these increased
          criminal activities.
         Residents would benefit from additional social services, including child care facilities, senior
          centers, multicultural centers, a hospital, and other health care facilities.
         City schools are either at, or quickly approaching capacity.
         Existing library facilities are inadequate for projected populations.
PUBLIC SERVICES PLANNING FRAMEWORK
This General Plan anticipates substantial urban development in Live Oak over the next 20 years. The City
has considered carefully in this General Plan the substantial natural resources (water, energy, etc) that
will be devoted to building and maintaining public facilities and utilities over the long term. This Element
highlights the City’s philosophy that these public services should be planned and managed in the most
environmentally and fiscally sustainable, efficient, and socially responsible way possible. To that end, this
Element includes:
         goals for service provision;
         policies and standards used for service expansions, improvements, extensions, and other
          investments;
         general guidance on infrastructure and service planning, phasing, and financing to accommodate
          new development; and,
         programs to maintain and improve quality of public services in the existing developed city.
In particular, for the General Plan time horizon (between present and 2030), this Element establishes:
         how public services will be provided and prioritized;
         how public facilities and utilities are located, designed, and constructed; and,
      how public services will be financed on an ongoing basis.
New development will be managed to ensure adequate public services and to conserve resources
associated with those services (such as water, energy, and natural areas). As described in this Element,
the City will ensure that high quality public facilities and services are provided to new neighborhoods and
existing residents and businesses. The City will actively seek to increase the quality of existing public
services, facilities, and utilities, if needed, to match facilities and service levels in the new growth area.
                                                 Live Oak General Plan
                                                       PUBLIC-2

                                                                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
There are important relationships between this Element and others in the General Plan. Concepts
described here are related to policies in the Conservation and Open Space Element, Land Use Element,
Circulation Element, and Community Character and Design Elements. For example, the City’s approach to
drainage is described here and in the Conservation and Open Space Element. Dual-use parks and
drainage facilities are addressed in this Element, as well as in the Parks and Recreation Element. The
City’s preference for school sites with safe transportation routes is reflected in this Element and in the
Circulation Element.
Rather than try to artificially separate inherently related policies, the City has intentionally provided
some overlap on certain topics addressed in various related Elements. The City has prepared these
polices carefully, to ensure horizontal consistency among General Plan Elements.
Following is contextual information, as well as goals, policies, and implementation programs that address
public services, facilities, and utilities. Service standards are provided, where applicable. These goals and
policies are grouped by topic as follows:
        Water
        Sewer
        Drainage and Flood Protection
        Schools
        Libraries
        Law Enforcement
        Fire Protection
        Social Services
        General Government Services
        Solid Waste Collection
        Private Utilities
WATER
CONTEXT
Water supply for domestic water service and fire flow is supplied from five wells owned and operated by
the City. Pipeline diameters range from two to sixteen inches in diameter (see Figure PUBLIC-1). The City
has a 1.4 million gallon ground level storage tank with a 4,200 gallons per minute (gpm) reliable capacity
booster pump station. The water demand and water production has decreased after meters were
installed on all water services in 2006. The water production in 2007 was 1,492 acre feet. The annual
average demand was 1,015 gpm, and the maximum day plus fire flow demand was 6,769 gpm. The City’s
wells reliably produce 5,855 gpm. Future development anticipated under the General Plan will require
additional water.
Wells 1 through 4, all meet new arsenic standards and meet or exceed standards for other pollutants.
Well 5 is no longer in service. In the Background Report prepared for the General Plan update in 2005,
Well 4 was identified as having odor issues. However, since the implementation of the arsenic removal
program, this is no longer an issue and no more complaints regarding odor have been made to the City.
Future development will require additional water supply, which may need arsenic treatment, additional
storage, and new distribution pipelines to distribute water to the new areas (see Figure PUBLIC-1).
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PUBLIC-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
WATER GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-1.                Provide a safe and reliable water supply and delivery system.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.1 The City will maintain a water master plan that provides for phased, efficient
                              extension of water delivery and water quality infrastructure, including new wells,
                              new pumping and storage capacity, and treatment systems, as necessary, to
                              meet the needs of new development.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.2 The City will maintain and improve water quality according to state and federal
                              standards.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.3 New development shall provide land for wells and other water infrastructure,
                              and shall construct and dedicate water infrastructure as directed by the City.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.4 New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis toward new groundwater
                              wells, water treatment improvements, conveyance facilities, and water supply
                              projects, consistent with the City’s water master plan and City standards.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.5 City approval of new development requires analysis and demonstration of
                              secure and reliable water supply prior to approval. A formal water supply
                              assessment, as defined in California Water Code Sections 10910–10912, will be
                              required as part of City environmental review and project approval for projects
                              that meet the minimum size requirements defined by this state law.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.6 New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis toward City strategies to
                              increase water storage capacity for domestic water supply, back-up emergency
                              supply, and fire flow.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.7 The City will improve water conveyance and fire flow in the existing city to
                              encourage redevelopment, as necessary and as funding is available.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.8 The City will proactively leverage state, regional, and federal funding for water
                              supply and water quality improvements to serve developed areas.
    Policy PUBLIC-1.9 When water delivery improvements are made in areas adjacent to developed
                              areas, the City will identify opportunities for existing developed properties to
                              connect into new City water systems.
                                                  Live Oak General Plan
                                                        PUBLIC-4

                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                         Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                       Figure PUBLIC-1
                      Water System Map
Live Oak General Plan
      PUBLIC-5

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
   Policy PUBLIC-1.10 The City will establish long-term financing mechanisms and phased
                        improvements planning to improve water infrastructure in the existing
                        developed city to induce infill development. The goal of the City’s financing and
                        capital improvements planning will be to fund improvement of water
                        distribution infrastructure in developed city neighborhoods, without increasing
                        service fees for existing customers.
Goal PUBLIC-2.          Ensure reliability of the City’s water supply through water conservation and
                        an efficient water distribution system.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.1 The City will ensure that new groundwater well sites are located where the
                        aquifer is stable enough to avoid long-term drawdown.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.2 The City will explore the use of recycled water from the City’s wastewater
                        treatment plant for landscape irrigation and other appropriate uses.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.3 The City will plan for, and new development shall be consistent with state law
                        requirements for water conservation through the City’s Urban Water
                        Management Plan (California Water Code sections 10630–10656).
   Policy PUBLIC-2.4 New development should install water-conserving appliances and faucets,
                        drought-tolerant landscaping, recycled water systems, and other water
                        conservation improvements and programs, to the greatest extent feasible.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.5 The City will encourage water conservation measures not required by state law,
                        such as recycled water systems.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.6 The City will establish use-based water rates. The City will consider adopting
                        relatively low rates for a basic water allocation, and higher water rates beyond
                        this basic allocation.
   Policy PUBLIC-2.7 The City will provide education to residents and businesses on benefits and
                        methods of water conservation.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-1.1
       The City will adopt a water master plan that is consistent with the 2030 General Plan, to provide
       for phased improvements to meet future needs. The master plan will include an inventory of
       existing development, estimates of future demand within the existing city, and estimates of
       future growth within areas planned for annexation, consistent with the General Plan. The City
       will incorporate analysis from the water master plan into its capital and ongoing fee programs.
       The master plan will identify improvements to serve the needs of new development and will
       also identify any deficiencies in the existing developed city. The master plan will provide a plan
       to address any such deficiencies.
       The master plan will identify potential locations for new well sites where a stable and reliable
       supply should be available, and where City use would not cause long-term drawdown.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  PUBLIC-7

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
          The City will also prepare and adopt an Urban Water Management Plan for water conservation in
          the City, consistent with state law requirements. The City will implement the Urban Water
          Management Plan through enforcement of standards for new growth. The City will identify
          improvements that should be made to the existing City to conserve water and will phase in these
          improvements, as feasible.
          The City will explore opportunities in the water master plan, as well as the Urban Water
          Management Plan, to encourage water conservation measures not required by state law. The City
          will, if feasible, provide incentives that are substantial enough to encourage new and existing
          development to install and use recycled water systems and other water-conserving
          improvements. Incentives could include lower up-front water hookup fees and lower ongoing
          water rates, depending on the extent of water conservation measures included.
          The City will update the water master plan, as necessary, to address growth needs, regulatory
          changes, and water quality issues.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-1.2
          The City will continue the arsenic removal program, as necessary, in order to meet all federal and
          state standards for all groundwater wells in the city. The City will implement a study to investigate
          the need for additional programs for water treatment, monitoring, and cleanup of other
          constituents (pollutants), as necessary. The City will implement a nitrate monitoring program that
          will include periodic monitoring and impose time standards for any cleanup needed.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-1.3
          The City will continue to develop and implement its hydrant valve maintenance program.
SEWER
CONTEXT
The City of Live Oak operates and maintains its own sewer system and wastewater treatment plant
(WWTP). The Live Oak Wastewater Treatment Plant has a capacity of 1.4 million gallons per day (mgd)
average dry weather flow. It provides secondary treatment of raw wastewater through a series of
aerated ponds and lagoons, discharging disinfected effluent to an irrigation drain (Reclamation District
777 Lateral Drain Number 1). Current wastewater flows average 0.70 mgd. The WWTP was issued a
Cease and Desist Order (Order No R5-2004-0097) by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB)
in 2004, due to high contaminant levels in the effluent. A new Cease and Desist Order was issued in
February 2009 that rescinds the previous order, extends the time schedule for complying with Waste
Discharge Requirements (WDR) Order N0 R5-2004-0096 Effluent Limitations B.2 and B.4 for some of the
constituents, and issues new interim effluent limitations. The City designed a new activated sludge
tertiary treatment plant to comply with water quality standards. Because extensive sewer inspection of
the system has not yet been initiated by the City, the physical condition of the existing collection system
is not well known. However, the system experiences excessive inflow and groundwater infiltration (I/I)
and at least some parts of the collection system are in poor condition. Figure PUBLIC-2 illustrates the
City’s wastewater system.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                    PUBLIC-8

      Figure PUBLIC-2
Wastewater System Map

                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
SEWER GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-3.       Use environmental best practices and provide cost effective wastewater
                     collection, conveyance, and treatment systems to serve new and existing
                     portions of the city.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.1 The City will prepare a wastewater master plan that provides for phased,
                     efficient extension of wastewater collection and improvements to wastewater
                     treatment and disposal systems, to meet existing and future needs.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.2 The City will investigate and identify, through the wastewater master plan
                     process, cost-effective options for adding treatment capacity to serve new
                     growth.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.3 New development shall construct and dedicate wastewater collection facilities
                     or pay in-lieu fees, and shall contribute on a fair-share basis to expanding
                     treatment capacity to accommodate new growth anticipated under this
                     General Plan, and as directed by the City’s wastewater master plan.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.4 City sewer connection fees and ongoing sewer rates should be proportionally
                     lower for properties that fund and install recycled water systems and are able to
                     reduce overall wastewater demand.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.5 Expansion of wastewater treatment capacity to serve new growth should be
                     financed and phased to avoid increasing sewer rates for existing residents and
                     businesses.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.6 Wastewater infrastructure extensions will be phased by the City as part of the
                     City’s overall growth. Wastewater infrastructure will generally be provided first
                     to areas directly adjacent to City limits, and then infrastructure will be extended
                     outward.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.7 The City and Redevelopment Agency should ensure collection and wastewater
                     treatment capacity is available for infill development needs. The
                     Redevelopment Agency should consider using redevelopment tax increment
                     funds to help finance infrastructure improvements for infill areas within the
                     redevelopment project area.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.8 The City will identify regional, state, or federal funding and will leverage this
                     funding, as appropriate, to make improvements to the City’s existing
                     wastewater infrastructure in order to encourage infill development.
   Policy PUBLIC-3.9 The City will ensure compliance with state and federal standards for
                     wastewater disposal. Monitoring and reporting programs may be required, as
                     appropriate.
                                        Live Oak General Plan
                                              PUBLIC-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
Implementation Program PUBLIC-3.1
          The City will adopt a wastewater master plan that is consistent with the 2030 General Plan, to
          provide for phased improvements to meet future needs. The master plan will include an
          inventory of existing development, estimates of future demand within the existing city, and
          estimates of future demand within areas planned for annexation. The wastewater master plan
          will provide cost-effective methods for expanding the system to meet future growth needs
          without raising sewer rates in the existing city. The master plan will identify deficiencies in the
          existing developed city that need to be addressed prior to, or in advance of infill development.
          The Wastewater Master Plan will identify improvements and funding required to comply with
          Regional Water Quality Control Board and other applicable state and federal water quality
          standards.
          The City will update the wastewater master plan, as necessary, to address growth needs,
          regulatory changes, technological innovations, and regional plans for wastewater treatment and
          disposal. As part of the wastewater master planning process, the City will identify improvements
          needed to meet applicable state and federal wastewater disposal standards. The City will
          incorporate analysis from the wastewater master plan into its capital and ongoing fee programs.
          The City will examine whether installation of recycled water systems and/or installation of
          drought tolerant landscaping would substantially reduce the costs of wastewater treatment
          plant capacity upgrades and conveyance facilities compared to a scenario that does not use
          these water-saving features. The City will explore opportunities to pass savings related to
          wastewater infrastructure to properties that install and use recycled water and install drought
          tolerant landscaping, as feasible.
DRAINAGE AND FLOOD PROTECTION
CONTEXT
The City mostly has piped systems to convey stormwater runoff, although there are drainage ditches in
certain developed areas. Within the Sphere of Influence and outside City limits, drainage is mainly via
roadside ditches. The Live Oak Slough (Main Canal) is a main drain which collects runoff from Live Oak
and outlying regions and transports the flow downstream to the East Interceptor Canal. Under current
conditions, existing drainage facilities are at maximum capacity during large storm events (Figure
PUBLIC-3). Please refer to the Public Safety Element for more information on flood hazards. Additional
information is included in Appendix C, “Background Information, SB 5 General Plan Amendment for 200-
Year Flood Protection.”
Reclamation District No. 777 provides drainage to the majority of the Live Oak Planning Area (Figure
PUBLIC-4). This district operates Laterals 1, 2, 6, 6A, 14 and the Main Canal in the area in and around
Live Oak. Reclamation District 2056 also provides service to a smaller portion of the Planning Area.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   PUBLIC-12

                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                             Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                           Figure PUBLIC-3
                      Drainage Facility Map
Live Oak General Plan
      PUBLIC-13

                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                       Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                                  Figure PUBLIC-4
            Reclamation District Service Areas
Live Oak General Plan
      PUBLIC-15
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
In addition to piping stormwater, many jurisdictions are considering the benefits of a more holistic
approach to stormwater management. There are many different strategies that work in different
climates and topographic contexts, but two general terms that are frequently used to describe current
thinking in stormwater management are: natural drainage systems (NDS) and low-impact development
(LID).
NDS and LID are stormwater management strategies that maintain or restore the natural hydrologic
functions of a site to achieve natural resource protection objectives and fulfill environmental regulatory
requirements. 1 NDS and LID employ a variety of natural and built features that reduce the rate of
runoff, filter out its pollutants, and facilitate the infiltration of water into the ground. NDS and LID can
mitigate both stormwater quality and quantity impacts of urban development.
Because NDS and LID have a variety of techniques for controlling runoff, designs can be customized
according to local regulatory and resource protection requirements, as well as site constraints. New
development, infill projects, and capital improvement programming can all use NDS and LID.
These systems can be less costly to construct and maintain, compared to a traditional piped system,
while also providing water quality benefits and using stormwater as a community amenity. The City can
decrease the amount of land needed for stormwater detention with designs that slow down and
disperse runoff following a storm event.
Rather than collecting runoff in piped or channelized networks and controlling the flow downstream in a
large stormwater management facility, NDS and LID take a decentralized approach to disperse flows and
manage runoff closer to where it originates. LID incorporates a set of overall site design strategies and
decentralized source control techniques that can be used in buildings, infrastructure, or landscape
design. The goal of moving stormwater away from buildings is combined with strategies to slow down,
disperse, and filter stormwater runoff (see Figure PUBLIC-6). NDS and LID reuse stormwater in rain
gardens, reduces impervious surfaces, and through other means limits the amount or rate of
stormwater entering City systems.
NDS and LID use open, vegetated swales, stormwater cascades, and small wetland ponds instead of
pipes and vaults (see Figure PUBLIC-5). NDS and LID can also be designed to work in tandem with
engineered drainage.
DRAINAGE GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-4.                 Provide storm drainage systems that protect property and public safety and
                               that prevent erosion and flooding.
     Policy PUBLIC-4.1 The City will prepare and maintain a drainage master plan to provide phased
                               extension of drainage infrastructure to serve new growth and address existing
                               deficiencies.
1
   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Unified Facilities Criteria, Design: Low Impact Development Manual. October 25, 2004.
                                                   Live Oak General Plan
                                                          PUBLIC-16
                                                        LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
Figure PUBLIC-5
Roadside Drainage Swale
Figure PUBLIC-6
Planter Strip Stormwater Infiltration
                          Live Oak General Plan
                                PUBLIC-17
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
    Policy PUBLIC-4.2 As part of the master plan and capital improvements planning, the City will set
                              priorities and make repairs to the City’s existing stormwater drainage system.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.3 The City will develop a funding mechanism to improve existing drainage
                              systems and develop new ones in existing City areas that currently lack
                              stormwater drainage infrastructure.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.4 New development shall construct and dedicate facilities for drainage collection,
                              conveyance, and detention, and shall contribute on a fair-share basis to
                              areawide drainage facilities, as directed by the City’s drainage master plan.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.5 Drainage infrastructure will be phased to serve the new growth area.
                              Temporary drainage facilities may be required at some phases of new
                              development, to be replaced by permanent facilities at buildout.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.6 The City will identify regional, state, or federal funding and will leverage this
                              funding, as appropriate, to make improvements to the City’s existing drainage
                              infrastructure to encourage infill development.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.7 The City will explore opportunities in the new growth area to provide oversized
                              stormwater drainage infrastructure that can accommodate both flows from
                              new development and flows from existing city areas that lack the necessary
                              infrastructure. The City or Redevelopment Agency will consider reimbursing
                              new development for these improvements, on a fair-share basis.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.8 During the planning of new development and the installation of drainage
                              infrastructure, appropriate steps shall be taken to avoid increasing any drainage
                              problems in the existing developed city.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.9 The City will include in the drainage master plan and capital improvements
                              planning a program to repair canal levees, where necessary, to prevent
                              overtopping during storm events.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.10 The City will coordinate with the California Department of Transportation
                              (Caltrans) to improve drainage infrastructure and address inter-agency flooding
                              issues.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.11 The City’s drainage master plan will incorporate regional, state, and federal
                              standards and regulations, as appropriate, and will be consistent with
                              Reclamation District 777 and RD 2056 standards, as applicable.
    Policy PUBLIC-4.12 New development shall be designed to control surface runoff discharges to comply
                              with City standards, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit
                              requirements, and Regional Water Quality Control Board standards, as applicable.
                                                 Live Oak General Plan
                                                       PUBLIC-18

                                                                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                        Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
Implementation Program PUBLIC-4.1
       The City will adopt a drainage master plan, consistent with the policy direction in the 2030
       General Plan, to provide for phasing and financing of drainage improvements in the existing
       developed city and in the new growth area.
       The master plan will include an inventory of existing development, estimates of future needs in
       the existing city, and estimates of future growth in the new growth area. The drainage master
       plan will address how to meet future growth needs, if possible, without any rate increases in the
       existing city.
       The drainage master plan will also identify deficiencies and provide for drainage improvements
       in the existing developed city. As part of both the Drainage Master Plan and capital
       improvements planning, the City will set priorities and make repairs to the City’s existing
       stormwater drainage system. Areas in the existing developed city that lack drainage
       infrastructure will take priority in the improvement schedule.
       The City will update the drainage master plan, as necessary, to address growth needs, regulatory
       changes, and technological innovations. The City will incorporate analysis from the wastewater
       master plan into its capital and ongoing fee programs.
Goal PUBLIC-5.          Use best environmental practices in the City’s drainage systems to ensure
                        water quality and take advantage of cost-saving multi-use opportunities.
   Policy PUBLIC-5.1 The City’s drainage master plan will plan and provide for appropriate
                        components of natural drainage systems, which not only can be less costly to
                        construct and maintain compared to a traditional piped system, but also
                        provide water quality benefits and allow stormwater facilities to provide
                        community amenities.
   Policy PUBLIC-5.2 The City’s drainage master plan should incorporate the use of newly
                        constructed, appropriately landscaped drainage swales to filter, slow down, and
                        better convey stormwater runoff.
   Policy PUBLIC-5.3 Existing Reclamation District 777 and Reclamation District 2056 drainage
                        channels should be improved, to the greatest extent feasible, to create more
                        naturalized swales that provide stormwater conveyance. These channels should
                        be restored with native, low-maintenance landscaping to filter stormwater and
                        enhance neighborhood aesthetics.
   Policy PUBLIC-5.4 New single-family residential projects should be designed to allow building
                        drainage to sheet flow across the front yard to be filtered through drainage
                        swales located in the landscaped planter strip between the sidewalk and street,
                        where possible.
   Policy PUBLIC-5.5 Under the City’s drainage master plan, open playfield portions of parks will be
                        used for stormwater detention.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   PUBLIC-19

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
     Policy PUBLIC-5.6 Drainage swales should have adjacent pathways to allow circulation of
                               pedestrians, bicyclists, and stormwater in the same corridor, connecting with
                               parks that are also designed to detain stormwater (see also the Parks and
                               Recreation Element).
     Policy PUBLIC-5.7 The City’s master planning for drainage and for parks and recreation should
                               account for the cost savings of this dual-use application of both park and
                               drainage impact fees.
     Policy PUBLIC-5.8 New development should use low impact development (LID) techniques such
                               as preserving or restoring natural landscape features for drainage, minimizing
                               hard (impervious) surfaces, and using other methods that reduce, recycle, and
                               filter stormwater.2
     Policy PUBLIC-5.9 The City will provide incentives designed to induce the construction of low
                               impact development (LID) designs in development. The City’s reduced drainage
                               fees should be designed to offset additional costs involved in using LID
                               features, if possible.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-5.1
          The City will adopt a drainage master plan, consistent with the policy direction in the 2030
          General Plan, to provide for phasing and financing of drainage improvements in the existing city
          and in the new growth area.
          The City’s drainage master plan will implement natural drainage systems that use newly
          constructed or restored drainage swales to convey stormwater runoff.
          The City’s drainage and parks and recreation planning and fees should account for the cost
          savings of this dual-use application of both park and drainage impact fees. Planning and fees
          should consider savings of low impact development (LID) techniques, where appropriate.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-5.2
          The City will revise the Public Works Improvement Standards (City standards), as necessary, to
          be consistent with the 2030 General Plan. Development projects, instead of being required in
          each case to detain stormwater on-site, will contribute to areawide drainage facilities, as
          directed by the drainage master plan.
          City standards should also be revised to allow the use of larger drainage swales and smaller
          filtration drainage swales within planter strips along streets. The City will consider revising
          standards to allow the use of tracked “Hollywood” driveways for single-family residential
          development, a design that reduces impervious surface and stormwater runoff (see Figure
          PUBLIC-7). City standards for this type of driveway, if they become adopted, must be carefully
          developed to ensure high quality construction of driveways, good drainage, and good
          maintenance of the landscaped area to prevent deterioration and ensure proper function.
2
  For information about LID concepts, please refer to the U.S. EPA’s Web site: http://www.epa.gov/nps/lid/.
                                                   Live Oak General Plan
                                                         PUBLIC-20

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
           Figure PUBLIC-7
           Tracked, or “Hollywood” Driveway.
FLOOD PROTECTION GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Please also refer to the Safety Element of this General Plan for policy on flood protection.
Goal PUBLIC-6.           Protect property and public health through adequate flood protection.
    Policy PUBLIC-6.1 The City will coordinate with ongoing regional efforts to verify and improve flood
                         protection for the Planning Area, consistent with state and federal regulations.
    Policy PUBLIC-6.2 The City will assess fees for new development on a fair-share basis to fund regional
                         flood protection improvements needed to meet state and federal standards.
    Policy PUBLIC-6.3 The City will proactively identify and take advantage of regional, state, and
                         federal funding that may be available for use in flood protection improvements.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-6.1
        The City will continue its participation with the regional flood protection joint powers authority
        addressing the assessment and improvement of levees on the west side of the Feather River to
        meet state and federal standards.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   PUBLIC-21

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
SCHOOLS
CONTEXT
The Live Oak Planning Area is served by the Live Oak Unified School District (LOUSD). There are six
schools in this district: Encinal Elementary School (grades kindergarten through eight [K–8]), Luther
Elementary School (grades K–4), Live Oak Middle School (grades 5–8), Live Oak High School (grades 9–
12), Valley Oak Continuation High School (grades 9–12), and Live Oak Alternative School (grades 1–12)
Figure PUBLIC-8). Encinal Elementary School is located outside the Planning Area and Valley Oak
Continuation High School shares facilities with Live Oak High School. LOUSD uses portable classrooms, as
necessary, to accommodate the overflow of students.
Table PUBLIC-1 below lists each of the LOUSD schools and shows each facility’s capacity and student
enrollment for the 2007–2008 school year. The enrollments and capacities are compared to assess
which schools have available capacity for additional students and which schools may currently be
enrolled beyond capacity, indicating the need for additional school facilities. As shown, three of the five
schools within the District already serve more students than they have the capacity to serve; the other
two schools are have some remaining capacity, although both schools are more than 90 percent filled.
Since LOUSD schools are already overcrowded, this indicates the need for new schools to serve the
existing population; new growth will further increase this need.
                                                             TABLE PUBLIC-1
                           LIVE OAK UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT SCHOOLS ENROLLMENT AND CAPACITY
                                          Enrollment (2007-2008                                       2            Percentage of Capacity
                 School                                        1                  Facility Capacity
                                               School Year)                                                                  Filled
Luther Elementary School                             652                                   610                              106.9%
Encinal Elementary School                             80                                    73                              109.6%
Live Oak Middle School                               561                                   594                               94.4%
Live Oak High School                                 558                                   530                              105.3%
                                3
Live Oak Alternative School                           55                                    60                               91.7%
Notes:
1
    Enrollment information provided by California Department of Education, Educational Demographics Unit, Data Quest – District Level
    Enrollment Reports, prepared December 1, 2008 with data current as of October 15, 2008. http://dq.cde.ca.gov/dataquest/, accessed
    December 1, 2008.
2
    Capacity information provided by Chris Peters, Chief Financial Officer, Live Oak Unified School District. Personal Correspondence, February
    17, 2009.
3
    Includes 26 students enrolled in Live Oak Alternative School and 29 students enrolled in Valley Oak Continuation High School, since
    facilities are shared.
In its future enrollment projections, LOUSD uses a generation factor of 0.5 students per dwelling unit. To
make grade-specific projections possible, LOUSD breaks down this factor for different groups of grades.
The generation factor breaks down to 0.243 students per unit for grades K–5, 0.114 for grades 6–8, and
0.143 for grades 9–12. The LOUSD updates its student generation rates and impact fees periodically, in
order to keep pace with demographic changes.
                                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                                 PUBLIC-22

                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                          Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                                               Figure PUBLIC-8
                      Schools in the Live Oak Planning Area
Live Oak General Plan
      PUBLIC-23
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
SCHOOLS GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-7.                Support high-quality public schools to meet the needs of current and future
                              Live Oak residents.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.1 The City will coordinate with the Live Oak Unified School District to determine
                              appropriate locations for new schools. If possible, schools should be located
                              within Civic Centers and within walking or biking distance of all homes within
                              their attendance boundaries.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.2 The City will coordinate with the Live Oak Unified School District to take
                              advantage of efficiencies available through joint-use arrangements between
                              LOUSD and the City park and recreational facilities and joint-use library
                              facilities.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.3 Joint-use facilities could occur on existing and new school sites, and could be
                              existing or new City-owned facilities, as appropriate. Maintenance
                              responsibilities and costs of joint-use facilities should be shared between the
                              City and LOUSD.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.4 New development shall contribute school development impact fees, construct
                              and dedicate new school facilities, or provide a combination of both, according
                              to state law and LOUSD practices. Development impact fees should be
                              designed to reflect relatively smaller anticipated household sizes (on a per-unit
                              basis) in Small Lot Residential, Medium-Density Residential, and Higher-
                              Density Residential projects, compared to Lower-Density Residential projects.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.5 The City will ensure that areas around planned school sites offer safe and
                              convenient pedestrian and bicycle access from the surrounding neighborhood.
                              New developments shall provide safe routes to and from school sites from
                              surrounding planned neighborhoods.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.6 The City will partner with the Live Oak Unified School District on job training
                              programs, agriculture-oriented education, youth and adult language programs,
                              after school programs, youth summer programs and other mutually-beneficial
                              informal and formal educational and recreational programs.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.7 The City will proactively coordinate with the Live Oak Unified School District in
                              applying for grants and other funding that could be used for development of
                              joint-use facilities, or collaborative educational and recreational programs.
    Policy PUBLIC-7.8 The City will coordinate with the Live Oak Unified School District to offer a
                              youth job shadow program with City employees. The City will encourage local
                              businesses and nonprofit entities to participate in such a program.
                                                   Live Oak General Plan
                                                         PUBLIC-24
                                                                                       LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
Implementation Program PUBLIC-7.1
          The City will involve the Live Oak Unified School District in long-range land use planning and
          review of project proposals. The City and LOUSD should coordinate on guidelines for the
          provision of school sites in new development areas, including site size and configuration, and on
          design of joint-use park and recreational facilities and joint-use library facilities. The City will
          coordinate with Sutter County, which currently collects library fees from development within
          Live Oak, to possibly apply those fees to joint-use facilities at existing or future school sites. The
          City will coordinate with LOUSD on school site location and acquisition as part of the planning
          process for new development proposals. The City will make subdivision map approval
          conditional on payment of mitigation fees for school impacts, on school construction and
          dedication, or on some combination of both methods for meeting developer obligations, as
          applicable.
LIBRARIES
CONTEXT
Live Oak is served by the Sutter County Library system, which has a Main Branch in Yuba City. The Barber
Branch is located in Live Oak at 10321 State Route (SR) 99. This branch is open 20 hours per week,
Monday through Friday (Figure PUBLIC-9).
There are approximately 14,700 items available for public use in the branch, all of which are books and
periodicals. Approximately 5,000 items are checked out from the branch each year. 3 In addition to
these materials, patrons have immediate access to the Sutter County Library’s entire catalog, which
includes over 60,000 items. The Sutter County Library shares circulation with the Sacramento,
Woodland, Folsom, and Colusa County Libraries and materials are delivered daily from those library
systems to each of the Sutter County Library branches. The library also has interlibrary loans with other
regional libraries, so library patrons may also borrow materials not in the Library’s catalog, if needed. 4
In the Barber Branch, there are four computers available for public use, all of which feature both the
library catalog and internet service. The Barber Branch has 1,932 square feet of floor space, which
equates to 0.3 square feet of library floor space per capita.
In addition to access to a large library catalog, the Sutter County Library has educational programs
offered out of the Main Branch in Yuba City. These programs include children’s reading programs, story
times for toddlers, preschoolers, and school age children, teen programs, game nights, book clubs for
pre-teens and adults, community classes during certain times of the year, citizenship classes, and an
adult literacy program. A community meeting space is located at the Main Branch, but due to the
popularity of the adult literacy program, the space is primarily used as a classroom for the program. 5
3
   Arlene Wheeler, Branch Librarian, Sutter County Library Barber Branch, Personal correspondence,
   February 17, 2009.
4
   Roxanna Parker, Director, Sutter County Library, Personal correspondence, December 22, 2008.
5
   Steve Lim, Service Coordinator, Sutter County Library, Personal correspondence, December 22, 2008.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                     PUBLIC-25

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                                                                  Figure PUBLIC-9
                                                                 Library Locations
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                 PUBLIC-26
                                                                                       LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
Due to limited staffing and hours, other library branches are currently not able to provide as many of
these additional services. The Sutter County Library is better able to provide these programs at the Main
Branch, but all Library users may participate in the programs provided out of the Main Branch. Programs
at the Barber Branch are limited to story time, a summer reading program, and tours of the library given
to schools visiting the facility. 6
LIBRARIES GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-8.             Develop library facilities and provide high-quality library services sufficient
                           to accommodate current and future needs of all Live Oak residents.
    Policy PUBLIC-8.1 The City will encourage the Sutter County Library to develop additional library
                           facilities or expand existing facilities in Live Oak, using a guideline of 0.5 square
                           feet of public library facilities per capita.
    Policy PUBLIC-8.2 The City will encourage the Sutter County Library to increase service hours and
                           the library’s collection of books, periodicals, and other media, where feasible.
    Policy PUBLIC-8.3 The City will explore opportunities with the Live Oak Unified School District to
                           develop joint school and community use libraries.
Implementation Program-8.1
        The City will coordinate with the County to identify funding sources for development of new
        library facilities and expansion of existing facilities with a guideline of providing 0.5 square feet
        of public library space per capita as the City grows. The City will coordinate with the County in
        identifying specific standards for levels of service, should the County elect to establish this
        service standard as a part of that General Plan update process. The City will coordinate with the
        Sutter County Library to increase service hours and the library’s collection of books, periodicals,
        and other media, where feasible.
        New public library facilities in should locate within Neighborhood or Civic Centers. The City will
        coordinate with the County (which currently collects library development impact fees) and the
        Live Oak Unified School District on joint-use agreements so that existing library facilities in schools
        can be opened to the public and planned library facilities in new schools can be jointly used,
        maintained, and staffed as a way of helping achieve the 0.5 square feet per capita guideline.
6
  Roxanna Parker, Director, Sutter County Library, Personal correspondence, December 22, 2008.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PUBLIC-27

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CONTEXT
Law enforcement and police protection services for the city of Live Oak are provided by a Sutter County
Sheriff’s Department substation. Live Oak had its own police department until 1980, when the
department was eliminated and the City began contracting with Sutter County for law enforcement
services. There are currently nine law enforcement officers located at the Live Oak substation (Figure
PUBLIC-10). These include one sergeant, one lieutenant, and seven deputies. The Live Oak contract area,
the area served by the Sheriff’s Department under the contract with the City, includes all of the city, as
well as an area outside the City limits that has roughly the same boundaries as the City’s Sphere of
Influence. Specifically, this contract area is bound by the county line to the north, Feather River to the
east, Paseo Road to the south, and Township Road to the west. 7
Currently, Live Oak has an average of 1.05 officers per 1,000 residents (based on Live Oak’s 2008
Department of Finance population estimate of 8,539). As of 2008, the County’s overall staffing ratio was
1.6 officers per 1,000 residents; the Sheriff’s adopted goal is 1.1 officers per 1.000 residents. 8 Therefore,
County staffing exceeds this goal, but staffing within Live Oak falls short of the adopted staffing ratio goal.
In 2006, the Sheriff’s Department had an average response time of 8 minutes 11 seconds for priority 1
calls and 9 minutes 54 seconds for priority 2 calls. The Sheriff’s Department does not currently have an
adopted response time standard. 9
The Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report identified the need for an
expansion of the Sutter County jail facility as a constraint for continuing to provide law enforcement
services in the County. According to the report, in 2007, the jail was consistently near its capacity of 352
inmates. In addition, the report specifically indicated that additional officers and facilities would be
needed to accommodate growth in the City of Live Oak, in order to meet service demands. 10
LAW ENFORCEMENT GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-9.                 Support law enforcement services that protect the health, safety, and
                               welfare of Live Oak residents.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.1 The City will coordinate with the Sutter County Sheriff’s Department to ensure
                               that law enforcement service for Live Oak residents is adequate.
7
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, Page 3.3-2.
8
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, Page 3.3-3.
9
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, Page 3.3-1.
10
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, Page 3.3-2.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PUBLIC-28

                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                            Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                         Figure PUBLIC-10
Law Enforcement Service Areas and Stations

                                                                                          LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                  Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
     Policy PUBLIC-9.2 The City will coordinate with the Sutter County Sheriff’s Department to plan for
                            law enforcement facilities and equipment in Live Oak that keeps pace with
                            growth and development.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.3 The City shall attempt to establish a mechanism to provide funding for
                            additional law enforcement staff, facilities, and equipment needed to serve the
                            needs of new growth. New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis
                            toward improvements for law enforcement necessary to serve new growth.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.4 The City will encourage efficiencies in new or expanded law enforcement
                            facilities in Live Oak through sharing locations with other public service
                            providers.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.5 The City will involve law enforcement officials in review of proposed
                            development projects, and will, as appropriate, make addressing law
                            enforcement recommendations a condition for approval.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.6 The City will require that new development address such principles of Crime
                            Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED) as access and community
                            surveillance, and will explore opportunities to reduce or eliminate design
                            elements in existing development that may promote and/or enable criminal
                            activities. 11
     Policy PUBLIC-9.7 The City will encourage the Sheriff’s Department to implement policing
                            programs that increase police presence within Live Oak and to emphasize more
                            street patrol and traffic enforcement to make residents feel safe and confident.
     Policy PUBLIC-9.8 The City will establish and support community outreach programs aimed at
                            encouraging residents to be proactive in crime prevention in Live Oak. Such
                            programs include neighborhood watch, youth outreach programs, and other
                            community-based programs.
Implementation Program-9.1
          The City will coordinate with the Sutter County Sheriff’s Department on expansion of law
          enforcement facilities and equipment needed to serve new growth. The City’s development
          impact fee structure will provide for appropriate funding for facility expansion.
11
   Crime prevention through environmental design is a strategic approach influencing criminal behavior through
   physical design components that facilitate surveillance by the citizenry and the police (“eyes on the street”),
   create active public spaces, establish boundaries between public and private space, and otherwise enhance
   security and deter crime. Please refer to the following web sites for more information: http://www.cpted-
   watch.com/, http://www.cpted.net/, http://www.cptedtraining.net.
                                             Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                       PUBLIC-31

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
FIRE PROTECTION
CONTEXT
The City of Live Oak contracts with the Sutter County Fire Department to run the Live Oak Fire
Department (LOFD). LOFD provides fire protection services for the entire Live Oak Planning Area and
much of the northern section of the county. LOFD has one station, located in the city, which serves all of
these areas. The Live Oak Fire Station is located within County Service Area F (CSA-F), which includes
two other fire stations, the Sutter Station located in the community of Sutter, and the Oswald-Tudor
Station, located in the rural area south of Yuba City (Figure PUBLIC-11).
In 2005, LOFD’s station had four paid staff, including three career fire lieutenants and one fire apparatus
engineer, as well as 16 volunteers. Sutter County has a minimum staffing standard of one career fire
lieutenant and/or fire apparatus engineer at each station, including the Live Oak Station.
Two fire captains (who are not counted above as part of station staff) collaboratively manage the three
CSA-F stations. The office for one of the captains is located at the LOFD station. Typical call volume for
Live Oak is approximately 100 emergency calls per 1,000 persons. Current call volume is 850 to 1,000
incidents per year. One staffed engine can handle approximately 1,000 calls per year. A maximum
response time of 4 minutes within the city has been suggested by the LOFD as a response time standard.
The Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report reported that the average
response time in the CSA-F area was 7 minute 57 seconds in 2006. However, within Live Oak, the
average response time was less than 5 minutes for the urban areas. 12 The LOFD does not have adopted
response time service standards, but recommends using a four minute maximum response time
standard for planning the locations of future stations within the Live Oak service area. 13
Constraints to fire protection services identified in the Sutter County General Plan Update Technical
Background Report include the increase in calls for service in areas experiencing development and
growth and longer average response times for incidents in rural areas. 14
FIRE PROTECTION GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-10.                Support high-quality and efficient fire protection services for Live Oak
                               residents and businesses.
     Policy PUBLIC-10.1 The City will ensure that fire protection providers have facilities with sufficient
                               capacity, personnel, and equipment to meet growth needs in the City for fire
                               protection and related emergency services, as determined by the City Council
                               and using the following guidelines:
12
   Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, page 3.3-13.
13
   City of Live Oak, Live Oak General Plan Update Background Report, 2006, page PSF-19.
14
   Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, pages 3.3-8 – 3.3-9.
                                                  Live Oak General Plan
                                                        PUBLIC-32

                                            LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                    Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                                 Figure PUBLIC-11
County Fire Service Areas and Live Oak Fire Station

                                                                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                            Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
                            The City’s fire response time guideline is 5 minutes for all incidents within
                             the City of Live Oak. When this response time standard cannot consistently
                             be met, the City will evaluate whether additional fire stations, staff, and/or
                             equipment are necessary to meet the standard.
                            New fire stations will be constructed, as necessary, to achieve an average
                             response time of 4 minutes or less. New development shall set aside land
                             for future fire station locations, as directed by the City.
   Policy PUBLIC-10.2 The City will examine the feasibility of establishing a mechanism to provide
                        funding for additional fire protection staff, facilities, and equipment. New
                        development will contribute development impact fees on a fair-share basis for
                        fire protection facilities and equipment to serve new development areas.
   Policy PUBLIC-10.3 The City will coordinate with the fire protection personnel to review
                        development proposals and ensure projects are planned and designed in a
                        manner that promotes fire safety, provides adequate emergency access, and
                        meets all applicable fire codes.
   Policy PUBLIC-10.4 The City will encourage funding efficiencies in new or expanded fire protection
                        facilities in Live Oak through co-location with other public service providers,
                        such as law enforcement.
Goal PUBLIC-11.         Ensure that adequate infrastructure, water supply, water storage, and
                        water pressure is available for fire flow requirements.
   Policy PUBLIC-11.1 The City will provide adequate water supply, storage, and appropriately-sized
                        distribution pipelines to provide appropriate fire flows and emergency reserve,
                        according to County fire flow standards until such time as the City adopts its
                        own standards.
   Policy PUBLIC-11.2 New development shall provide adequate minimum fire flow pressures and
                        emergency fire reserve capacity, as required by the City, to ensure public safety
                        and protection of property.
   Policy PUBLIC-11.3 Fire sprinklers are required in new industrial, commercial, and multi-family
                        residential developments within the city, and according to state law.
Implementation Program-11.1
       The City will coordinate with the Sutter County Fire Department on expansion of fire protection
       facilities and equipment needed to serve new growth. The City will structure its development
       impact fees to provide appropriate funding of facility expansion to meet the needs of new
       growth.
                                         Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   PUBLIC-35

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
SOCIAL SERVICES
CONTEXT
A range of social services are available to residents of Live Oak and the surrounding areas, as described
below.
The Sutter County Human Services Department serves all of Sutter County, including Live Oak. This
department provides programs intended to prevent or contain infectious disease and to improve public
health. The Department evaluates and treats psychiatric disorders, substance abuse problems, and
general medical problems. The Department also determines eligibility for public assistance programs
and secures and maintains employment for county residents.
Another county social service agency serving Live Oak is the Sutter County Department of Child Support
Services (SCDCSS). SCDCSS exists to provide child support establishment and enforcement services for
children and families in the county. Its services include:
         establishing paternity, child support payments, and medical coverage;
         locating noncustodial parents and their assets to enforce court orders;
         collecting and distributing child and spousal support payments;
         maintaining accounts of payments owed and received; and,
      modifying and enforcing court orders.
Live Oak is also served by the Yuba-Sutter Department of Veterans’ Services. Located in Marysville, the
department is a bi-county agency for which Yuba County acts as a lead agency. The Veterans’ Services
Office helps veterans, their surviving spouses, and dependents obtain benefits by providing information
and assisting them in filing claims with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the California
Department of Veterans Affairs (CDVA).
Many social services are also provided by private entities. These include a senior care facility called Live
Oak Manor. This facility is a privately operated for-profit facility that provides 24-hour care, medical
treatment, housekeeping, dietary services, nursing services, social work services, housing, and activities
for as many as 99 seniors. 15
In addition to this facility, the California Department of Department of Social Services (CDSS) Community
Care Licensing Division keeps records of licensed adult care facilities in the state. Adult residential
facilities provide 24-hour non-medical care for 18- to 59-year old physically, developmentally, and/or
mentally disabled adults who are unable to provide for their own needs. Two facilities are located in Live
oak – one with a capacity for six people and one with capacity for four people. 16
The CDSS Community Care Licensing Division also maintains records of licensed child care facilities.
Family child care centers are those that operate out of a private home, and may serve up to eight
children (in Small Family Child Care Homes) and 14 children (in Large Family Child Care Homes). There
15
   Hospital-data.com, Live Oak Manor, Inc. – Live Oak, CA, Detailed Hospital Profile, http://www.hospital-
   data.com/hospitals/LIVE-OAK-MANOR,_INC.-LIVE-OAK.html, accessed December 22, 2008.
16
   California Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division, Facility Search Data,
   http://www.ccld.ca.gov/docs/ccld_search/ccld_search.aspx, accessed December 22, 2008.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PUBLIC-36

                                                                                        LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
are seven licensed Large Family Child Care Homes in Live Oak. Data for Small Family Child Care Homes
was not provided. Child Care Centers are those facilities that are located in commercial facilities and
may be able to accommodate many more children, depending on staffing levels. In all, the Community
Care Licensing Division has records of five Child Care Centers in Live Oak, including one School Aged
Child Care Center with a capacity of 28, one Infant Center with a capacity of 12, and three Child Care
Centers, with capacities ranging from 18 to 110. 17
Other necessary social services provided in Live Oak include a medical clinic, two dental offices, and a
pharmacy. 18 There are no hospitals located within the city, but nearby hospital facilities include the
Fremont Medical Center in Yuba City, Rideout Medical Center in Marysville, and Biggs Gridley Memorial
Hospital in Gridley. 19
SOCIAL SERVICES GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-12.           Improve the level and quality of social services to address local needs.
      Policy PUBLIC-12.1 The City will coordinate with the County and with nonprofit service agencies to
                          improve child care, day care, senior care, homeless services, and other local
                          needs during General Plan buildout.
      Policy PUBLIC-12.2 The City will coordinate with service providers to ensure that enough sites for
                          social services are available to ensure that such facilities are accessible to all
                          residents, both within the existing developed city and in new growth areas.
      Policy PUBLIC-12.3 The City will encourage the development of facilities required to provide basic
                          social services and to maintain a high standard of living for all Live Oak
                          residents. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, hospitals and other
                          medical facilities, senior centers, child care facilities, gymnasiums, housing and
                          homeless facilities, legal aid offices, and other social services sites (see also the
                          Housing Element for information on transitional housing and other housing
                          related services).
      Policy PUBLIC-12.4 The City will encourage funding efficiencies in developing social service
                          facilities through co-location of social service providers in existing and new
                          facilities.
17
   California Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division, Facility Search Data,
   http://www.ccld.ca.gov/docs/ccld_search/ccld_search.aspx, accessed December 22, 2008.
18
   Live Oak Chamber of Commerce, Services, http://www.liveoakchamber.org/liveoak/services.html, accessed
   December 22, 2008.
19
   Fremont-Rideout Health Group website, http://www.frhg.org/hospital.aspx?id=24, accessed December 22, 2008.
                                            Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                     PUBLIC-37
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
GENERAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
CONTEXT
The City of Live Oak is managed by an elected five-member City Council and appointed City Manager,
who is responsible for managing City operations and carrying out City Council policies. The City operates
five departments, including Finance, Public Works, Community Development, Parks and Recreation, and
Building. In addition, the City operates committees and commissions that aid in City operations that fall
outside of the responsibility of the City departments. These include: the Streets, Lights, and Traffic
Committee; Parks and Recreation Committee; Community Relations Committee; and the Planning
Commission. As mentioned previously, the City contracts with Sutter County for law enforcement and
fire protection services. The City also maintains contracts with private firms for building plan checks and
engineering services. 20
All of the City’s general government services are located at City Hall, 9955 Live Oak Boulevard.
GENERAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-13.                Conveniently located general government facilities.
     Policy PUBLIC 13.1 New general government facilities shall be located either downtown, or within
                               Neighborhood Centers or Civic Centers to place these uses within walking or
                               bicycling distance from homes and in areas where transit facilities will be
                               focused.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-13.1
          The City will coordinate with the Redevelopment Agency to identify appropriate sites for the
          future relocation of City Hall. Other locations appropriate for other necessary general
          government facilities will also be identified. In addition, the City and the redevelopment agency
          will work together to identify possible funding mechanisms with which the new City Hall and
          other government facilities could be developed.
20
   Sutter County Local Agency Formation Commission, City of Live Oak Municipal Service Review and Sphere of
   Influence Update, December 2006, page 10.0-1.
                                                 Live Oak General Plan
                                                       PUBLIC-38

                                                                                       LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
SOLID WASTE
CONTEXT
The Live Oak Planning Area is served by Yuba-Sutter Disposal, Incorporated (YSDI) for solid waste
disposal, recycling, and green waste disposal service.
YSDI has two weekly solid waste collection routes in the City of Live Oak, each of which takes
approximately nine hours to complete. YSDI has two routes for green waste collection in Live Oak. These
green waste routes take a combined total of approximately 15 hours to complete. 21
All of Live Oak’s solid waste is disposed of at the Ostrom Road Landfill near Wheatland. The Ostrom
Road Landfill contains 225 acres of permitted landfill land and can accept up to 3,000 tons of municipal
solid waste per day. The landfill has a total capacity of nearly 42 million cubic yards and an expected
closure date of 2066. 22
As of December 2008, YSDI had 1,947 residential customers and 95 commercial customers in Live Oak.
From October 1, 2007 to September 30, 2008, YSDI collected approximately 3,590 tons of solid waste
from the city of Live Oak, which does not include recycling or green waste. YSDI has no plans for new
facilities to serve Live Oak at this time. 23
SOLID WASTE GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-14.            Provide high-quality solid waste collection services and make use of
                           environmental best practices to reduce the city’s waste stream.
     Policy PUBLIC-14.1 The cost of recycling and yard waste collection shall be substantially less than
                           the same volume of garbage, as appropriate, to encourage recycling and
                           composting of yard waste.
     Policy PUBLIC-14.2 The City will encourage the use of compost in community gardens and other
                           appropriate locations. The City will coordinate with the local solid waste
                           collection provider to implement community or Citywide composting facilities
                           for yard waste collected locally.
     Policy PUBLIC-14.3 The City will comply with state law on solid waste collection and will implement
                           regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board.
     Policy PUBLIC-14.4 The City will pursue funding and grants to help fund solid waste reduction
                           programs.
21
   Terry Bentley, Yuba-Sutter Disposal, Inc., Written Correspondence, March 9, 2009.
22
   California Integrated Waste Management Board, Jurisdiction Landfill Overview: California Waste Stream Profiles,
   www.ciwmb.ca.gov, accessed February 17, 2009.
23
   Terry Bentley, Yuba-Sutter Disposal, Inc., Written Correspondence, March 9, 2009.
                                             Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                      PUBLIC-39

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
     Policy PUBLIC-14.5 Construction and demolition waste from development projects should be
                               recycled or reused to aid in reducing the City’s overall waste stream.
     Policy PUBLIC-14.6 The City will implement recycling education programs for city residents to
                               promote source reduction, recycling, and composting to decrease the City’s
                               waste stream.
Implementation Program-14.1
          City government offices shall implement a program to promote the use of recycled materials
          and “green office” practices in all City facilities, wherever economically feasible. The City will
          encourage the same types of practices in private businesses through education programs.
PRIVATE UTILITIES
CONTEXT
Many necessary services in Live Oak are provided by private utility providers. For example, electricity
and natural gas services are provided by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), and
telecommunications services are provided primarily by AT&T and Comcast for telephone, internet, and
cable television. Other utilities may also provide internet, cable and/or satellite television, and cellular
phone services. These companies are summarized below.
ELECTRICITY & NATURAL GAS
In Live Oak and the entire Planning Area, both electricity and natural gas services, are provided by PG&E.
Major electricity facilities within Live Oak include the Live Oak substation, as well as several main
transmission lines, most of which run alongside major roads within the Planning Area above ground. In
addition to these major aboveground lines, there are smaller three-phased and one-phased
aboveground and below-ground lines that branch off of the major lines and into neighborhoods. 24 See
the Background Report prepared for the Live Oak General Plan Update for a more detailed description
of the locations of these facilities.
In addition to electricity facilities, PG&E also owns and operates natural gas facilities within the Planning
Area, including high pressure gas lines and transmission beneath several major roads. Some of these
facilities are also located beneath several side streets located throughout the City. 25 See the
Background Report prepared for the Live Oak General Plan Update for a more detailed description of
the locations of these facilities.
24
   City of Live Oak, Live Oak General Plan Update Background Report, page PSF-20.
25
   City of Live Oak, Live Oak General Plan Update Background Report, page PSF-20.
                                                 Live Oak General Plan
                                                       PUBLIC-40

                                                                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
OTHER UTILITIES
AT&T provides local and long distance telephone, internet, satellite television, and cellular phone
services to Live Oak and the surrounding areas. Infrastructure necessary to provide these services
including fiber optic lines, above- and below-ground services lines, and internet remote terminals are
located strategically throughout Sutter County. Some services, such as DSL internet, are only available
within a certain distance from this infrastructure. AT&T is in the process of modernizing many of its
older facilities. 26 Other cellular phone service providers in the area include T-Mobile, Verizon, Metro
PCS, Virgin Mobile, and Net 10. Cellular phone towers and underground facilities are located
strategically throughout the County. 27 Cable television is provided by Comcast, which has operates both
above- and below-ground facilities throughout Sutter County and leases some capacity from AT&T’s
fiber optic lines. Comcast repairs and improves facilities as needed. 28 In addition to these providers,
Electric Lightwave, Inc. (ELI) also provides some communication services in Sutter County, including data
communications, point-to-point internet feed, T1 internet access, and long distance voice
communications. Infrastructure includes underground and overhead fiber optic cable and copper cable,
and improvements are made as needed. 29
PRIVATE UTILITIES GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Goal PUBLIC-15.            Coordinate with adequate and efficient private utilities to meet the needs of
                           Live Oak residents for natural gas, electricity, telecommunications, and
                           other utility services.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.1 New development shall accommodate public and private utilities (natural gas,
                           electricity, telecommunications, and other utility services) in rights-of-way and
                           easements, according to City standards.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.2 The City will work with local gas, communications, and electricity providers to
                           maintain and improve current levels of service and to meet future demands and
                           promote the City’s economic development policies.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.3 The City will provide all utility providers the opportunity to participate in the
                           planning process for new development in Live Oak.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.4 The City will encourage active coordination between developers and utility
                           providers in order to ensure that the best possible services are provided to
                           existing and future city residents. Such coordination will also ensure public
                           safety related to existing underground utilities.
26
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, page 3.1-91.
27
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, page 3.1-92.
28
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, page 3.1-91.
29
   Sutter County, Sutter County General Plan Update Technical Background Report, February 2008, page 3.1-92.
                                            Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                     PUBLIC-41

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
 Public Utilities, Services, and Facilities
     Policy PUBLIC-15.5 In new growth areas, new utility infrastructure shall be placed underground
                               wherever possible. Where infrastructure cannot be placed underground, it shall
                               be designed and built to blend as much as possible with the characteristics of
                               the natural and/or created surrounding environment.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.6 The City will coordinate with utility providers to relocate existing utility
                               infrastructure underground during street construction or repair work, infill
                               development, or other infrastructure work.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.7 New utility infrastructure required to serve new development will be funded
                               entirely by those that benefit from new development. Existing residents shall
                               not pay for the extension and development of utility infrastructure necessary to
                               provide services to new development.
     Policy PUBLIC-15.8 The City will encourage and accommodate community renewable energy
                               collection and use, and other renewable energy and energy conservation
                               programs in all new and existing development.
Implementation Program PUBLIC-15.1
          The City will coordinate with private utility providers and Sutter County regarding the expansion
          of electricity, natural gas, and telecommunication facilities needed to serve new growth in Live
          Oak. The City will coordinate with utility companies in identifying efficiencies in serving new
          development and in identifying needs for upgrades for existing utility customers.
                                                  Live Oak General Plan
                                                        PUBLIC-42
                                       PARKS AND RECREATION
                                                                                    ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
This Element describes the park standards, policies, and implementation programs that ensure that the
City’s park and recreational needs are met in the future.
Under state law (Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code Section 65000 et seq.) parks and
recreation is not a mandatory element of a general plan. However, under state law, each community
may prepare optional general plan elements to address issues of particular local importance. During the
public outreach for this General Plan update, citizens, the General Plan Steering Committee, and
decision makers determined that Live Oak’s parkland and recreational programming are fundamental to
achieving goals for the local quality of life. The inclusion of this optional Parks and Recreation Element is
a reflection of the high priority of these issues for the community.
KEY ISSUES
During a series of workshops to determine a vision for the General Plan, residents of Live Oak identified
key issues facing the City of Live Oak. The following issues are related to parks and recreation:
     To create livable neighborhoods and a healthy citizenry, the City will need to provide adequately
         maintained parks and open space and cultural and recreational activities and programs.
     The City does not currently provide adequate park space.
     New development will be required to pay for the additional park and recreational facilities and
         meet the minimum service standards set by the City, but new development will not fix the
         already existing park space deficit.
     In addition to neighborhood and community parks, the community is highly interested in linear
         parkland, which would provide walking and bicycling paths and drinking fountains, benches, and
         other amenities.
     The City and Live Oak Unified School District are leasing facilities from one another for different
         recreational programming. A joint-use strategy for existing and future planned park space and
         recreational facilities could benefit the City and school district alike.
     With the Feather River and Sutter Buttes nearby, Live Oak has the opportunity to position itself
         as a regional center for recreational activities that are tied to these nearby important natural
         resources.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                     PARKS-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Parks and Recreation Element
CONTEXT
In 2009, the City of Live Oak had four parks: Oak Tree Park, Date Street Park, Live Oak Memorial Park,
and Pennington Ranch Park. These parks provide a range of recreational facilities. Oak Tree Park
contains picnic tables, barbecues, and a playground. Date Street Park has a small lawn used as an
informal soccer field, benches, picnic tables, and a playground. Live Oak Memorial Park has basketball
courts, baseball fields, volleyball courts, picnic tables, barbecues, a playground, restrooms, and the Live
Oak Swimming Pool. Pennington Ranch Park is approximately 3.5 acres in size. The majority of park is
grass for activities, but there is also a large play structure, two shelters with picnic tables, swings, two ½
court basketball courts, and benches.
Sutter County owns and operates the Live Oak Park and Recreation Area, which is located approximately
2 miles east of downtown. This facility provides access to the Feather River. The park has overnight
recreational vehicle (RV) parking and picnic, camping, and barbecue facilities. The County charges a day
use fee to use the park.
The City owns and manages the Community Building adjacent to Live Oak Memorial Park and the Boy
Scout Building on Myrtle Street. The Community Building is routinely used for public meetings and other
events. The Boy Scout Building provides a meeting place for community organizations.
Live Oak Parks and Recreation Department provides a variety of recreational programs. These include
youth basketball, youth wrestling, swimming lessons, and fitness programs. Additionally the City hosts a
number of recreational-oriented events throughout the year.
PARKS AND RECREATION FRAMEWORK
The 2030 General Plan establishes the City’s intent to provide high-quality parks and recreational
opportunities within walking distance of each home. The policies and implementation programs in this
Parks and Recreation Element ensure:
     neighborhood facilities that allow convenient access and encourage use;
     different sizes and types of parkland to serve various age groups, activity levels, and recreational
         interests;
     a linear park system that accommodates pedestrian/bicycle recreation throughout the city; and,
     recreational programming that provides children and seniors with a variety of engaging
         activities.
This Element contains goals, policies, and implementation strategies to achieve the above mentioned
components.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                     PARKS-2

                                                                                 LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                 Parks and Recreation Element
PARK TYPES AND STANDARDS
To provide residents with a high level of access to recreational amenities, the new parks will be
dispersed throughout the community and will be connected via the linear park and pedestrian/bicycle
path system. Proposed parks will include a new community park, neighborhood parks, numerous pocket
parks, and an extensive network of linear parkland.
Community Parks: Community parks are large parks that provide recreational facilities for the entire city
(see Figure PARKS-1, “Example Community Park”). A community park is approximately 20 to 30 acres in
area and provides sports fields, community activity buildings (for indoor public events), and recreational
facilities, such as sports courts and other facilities, as local needs dictate. Community parks can also
provide spaces for passive recreation (e.g., walking, picnicking, wildlife observation, reading).
Community parks will be located along the pedestrian/bike path system, but should also provide
vehicular access and some parking. On-street parking should be provided along the perimeter of
community parks to reduce the amount of land within the park that must be devoted to surface parking.
As the name suggests, community parks are designed and outfitted with facilities appropriate to serve
the entire community. Community parks provide venues for sporting or other events attracting
participants and spectators from throughout Live Oak and even provide the opportunity for occasional
regional events. Playfield portions of Community Parks can be designed to provide areas for stormwater
detention and groundwater infiltrations without compromising recreational functions of the parks.
Figure PARKS-1
Example Community Park
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  PARKS-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Parks and Recreation Element
Neighborhood Parks: Neighborhood parks are typically between 3 and 8 acres in area and are located and
designed to serve the surrounding neighborhood (see Figure PARKS-2, “Example Neighborhood Park”). 1
Neighborhood parks have active recreational facilities, such as playground equipment, sports fields, and
sports courts. Neighborhood parks also have passive elements, such as picnic areas, benches, and walking
paths. Open playfield portions of neighborhood parks will be designed for stormwater detention and
infiltration without compromising the quality of the parkland for recreational use. Neighborhood parks can
be designed to meet the needs of an adjacent public school in addition to the broader community. The
City’s intent is to ensure that a neighborhood park is within one-half mile of all residences.
Figure PARKS-2
Example Neighborhood Park
Pocket Parks: Pocket parks are small parks of less than 2 acres in area that provide recreational space
for residents living within one-quarter mile of the park. Pocket parks provide picnic areas, playground
equipment, and small, landscaped areas for passive or active recreational use (see Figure PARKS-3,
“Example Pocket Park”).
1
  Neighborhood parks may be smaller in size if they are located adjacent to a school and school district standards
  warrant a smaller park site for school-related recreational areas and facilities.
                                                Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PARKS-4

                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                  Parks and Recreation Element
Figure PARKS-3
Example Pocket Park
Linear Parks: Linear Parks are long, narrow greenways with a pedestrian/bicycle path. A typical linear
park could range from 20 to 150 feet wide, and would be comprised of low-maintenance landscaping,
lighting, drinking fountains, benches, and other appropriate amenities, in addition to the
pedestrian/bicycle path. If linear parks cross streets or nonresidential areas, the width of the linear park
property may narrow down to the width of the pedestrian/bicycle pathway. Within linear park corridors,
there could also be constructed or restored stormwater management facilities and natural open space
providing some habitat value. Linear parks provide recreational space, could potentially serve drainage
needs, and can be located to provide buffer areas between potentially incompatible uses, such as active
farmland and residential development. Linear parks are strategically located to provide connections to
neighborhood parks, community parks, and other destinations.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                   PARKS-5
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Parks and Recreation Element
PARKS ACREAGE STANDARD
The City’s park standard is 7 acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents. Of the required 7 acres, at least
3.5 acres should be community parks, neighborhood parks, or pocket parks (see definition of these park
types above). Playfield portions for City parks may be designed also to provide stormwater detention,
and this acreage can be counted toward the City’s parkland standard. The City will be flexible with
respect to the distribution of parkland between community parks, neighborhood parks, and pocket
parks, to best meet the changing needs of the community. The desired distribution of parkland is as
follows:
      Community parks (1–2 acres per thousand residents)
      Neighborhood parks (1–2 acres per thousand residents)
      Pocket parks (0.5–1.5 acres per thousand residents)
Up to 3.5 of the 7 required parkland acres can be in linear parks. Corridors alongside linear parkland can
also be designed to accommodate stormwater drainage swales (refer to the Public Facilities and Services
Element and the Open Space Element for more description of the City’s approach to stormwater
management). With these dual-use facilities, the drainageway itself does not count toward the City’s
park acreage standard.
FUTURE PARK NEEDS
This General Plan establishes policy to address the current parkland deficiency for the existing city and
the size and distribution of parkland within new growth areas to meet the City’s standards.
PARK LOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION
The City has identified general locations and sizes for parks on the General Plan Land Use Diagram
(please refer to the Land Use Element). The Land Use Diagram was prepared, in part, to ensure that at
least one park is within one-half mile to one mile of every residence and that most residences are within
one-quarter mile of at least one park. Please also refer to Figure PARKS-4, which depicts the general
location of parks in Live Oak.
A new community park is identified in the southwestern portion of the Planning Area, south of Allen
Street and west of Larkin Road (see the definition above for community parks). Neighborhood and
pocket parks (see definitions above) are distributed throughout residential areas.
To ensure bicycle and pedestrian access, parks should be especially focused in areas with medium- and
higher-density housing, such as Civic Centers and Neighborhood Centers. Focusing parkland and other
destinations near areas with more residents makes it possible for people to walk or bicycle to meet
travel daily needs. Providing more parkland in areas with higher-density housing allows residents of
medium- and higher-density housing, who do not have large private backyards, access to recreation
space. Residents living in small-lot, medium-density, and higher-density housing can trade smaller
private backyard spaces for nearby publicly maintained recreational space. Please refer to the Land Use
Element for more detailed discussion of Centers.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                  PARKS-6

Figure PARKS-4
 Parks Diagram

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                    Parks and Recreation Element
As described in the Circulation Element, a network of pedestrian and bicycle routes will be provided
throughout the city. The network will provide residents with the opportunity for healthy recreational
activities, transportation alternatives, and access to scenic views and natural areas. Linear parks (see the
definition below) will serve a dual role as both a recreational resource and as part of the City’s
stormwater management system. Swales alongside trails can convey stormwater runoff to detention
areas in neighborhood and community parks.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
The goals, policies, and implementation strategies found in this section address the provision, operation,
and maintenance of parks and recreational facilities during the planning horizon of the 2030 General
Plan.
Goal PARKS-1.             Provide a variety of parkland in the existing developed City to meet park
                          standards.
    Policy PARKS-1.1      As funding is available, the City will develop additional parkland to serve the
                          existing City, with a focus on areas lacking adequate park acreage according to
                          City parkland standards.
    Policy PARKS-1.2 The City will proactively seek state and federal funds for parkland acquisition to
                          address deficiencies in the existing City relative to parkland acreage standards.
    Policy PARKS-1.3      The City will explore options with Sutter County to open up access to Live Oak
                          Park and Recreation Area, improve bicycle/pedestrian access to and from the
                          park, and expand and improve this park to meet existing and future needs.
    Policy PARKS-1.4 The City will coordinate with the Live Oak Unified School District to expand
                          joint school and community use and maintenance of park space and facilities at
                          existing schools. As existing schools are expanded or otherwise improved,
                          additional public access to school parkland should be made available to meet
                          City demand for park space.
    Policy PARKS-1.5      The City will seek opportunities to construct linear parks with pedestrian/
                          bicycle pathways that connect homes and destinations and address existing
                          deficiencies relative to the City’s parkland acreage standards.
Goal PARKS-2.             Ensure that accessible, high-quality parkland is planned and developed as
                          the City grows.
    Policy PARKS-2.1 The City’s parks and recreation master plan will direct phased park acquisition
                          and improvements.
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                    PARKS-9

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Parks and Recreation Element
    Policy PARKS-2.2 New developments shall set aside land and dedicate improved, publicly
                          accessible parkland, in locations and amounts dictated by City park standards
                          and the City’s parks and recreation master plan.
    Policy PARKS-2.3 Private recreation facilities may count toward the City’s parkland standards if
                          they are publicly accessible and available for City recreational programming.
    Policy PARKS-2.4 The City may allow new developments to contribute to a park in-lieu-fee
                          program instead of dedicating improved parkland to meet City standards. The
                          park in-lieu-fee program will be used for fair-share funding of parks that serve
                          local, neighborhood, and community-wide needs, as directed by the City.
    Policy PARKS-2.5 The City will encourage multiple uses of the linear park and open space system.
                          These facilities will be designed for recreational, circulation, and stormwater
                          drainage conveyance and detention purposes. The City will structure drainage
                          development impact fees and park in-lieu-fee programs to take into account
                          overlapping purposes of linear parkland and open space.
    Policy PARKS-2.6 The City will collaborate with the school district on planning, financing, and
                          development of new park space adjacent to school sites that would be jointly
                          used by schools and new residential development in the surrounding
                          neighborhood.
    Policy PARKS-2.7      Joint-use school/park facilities should be located in or near Civic Centers to
                          ensure safe routes to and from surrounding neighborhoods.
    Policy PARKS-2.8 New parks will be located and designed to encourage pedestrian and bicycle
                          travel to and from the surrounding neighborhoods.
    Policy PARKS-2.9 Active portions of neighborhood and community parks that may generate light
                          and noise should be located and designed to promote compatibility with the
                          surrounding neighborhood.
Goal PARKS-3.             Provide recreation facilities and programs to accommodate the needs of
                          existing and future residents.
    Policy PARKS-3.1      The City will prepare a parks and recreation master plan to identify recreational
                          facilities standards and planning and funding of recreational facilities
                          development, operations, and maintenance.
    Policy PARKS-3.2 The City will monitor the use of existing recreational facilities and participation
                          in recreational programs to identify local preferences and priorities for
                          recreational facilities development.
    Policy PARKS-3.3      The City will support and promote awareness of volunteer groups and
                          organizations that provide recreation activities for young people, seniors, and
                          disabled persons. Such organizations should have easy and relatively
                          inexpensive access to City recreational facilities, as needed.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                    PARKS-10

                                                                              LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               Parks and Recreation Element
   Policy PARKS-3.4 The City will make efforts to provide recreational programs (e.g., swim lessons,
                        after school programs, teen center activities, senior fitness programs) if such
                        programs are not provided by other organizations within the community.
Goal PARKS-4.           Become a countywide or regional center for recreation.
   Policy PARKS-4.1 The City will proactively coordinate with Sutter County and Yuba City to
                        identify regional park and recreation needs, such as regional parks or trails,
                        which could be planned, jointly funded, and developed in Live Oak.
   Policy PARKS-4.2 The City will coordinate with the other cities and the county to plan for
                        improvements at Live Oak Park and Recreation Area to support and
                        complement future trails along the Feather River.
   Policy PARKS-4.3 The City will coordinate with California State Parks on funding opportunities to
                        support local recreational goals and plan for improvements in Live Oak that
                        would complement any future nearby state parks and recreational lands.
Implementation Program PARKS-1
       Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will prepare and implement a Parks and
       Recreation Master Plan. The Master Plan will provide general guidance for the acquisition and
       improvement of parkland to serve Live Oak during General Plan buildout, consistent with the
       General Plan. The Master Plan will identify general standards for types and sizes of recreational
       facilities to be included in each park type, as well as and planning and funding of facilities
       development, operations, and maintenance.
       The Parks and Recreation Master Plan should consider the needs of all age groups and residents
       with differing abilities. This Master Plan should also be designed to provide for needs and
       preferences of existing and anticipated future residents. The Master Plan should consider
       guidance from state and federal park agencies relative to recreation facilities standards.
       The Master Plan should provide conceptual design ideas for community parks, neighborhood
       parks, pocket parks, and linear parks. Parkland will be designed in coordination with the City’s
       drainage master planning for dual use of linear parkland for stormwater conveyance and
       neighborhood and community parks for detention. The design of neighborhood parks should be
       coordinated with the Live Oak Unified School District to promote joint use. Parks and related
       open space should also be located to take advantage of opportunities for joint benefits in
       recreation and habitat preservation. The Master Plan should take advantage of other joint use,
       dual use, and other efficient use of resources and opportunities for meeting multiple City
       planning and environmental objectives, including buffering between potentially incompatible
       uses. Linear parkland can coincide with agricultural buffers, for example. Neighborhood and
       community parks should be designed to reduce noise and light impacts on nearby residential
       areas. Community parks will have events that may require some amount of surface parking. The
       Master Plan will take into account parking demand for events at planned community parks and
       balance the City’s desire to limit surface parking with the on-street parking needs of the
       surrounding neighborhood.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                PARKS-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Parks and Recreation Element
         This Master Plan will include conceptual cost estimates—both capital and ongoing—for
         development, operation, and maintenance of Live Oak’s park system, recreational facilities, and
         recreational programs. These cost estimates will be integrated into the City’s park in-lieu-fee
         program, operations and maintenance funding programs, and Capital Improvements Program.
         The City will use the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, in part, to identify projects that can be
         the subject of grant applications, or that otherwise can be funded through cooperative regional
         funding arrangements.
         The Recreation Master Plan should be structured to position Live Oak as a regional center for
         parks and recreation facilities. The Master Plan should integrate with County parks and
         recreation planning and link with existing and planned County pedestrian and bicycle routes.
         The Master Plan should integrate with the planning of state parks, including developing bicycle
         access to existing and future state parks and recreation lands.
Implementation Program PARKS-2
         The City will develop and maintain park in-lieu fees at a level adequate to provide parks and
         recreational facilities consistent with standards in the General Plan and the City’s Parks and
         Recreation Master Plan. Park in-lieu fees and dedication requirements will be structured
         according to a metric that reasonably estimates the impact of the proposed development on
         park facilities. Acceptable metrics include the anticipated population of development projects
         according to the anticipated number of proposed bedrooms, in accordance with state law.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                   PARKS-12

                                     PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Public Safety Element contains goals, policies, and implementation measures related to public
safety in the city of Live Oak. The Public Safety Element directs the City to evaluate potential hazards,
develop policies and procedures to avoid hazards, and create adequate emergency responses. The State
General Plan Guidelines require the Public Safety Element to contain analysis of the following issues:
   seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam
    failure;
   subsidence, liquefaction, and other seismic hazards identified on seismic hazard maps;
   slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
   other known geologic hazards;
   flooding; and,
   wildland and urban fires.
In addition to the required topics, the Public Safety Element will also address the handling and transport
of hazardous materials, the control of West Nile virus, crime prevention, and existing evacuation routes.
This Element contains maps of evacuation routes and known seismic or geologic hazards as required by
Government Code Section 65302 (g). Information related to urban fire hazards, including a discussion of
peakload water supply requirements, can be found in the Public Utilities Element. Descriptions of fire
hazard information related to minimum road widths and turnouts requirements are addressed in the
Circulation Element.
Live Oak was a participant in the development of the Sutter County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan and
adopted this plan in 2007. This plan is hereby incorporated by reference. The Sutter County Local Hazard
Mitigation Plan was updated in August 2013.
KEY ISSUES
The City has identified a variety of potential natural and human-caused safety issues. The discussion
focuses on hazardous waste materials and geologic, flood, and fire hazards within the City Planning Area
that have the potential to affect residents of, and property in Live Oak. Some of the more prevalent
issues facing the City include the following:
   Areas are susceptible to localized flooding from the Live Oak Slough.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    PS-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Safety
   An identified seepage/boil area on a County-operated levee poses a flood hazard south of the Live
    Oak Planning Area.
   The Lake Oroville and Lake Shasta dams pose flood hazards.
   Older buildings in the city have inadequate fire detection and abatement systems.
   Potential water flow pressure issues may inhibit fire incidence response in older sections of the City.
   Hazardous waste sites are located within the City planning boundaries.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
SEISMIC HAZARDS
Seismic hazards are geological hazards caused by earthquake activity. The State of California has
identified five major areas of critical seismic concern including:
1.  surface ruptures;
2.   ground shaking;
3.   ground failure;
4.   tsunamis; and,
5.   seiches.
Earthquakes are the primary cause of all seismic hazards. Earthquakes occur on fault lines in the earth’s
crust and vary in intensity, location, magnitude, and duration. An earthquake is the result of a sudden
rupture of built-up energy in the earth’s crust. This rupture or breakage releases energy, moving
outward from the epicenter, in the form of seismic waves. The seismic energy of an earthquake is
greatest at the epicenter of earthquake. The ability of the seismic energy to travel depends on the
underlying geology of an area. Solid or dense materials, such as granite bedrock, do not conduct seismic
waves as well as loose geologic material, such as alluvium.
Live Oak’s geologic context and geographic location increase the risk of certain seismic hazards and
reduce the risk of others. Earthquakes can result in direct hazards or in indirect hazards. Direct hazards
include surface ruptures, fault displacement, and ground shaking. The nearest active fault to the Live
Oak Planning Area is the Cleveland Hills Fault, located at Lake Oroville more than 15 miles away. The lack
of active faults in the Planning Area means that the community faces little to no threat of surface
rupture and fault displacement. On the other hand, the alluvium soils found within the Sacramento
Valley and Planning Area are capable of effectively conducting seismic waves. Ground shaking can occur
at some distance from the epicenter of an earthquake and has historically been the dominant form of
seismic activity affecting the Planning Area.
Geologists use the Modified Mercalli Scale to measure the intensity of ground motion during a seismic
event. The Live Oak vicinity has not experienced ground shaking at a Modified Mercalli Scale level of VII
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     PS-2

                                                                                       LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                        Public Safety
or above, the level at which damage to unreinforced masonry buildings would be expected, during the
period of 1800 through 1996. 1
Indirect seismic hazards include ground failure, tsunamis, seiches, and dam failure. Ground failure
occurs when the stresses in the ground exceed the resistance of earth materials to deformation or
rupture. Instability comes about when stresses are increased by natural or human-made causes, such as
by earthquakes, fills, and ground water withdrawal. Various types of ground failure can occur including
liquefaction, lateral spreading, landslides, differential settlement, subsidence, and erosion. The
liquefaction potential of soils in the Live Oak area is generally moderate, though areas of higher
potential exist in areas parallel to the Feather River. Landslide risks are low because of the low level of
topographical relief in the area. Other hazards related to ground failure, such as differential settlement,
subsidence, and erosion, can be addressed through appropriate soil investigation before construction,
as specified in the City’s goals and policies.
Live Oak is not at risk for tsunamis or seiches based on its inland location and the absence of nearby
large bodies of water. Risks associated with dam failure are addressed in the flood hazards section
below.
FLOOD HAZARDS
The Live Oak Planning Area is vulnerable to four types of floods:
    localized flooding;
    riverine flooding;
    levee failure/overtopping; and,
 dam failure.
High-intensity rainfall is the primary cause of localized flooding. Flooding from weather events
frequently occurs in developed or urbanized areas with large amounts of impervious surfaces or in areas
that have inadequate storm drainage systems. Riverine flooding occurs during or after prolonged
periods of rainfall, or if rain events and snowmelt are combined. The Feather River, which forms the
eastern border of the General Plan Study Area, consists of a large watershed that stretches to the Sierra
Crest. The city’s location in the lower portions of the watershed exposes the community to substantial
risk from riverine flooding. Additionally riverine flooding can overwhelm the integrity of the local or
regional levee system. Levee failure can result if water overtops a levee, if high river levels saturate the
levee banks, or if the levee itself is structurally defective. Levee failure can occur very rapidly with little
warning. Once a levee is breached, floodwaters can inundate large low-lying areas. Levee overtopping or
failure could cause catastrophic flooding in the Planning Area.
Dam failure occurs when a dam is not structurally sound or is unable to withstand damages resulting
from seismic activity. The degree and speed of dam failure depends on the dam’s structural
characteristics. The Planning Area is susceptible to a variety of dam failure hazards. Sutter County has
identified that a catastrophic failure of the Shasta, Oroville, Bullards Bar, and Camp Far West dams
1
   California Division of Mines and Geology. 1996. Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Assessment for the State of
   California. California Department of Conservation, Sacramento, CA. In cooperation with the U.S. Geological
   Survey, Washington, D.C.
                                               Live Oak General Plan
                                                        PS-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Safety
would have a significant impact on Sutter County. Failures of the Oroville and Shasta dams would be
expected to have the most severe consequences on Live Oak.
FLOODPLAIN
The Live Oak General Plan encompasses a relatively flat area. The drainage pattern of the city is split into
two drainage sheds. The majority of the land west of the Southern Pacific Railroad drains south to
Reclamation District (RD) No. 777 drainage canal Lateral No. 1. The land east of the railroad drains south
and is collected in Live Oak Slough, which is the main canal for RD 777. Live Oak is susceptible to
localized flooding by Live Oak Slough, which runs along the east side of the City. The potential for major
flooding in Sutter County, including the Live Oak Planning Area, is primarily a function of the integrity of
the reservoir, levee, and bypass systems that provide flood protection (Figure SAFETY-1).
FLOODPLAIN ISSUES
The primary method of flood control in Sutter County is a system of levees along the Sacramento and
Feather Rivers. There are approximately 280 miles of levees within the County. Both urban and
agricultural areas are protected by these levees. However, recent studies found that some of these
levees did not meet, or were not certified as meeting, the current levee design criteria for protection
against the 200-year flood. As a result, much of the county was considered vulnerable to flooding from
levee failure.
The Sutter County Pilot Feasibility Study (SCPFS), conducted by the Army Corps of Engineers, produced a
plan to provide 200-year flood protection to the major urban areas within the county, pursuant to
Senate Bill (SB) 5 requirements, and to obtain FEMA levee certification. For areas with an existing or
projected (within next 10 years) population of 10,000 or greater, local governments cannot approve new
developments unless the land under review has 200-year flood protection, or efforts are in place to
provide that level of protection by 2025. The Feather River West Levee Project (FRWLP), began
construction of the most critical sections of the existing levees, and is expected to be completed in 2017.
Post-FRWLP mapping based on completion of these improvements shows that the City’s Planning Area is
outside the 200-year floodplain. A complete discussion is provided in Appendix C, “Background
Information, SB 5 General Plan Amendment for 200-Year Flood Protection.”
WILDLAND AND URBAN FIRE HAZARDS
According to the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, the City of Live Oak is located
within an area of low wildland fire risk. Although isolated grass fires do occur within the Planning Area,
the potential for large wildfires is constrained by the City’s relatively flat topography and the lack of
complex fuels. Therefore, wildfire and clearances around proposed structures for wildfire-prone areas is
not relevant, and no addressed in this General Plan. Like other communities in the state, Live Oak
manages urban fire risks by enforcing its development code and municipal ordinance and by contracting
fire suppression services from the Sutter County Fire Department. The City does however contain some
older buildings that present heightened levels of fire risk. These older buildings often have inadequate
fire detection and abatement systems. Additionally, the water systems in the older section of the city
may not provide recommended levels of water flow for fire incidents.
                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                    PS-4

                      Figure SAFETY-1
                      Floodplain Map
Live Oak General Plan
        PS-5

                                                                                       LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                       Public Safety
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous materials are substances that are dangerous to the public’s health and safety if they are
improperly used, stored, transported, or disposed. Hazardous materials include substances known to be
toxic, flammable, explosive, corrosive, infectious, carcinogenic, or radioactive. The most significant
concern regarding hazardous materials releases in Live Oak Planning Area is the presence of SR 99 and
the Union Pacific Railroad in the city. Accidents or spills could release hazardous substances such as
gasoline, diesel, or transported hazardous materials/hazardous wastes. Additionally, data from the
Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board indicates that 10 sites are recorded as containing
leaking underground storage tanks in the City. These sites involve gas, diesel, and waste oil
contamination of soils and water aquifers.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) environmental mapping database indicates that
three hazardous waste sites are in Live Oak. Hazardous waste sites include facilities regulated by EPA
that handle materials that can pose a substantial or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly managed. There are no known hazardous waste disposal sites located
within Live Oak. Yuba-Sutter Disposal Inc. provides hazardous waste disposal programs for the city
residents and businesses. 2
An additional public health concern related to hazardous materials is the potential of agricultural
pesticides to drift onto adjacent residential, civic, and commercial uses during application. This drift can
occur during aerial spraying and applications of orchard fogging pesticides. Buffers, as described in the
Conservation and Open Space Element, are intended to minimize potential conflicts (e.g., pesticide drift)
between urban and agricultural uses.
CRIME PREVENTION
A critical component of public safety is the protection of residents and businesses from crime. Sadly, the
City of Live Oak has experienced a substantial increase in the number of crimes over the last 5 years. In
particular, the incidence of assault, burglary larceny, and vehicle theft has increased. Additionally, gang
related activity has become more common in the community.
The City and the Sheriff’s Office have recently engaged in a community policing strategy where officers
use community interaction and support to help control crime. Community members help police by
reporting crimes, identifying suspects, and keeping their eyes on activities in their neighborhoods. This
change is thought to have led to the public’s willingness to engage the help of law enforcement officers
in conflicts and situations for which people would previously not have called law enforcement.
Additional outreach programs and crime prevention techniques and strategies will be used in the
community to ensure safety within the community.
2
  Please refer to the Safety Background Report and the Hazards and Hazardous Materials Section of the 2030 City
  of Live Oak General Plan EIR (under separate cover) for additional discussion of hazardous materials within the
  community.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                       PS-7

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Safety
WEST NILE VIRUS
A number of mosquito-borne diseases have occurred historically in Sutter County including malaria,
western equine encephalomyelitis, St. Louis encephalitis, and West Nile virus. In recent years, West Nile
virus has posed the most serious public health concern for the Planning Area. The disease can be
potentially deadly to humans and livestock. Twenty-one cases of West Nile virus have occurred in Sutter
County since its discovery in California in 2003 (Sutter County 2007). The regions’ agricultural lands and
numerous areas with standing water provide habitat for the mosquito species that carries the disease.
The City and the Sutter-Yuba Mosquito and Vector Control District (SYMVCD) have attempted to control
West Nile virus by reducing the mosquito population and educating residents on how to protect
themselves. The SYMVCD uses physical, biological, and chemical methods to control mosquito
populations. The SYMVCD also conducts a West Nile virus surveillance program and maintains records of
all identified cases of the disease.
EVACUATION ROUTES
The potential for emergencies related to geologic hazards, flood, fire, and hazardous materials requires
the City to have a planned evacuation route system (see Figure SAFETY-2 “Evacuation Route”).
Evacuation routes will vary depending on the characteristics of the specific hazard event. The specific
location and type of event will determine which evacuation plan will be implemented by the County.
The County’s multi-hazard plan designates planned evacuation routes. In general, SR 99 will be used as
the primary evacuation route for hazard events affecting the Live Oak Planning Area.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAMS
Following are Live Oak’s goals and policies to address existing and future public safety issues.
Goal PS-1.                Design buildings to prevent property damage and injury from hazards.
     Policy PS-1.1        All new buildings in the City shall be built under the seismic requirements of the
                          California Building Code.
     Policy PS-1.2        The City will encourage the retrofitting of older buildings to current safety
                          standards, as specified in locally applicable fire and building codes.
     Policy PS-1.3        New development shall ensure adequate water flow for fire suppression as
                          required by City Public Works Improvement Standards.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PS-8

                      LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                    Public Safety
                              Figure SAFETY-2
                             Evacuation Route
Live Oak General Plan
        PS-9
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Safety
Goal PS-2.          Minimize the loss of life and damage to property caused by flood events.
     Policy PS-2.1  The City will coordinate with the Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency to ensure
                    that flood control facilities protecting Live Oak’s Planning Area from flood risks
                    to the City are well maintained and capable of protecting existing and proposed
                    structures from flooding, in accordance with state law.
     Policy PS-2.2  The City will regulate development within floodplains according to state and
                    federal requirements to minimize human and environmental risks and maintain
                    the City’s eligibility under the National Flood Insurance Program.
     Policy PS-2.3  The City will require evaluation of potential flood hazards before approving
                    development projects.
     Policy PS-2.4  The City will require applicants for development to submit drainage studies that
                    adhere to City stormwater design requirements and incorporate measures from
                    the City’s master drainage plan to prevent on- or off-site flooding.
     Policy PS-2.5  New development shall be required to be consistent with regional flood control
                    improvement efforts. New development shall contribute on a fair-share basis to
                    regional solutions to improve flood protection to meet state and federal
                    standards.
     Policy PS-2.6  The City will use the most current flood hazard and floodplain information from
                    state and federal agencies (such as the State Department of Water Resources,
                    the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the Army Corps of
                    Engineers) as a basis for project review and to guide development in
                    accordance with federal and state regulations.
     Policy PS-2.7  As feasible, new development should incorporate stormwater treatment
                    practices that allow percolation to the underlying aquifer and minimize off-site
                    surface runoff (and therefore flooding).
     Policy PS-2.8  If any project, including the modification of an existing project, falls within the
                    jurisdiction regulated by the Central Valley Flood Protection Board (CVFPB)
                    (e.g., levees, regulated streams, and designated floodways), the City must
                    apply for an encroachment permit from the CVFPB.
Goal PS-3.          Provide for adequate emergency response.
     Policy PS-3.1  The City shall maintain and update the City’s emergency response plan, as
                    needed, and ensure ongoing consistency with the General Plan.
     Policy PS-3.2  The City will add a section to the emergency response plan on railroad safety to
                    address potential releases related to accidents or spills of hazardous
                    substances, such as gasoline, diesel, or transported hazardous
                    materials/hazardous wastes.
                                         Live Oak General Plan
                                                 PS-10

                                                                        LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       Public Safety
   Policy PS-3.3 The City will maintain mutual aid agreements with other agencies in Sutter
                 County.
   Policy PS-3.4 The City will coordinate with the County Office of Emergency Services to
                 identify and establish evacuation routes and operational plans to be used in
                 case of dam failure, flood disaster, and fire. The City will provide relevant
                 outreach to residents and businesses regarding evacuation routes for each
                 hazard type.
   Policy PS-3.5 The City will require development and maintenance of a road system that
                 provides adequate access for emergency equipment.
   Policy PS-3.6 As feasible, locate new essential facilities outside of flood hazard zones,
                 including hospitals and healthcare facilities, emergency shelters, fire stations,
                 emergency response centers and emergency communication facilities.
   Policy PS-3.7 Essential facilities that must be located within flood hazard zones should
                 incorporate feasible site design or building construction features that will
                 minimize flood damage and increase functionality during flooding events.
Goal PS-4.       Protect the community from the harmful effects of hazardous materials.
   Policy PS-4.1 The City, through its discretionary review authority, will assess potential risks
                 associated with hazardous materials used, stored, transported, and disposed,
                 and ensure they are handled in a safe manner and in compliance with local,
                 state, and federal safety standards.
   Policy PS-4.2 The City will require that dumpsites for hazardous materials are cleaned in
                 conformance with applicable federal and state laws before new uses are
                 established.
   Policy PS-4.3 The City will coordinate with appropriate federal, state, and regional agencies
                 to address local sources of groundwater and soil contamination, including
                 underground storage tanks, septic tanks, agriculture, and industrial uses.
   Policy PS-4.4 New development adjacent to areas of ongoing agricultural development
                 outside the City’s Sphere of Influence shall provide agricultural buffers that are
                 adequate to protect future residents from harmful effects of agricultural
                 chemical use (see Conservation and Open Space Element).
   Policy PS-4.5 The City will support efforts to identify and remediate soils and groundwater
                 contaminated with toxic materials, and to identify and eliminate sources
                 contributing to such contamination.
Goal PS-5.       Improve community safety and reduce opportunities for criminal activity.
   Policy PS-5.1 New development shall be designed to maximize surveillance through physical
                 design features, including, but not limited to, fronting buildings onto all parks
                                     Live Oak General Plan
                                             PS-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Public Safety
                          and other public spaces, visible entryways from surrounding structures and
                          businesses; well-defined and visible walkways and gates; well-lighted
                          driveways, walkways, and exteriors; and landscaping that preserves or
                          enhances visibility.
    Policy PS-5.2         The City will ensure that public areas and amenities such as transit stops,
                          sidewalks, plazas, parks, trails, and pedestrian/bicycle paths are appropriately
                          lighted, free of hiding places, and frequently patrolled.
     Policy PS-5.3        The City will attempt to reduce criminal activity through educational efforts
                          that focus on crime prevention by conducting community education programs.
     Policy PS-5.4        The City will involve neighborhoods in crime prevention, disaster preparedness,
                          citizen volunteer police services and shelter management through the
                          establishment of neighborhood watch programs.
Implementation Program PS-1
         The City will continue its participation with the regional flood protection joint powers authority
         addressing the assessment and improvement of levees on the west side of the Feather River to
         meet federal and state standards. The City will implement development impact fees to provide
         for necessary levee studies and improvement programs in coordination with the regional flood
         control joint powers authority. The City will proactively identify and take advantage of federal,
         state, and regional funding that may be available for use in flood protection improvements.
Implementation Program PS-3
         Consistent with state law, the City will consult with the Central Valley Flood Protection Board
         and local flood protection agencies serving the Planning Area, to obtain updated floodway and
         floodplain maps, data, and policies. When this information is available, if necessary, the City will
         update the General Plan and revise all applicable development standards, including the zoning
         code. Subdivision approvals, development agreements, permits, and other City entitlements will
         incorporate these revised City policies and regulations.
Implementation Program PS-4
         If necessary, the City will update the General Plan to incorporate 200-year floodplain mapping
         from the California Department of Water Resources and Central Valley Flood Protection Board,
         once available.
Implementation Program PS-5
         In review of new development projects, require disclosure of risk where proposed development
         would occur in flood risk areas. This disclosure may include notifying new residents in these
         areas and encouraging purchase of appropriate insurance.
Implementation Program PS-6
         The City will ensure proper training to emergency services staff, periodic equipment testing, and
         assessment of disaster preparedness. The City will provide opportunities for emergency
         preparedness training to interested members of the public and City personnel. The City will
         provide public access to emergency plans in areas such as City Hall, libraries, and schools.
                                              Live Oak General Plan
                                                      PS-12
                                                                            LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Public Safety
Implementation Program PS-7
      The City will adopt and implement a fire sprinkler ordinance to provide protection and to
      promote fire safety in older at-risk buildings.
Implementation Program PS-8
      The City will establish a public education campaign that encourages owners of older buildings to
      retrofit these structures to current safety standards, as specified in the California Building
      Standards Commission uniform codes, such as the California Fire Code and California Building
      Code.
                                          Live Oak General Plan
                                                  PS-13
                                                              NOISE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element provides comprehensive goals, policies and programs to control and abate
environmental noise and to protect the citizens of Live Oak from excessive noise exposure. The Noise
Element is intended to:
      provide sufficient information so that noise may be effectively considered in the land use
        planning process;
      develop strategies for abating excessive noise exposure through cost-effective mitigation
        measures in combination with appropriate zoning to avoid incompatible land uses;
      protect areas where noise levels are acceptable and noise sensitive areas from excessive noise;
      protect existing noise-producing agricultural, commercial, and industrial uses from
        encroachment by noise-sensitive land uses; and,
      provide guidance for the City in balancing goals for the community’s noise environment with
        other environmental goals, economic and social goals, and goals for fiscal sustainability and
        balanced urban development, including redevelopment and revitalization.
California Government Code Section 65302(f), the “Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise
Elements of the General Plan” and other state guidelines, specify both the contents of a Noise Element
and the methods used in its preparation. As adopted, the Office of Noise Control Guidelines require that
certain major noise sources and areas containing noise-sensitive land uses be identified and quantified
by preparing generalized noise exposure contours for current and projected levels of activity within the
community.
KEY ISSUES
The following noise-related key issues inform this element:
      The primary sources of noise in the Live Oak Planning Area are State Route (SR) 99 and other
        roadways, industrial operations, agricultural activities, and Union Pacific Railroad operations.
      Noise-sensitive land uses in the community include residences, parks, schools, and medical and
        other health care facilities.
      The City has the opportunity in planning for substantial long-term growth to avoid conflicts
        relative to noise through thoughtful land use and transportation planning.
                                           Live Oak General Plan
                                                  NOISE-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Noise Element
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Noise is commonly defined as unwanted sound. At high enough levels, noise can become a serious
community health problem. As a form of environmental stress, noise can interfere with human activities
such as sleep, conversation, recreation, and tasks demanding concentration.
Examples of major noise sources existing within the city of Live Oak include:
        Highway 99;
        major local streets;
        railroad operations;
        aircraft overflight; and,
        local industrial facilities.
State law requires noise-sensitive areas to be considered in the Noise Element. The 2030 General Plan
addresses noise relative to such noise-sensitive land uses as:
        residential areas;
        schools;
        hospitals and other medical facilities; and,
        rest homes.
For a detailed background on the existing noise environment in Live Oak and for information on basic
acoustics, please refer to the General Plan Noise Technical Background Report and the “Noise” section
of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report, which are incorporated by reference. Noise contour
maps are provided in these documents, in addition to other background information.
NOISE FRAMEWORK
In the General Plan Noise Technical Background Report (under separate cover), the City identified
important sources of noise in the existing community, which include industrial sources and
transportation routes. Some of these noise sources affect surrounding uses. The policies and programs
contained in the 2030 General Plan attempt to avoid the planning mistakes of the past. For example, the
City will use a network of connected, smaller-volume roadways that disperse traffic and therefore lower
noise along such roadways. The City will:
     use buffers to separate residential uses from large-volume roadways and the railroad;
     design noise generating industrial and commercial uses to avoid impacts on noise-sensitive
         receptors; and,
     implement technologies for quieter railroad crossings.
These approaches are referenced in this Element, as well as the Land Use, Circulation, and Community
Character and Design Elements. Overall, the City wishes to plan intelligently in order to reduce
substantial noise conflicts and avoid the need for soundwalls and other reactive fixes that create
unnecessary barriers and prohibit community connectivity and cohesiveness.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                    NOISE-2

                                                                                  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                Noise Element
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Following is a description of Live Oak’s goals, policies, and implementation programs to address existing
and future noise issues.
GOAL NOISE-1.            Create land use patterns and transportation networks that minimize noise
                         problems.
    Policy NOISE-1.1     New development shall disperse vehicular traffic onto a network of fully
                         connected smaller roadways, where feasible, and minimize funneling of local
                         traffic onto large-volume, high-speed roadways located within or adjacent to
                         neighborhoods.
    Policy NOISE-1.2     New development of noise-sensitive land uses in areas exposed to existing or
                         projected levels of noise from transportation, stationary sources, or agricultural
                         operations exceeding, or estimated to exceed, levels specified in Table NOISE-1
                         and NOISE-2 shall implement site planning techniques and/or feasible
                         mitigation shown to reduce noise exposure in outdoor activity areas and
                         interior spaces to the levels specified in Table NOISE-1 and NOISE-2.
                         Techniques can include dispersing traffic, traffic calming, site planning,
                         buffering, sound insulation, or other methods approved by the City.
    Policy NOISE-1.3     Proposed noise-generating industrial and other land uses shall be located away
                         from noise-sensitive land uses, shall enclose any substantial noise sources
                         completely within buildings or structures, or use other site planning or
                         mitigation techniques to achieve the standards established in this Noise
                         Element (see Table NOISE-2).
    Policy NOISE-1.4     Soundwalls are discouraged as a method for reducing noise exposure that could
                         be addressed through other means.
    Policy NOISE-1.5     The City will require buffers between proposed residences and ongoing
                         agricultural operations outside of the Sphere of Influence to reduce noise
                         exposure.
    Policy NOISE-1.6     In general, the newest land use is responsible for mitigating noise. If a use that
                         generates noise is proposed adjacent to lands zoned for uses that may be
                         sensitive to noise (i.e., residential neighborhoods), then the noise-generating
                         use is responsible for mitigating noise consistent with Table NOISE-2 standards
                         at the property line of the generating use.
                                             Live Oak General Plan
                                                     NOISE-3

  LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
  Noise Element
                                                                TABLE NOISE-1
     MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE FROM TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES AT NOISE-SENSITIVE LAND USES
                                                                                           Outdoor Activity Areas (dBA Ldn)
                                               Interior Spaces
               Land Use                                                          55         60          65         70          75      80
                                            dBA Ldn         dBA Leq
Residences                                     45               -
Hotels, Motels                                 45               -
Schools, Libraries, Museums,
Places of Worship, Hospitals,                  45              45
Nursing Homes
Theaters, Auditoriums, Concert
                                               35               -
Halls, Amphitheaters
Outdoor Spectator Sports                        -               -
Playgrounds, Parks                              -               -
Golf Courses Riding Stables,
                                                -               -
Water Recreation, Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Retail, and
                                               45               -
Commercial Services
Industrial, Manufacturing,
                                                -               -
Utilities, Agriculture
                Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings
                involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise requirements.
                Conditionally Acceptable – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a
                detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features
                included in the design.
                Normally Unacceptable – New construction or development should be discouraged. If new
                construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirement
                must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
                Clearly Unacceptable – New construction or development clearly should not be undertaken.
Notes: dBA = A-weighted decibels; Ldn = day-night average noise level; Leq = energy-equivalent noise level. This table does not apply to existing
transportation noise sources affecting existing land uses. Outdoor activity areas are the portion of a property where activities are normally
expected. This would include portions of backyards, decks, balconies, pools, sports or game courts, and patios, but would not include front yards,
spaces next to parking, roads, driveways, or vehicular loading areas. Hospitals and nursing homes use the Ldn interior standard, whereas schools,
libraries, museums, and places of worship use a Leq interior standard. Office buildings have an interior standard, but retail and commercial service
uses do not have an interior standard.
Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research 2003 General Plan Guidelines.
                                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                                    NOISE-4

                                                                                                               LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                 Noise Element
                                                               TABLE NOISE-2
                     MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE FROM NONTRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                                                      AT NOISE-SENSITIVE LAND USES
          Noise Level Descriptor                      Daytime (7 a.m.–10 p.m.)                         Nighttime (10 p.m.–7 a.m.)
                 Hourly Leq                                      60 dBA                                             45 dBA
                     Lmax                                        75 dBA                                             65 dBA
Notes:
dBA = A-weighted decibel; Leq = energy-equivalent noise level; Lmax = maximum noise level.
Each of the noise levels specified shall be lowered by 5 dBA for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech, music, or for recurring
impulsive noises. These noise-level standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses
(e.g., caretaker dwellings). Noise-sensitive land uses include schools, hospitals, rest homes, long-term care, mental care facilities, residences,
and other similar land uses. Outdoor activity areas are defined in Table Noise-1. Where development projects or roadway improvement
projects could potentially create noise impacts, an acoustical analysis shall be required as part of the environmental review process so that
noise mitigation may be included in the project design. Such analysis shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant and be prepared by a
qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics. Mitigation strategies shall emphasize
site planning and design over other types of mitigation.
GOAL NOISE-2.                     Minimize noise impacts associated with development projects and other
                                  land use changes.
       Policy NOISE-2.1           Developments that generate traffic shall be designed, and if necessary,
                                  mitigated to ensure acceptable daytime and nighttime land use/noise
                                  environment at outdoor activity areas according to the standards presented in
                                  Table NOISE-1 for transportation related noise. If existing noise levels exceed
                                  the acceptable levels listed in Table NOISE-1 at affected outdoor gathering
                                  spaces of noise sensitive land uses, projects are required to incorporate
                                  mitigation to reduce noise exposure in outdoor activity areas to the maximum
                                  extent feasible and to include feasible mitigation for interior spaces to achieve
                                  the levels specified in Table NOISE-1 and NOISE-2.
       Policy NOISE-2.2           Developments that generate, or are affected by, noise related to anything
                                  other than transportation shall be designed and, if necessary, mitigated below
                                  maximum allowable levels specified in Table NOISE-2, as measured at outdoor
                                  activity areas of existing and planned noise-sensitive land uses. If existing noise
                                  levels exceed the maximum allowable levels listed in Table NOISE-2, as
                                  measured at outdoor activity areas of noise sensitive land uses, projects are
                                  required to incorporate mitigation to reduce noise exposure in outdoor activity
                                  areas to the maximum extent feasible and to include feasible mitigation for
                                  interior spaces to achieve the levels specified in Table NOISE-1 and NOISE-2.
       Policy NOISE-2.3           The maximum noise level resulting from new sources and ambient noise shall
                                  not exceed the performance standards in Table NOISE-3, as measured at
                                  outdoor activity areas of any affected noise sensitive land use except:
                                   If the ambient noise level exceeds the standard in Table NOISE-3, the standard
                                         becomes the ambient level plus 5 dBA.
                                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                                    NOISE-5

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Noise Element
                                    Reduce the applicable standards in Table NOISE-3 by 5 decibels if they exceed
                                        the ambient level by 10 or more dBA.
                                    The City will exempt all school related events and City sponsored events from
                                        noise standards outlined in this chapter. Events that are not included in these
                                        two categories may apply for an exemption.
      Policy NOISE-2.4             New development shall provide all feasible noise mitigation to reduce construction
                                   and other short-term noise and vibration impacts as a condition of approval.
      Policy NOISE-2.5             New development shall ensure that construction equipment is properly
                                   maintained and equipped with noise control, such as mufflers, in accordance
                                   with manufacturers’ specifications.
      Policy NOISE-2.6             Any new noise- or vibration-sensitive receptor proposed within 100 feet of the
                                   railroad tracks shall be required to undergo a vibration analysis and identify
                                   feasible mitigation, as appropriate, prior to project approval.
                                                               TABLE NOISE-3
                      NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NONTRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                                                                                     Maximum Exterior Noise Level Standards2
       Cumulative Duration of a Noise Event1 (Minutes)
                                                                            Daytime dBA Lmax2,4                   Nighttime dBA Lmax3,4
                                30–60                                                    50                                    45
                                15–30                                                    55                                    50
                                 5–15                                                    60                                    55
                                  1–5                                                    65                                    60
                                  0–1                                                    70                                    65
Notes:
dBA = A-weighted decibel; Lmax = maximum noise level.
1
  Cumulative duration refers to time within any 1-hour period.
2
  Daytime = hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
3
  Nighttime = hours between 10:00p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
4
  Each of the noise level standards specified may be reduced by 5 dBA for tonal noise (i.e., a signal which has a particular and unusual pitch) or
  for noises consisting primarily of speech of for recurring impulsive noises (i.e., sounds of short duration, usually less than one second, with
  an abrupt onset and rapid decay such as the discharge of firearms).
Implementation Program NOISE-1
            Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will review the noise regulations in the
            Municipal Code and make revisions necessary to conform to this Noise Element. The City will
            consider permitting for special events. Applicants for the permit should provide a detailed
            outline of the event including hours of operation, why the additional noise is acceptable in their
            case, and how they plan to reduce noise to the lowest possible level.
                                                            Live Oak General Plan
                                                                     NOISE-6

                                                                            LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                          Noise Element
Implementation Program NOISE-2
      The City will ensure that personnel charged with enforcing such ordinances are properly trained
      and equipped for on-site measurement techniques and other necessary tasks. Enforcing
      personnel shall use a properly calibrated Type-II or better sound-level meter (or equivalent
      future technology) for situations that require a numerical measurement. The measuring
      instrument shall be placed at 4.5 to 6 feet above the ground on the property boundary in
      question. The measurement shall be taken in A-weighted decibels and measured for no less
      than 15 minutes.
Implementation Program NOISE-3
      The City will coordinate with Sutter County and the California Department of Transportation to
      ensure transportation planning and improvement programs are consistent with this Noise
      Element.
Implementation Program NOISE-4
      The City will coordinate with Union Pacific Railroad with the goal of establishing a Quiet Zone
      within the city limits of Live Oak, as feasible. As funding is available, the City will improve
      crossings with appropriate technologies to implement the Quiet Zone. The City will seek the
      cooperation of Union Pacific Railroad to reduce or eliminate the use of horns in noise sensitive
      areas of the community by installing alternative sounding devices.
                                        Live Oak General Plan
                                               NOISE-7
                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
This section describes the City of Live Oak’s goals, objectives, and programs regarding the provisions of
safe, adequate housing for residents. The primary housing goal of the City of Live Oak is to: 1
          Promote the construction of a variety of housing types that meet safe standards with minimal
          environmental impact and provide a choice location, preserve existing neighborhoods, and have
          adequate public services for the residents of the City of Live Oak.
To satisfy this goal, this Housing Element addresses the following policy areas:
A.   Adequate Sites for Affordable Housing
B.   Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing
C.   Conserve and Improve the Existing Housing Stock
D.   Preserve Units At-Risk of Conversion
E.   Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
F.   Energy Conservation
ADEQUATE SITES FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Goal A: To accommodate the City’s share of the Regional Housing Need.
     Policy A.1            Ensure that Live Oak has sufficient land with appropriate zoning to
                           accommodate the City's obligation to provide its share of the regional housing
                           needs, including accommodations for affordable housing to extremely low,
                           very low, low, and moderate- income households.
     Policy A.2            Ensure that future sites designated for higher-density housing are located near
                           community services, schools, and public transportation.
     Policy A.3            Identify whether there are any vacant or underutilized parcels that could
                           accommodate the development of multi-family housing. Encourage the
                           development of these parcels for affordable housing.
     Policy A.4            Coordinate the provision of services, such as water, sewer, drainage, and law
                           enforcement and fire protection to those areas where development is planned
                           and take the steps to ensure the public facilities are made available to meet the
                           expected housing growth.
1
  Please see Appendix B of the General Plan for background information regarding housing.
                                           Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                    HOUSING-1

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
Program A.1                 Provide Adequate Sites for Housing for All Income Levels
Accommodate housing for all income groups - in particular affordable housing - that contributes to the
City’s share of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for lower and moderate income
households, by ensuring that adequate sites for all types of housing are located throughout the City. To
achieve this objective, the City will do the following:
        The City will aid the Redevelopment Agency in preparing applications for state planning grants
         and applications for state and federal project development grants to collect as much funding as
         possible.
        Inform property owners and developers of regulatory and financial incentives through direct
         contacts with affordable housing providers in Live Oak, the distribution of a brochure explaining
         the City’s residential property development standards at the City’s permit counter and post of
         information on the City’s web site, and mail to owners of recorded vacant and underutilized
         properties.
        Use the flexible application of the Zoning Ordinance, including approval of minor variations
         from, or exceptions to, zoning standards (such as minimum lot dimension, parking, yard, or set-
         back requirements), when necessary, to permit financially feasible residential development.
        The Zoning Ordinance shall be modified to increase the maximum allowable density of the
         highest density residential zone (currently anticipated to be called “R-3”) to at least 30 units per
         acre.
        Amend the Zoning Ordinance so that residential parking standards are based on the number of
         bedrooms per dwelling unit rather than by zone. Standards shall be revised so that units with
         zero to one bedroom units will provide one on-site parking space, units with two bedrooms will
         provide 1.5 on-site parking spaces, and units with three or more bedrooms will provide two on-
         site parking spaces.
        Amend the Zoning Ordinance for parking in mixed-use areas (areas with mixed-use land use
         designations and areas where adjacent parcels allow for nonresidential and residential in close
         proximity) to allow shared parking for commercial and residential uses.
        Amend the Zoning Ordinance to reduce parking standards for second units, senior housing,
         group housing, transitional housing, and publicly assisted affordable housing projects. Parking
         standards shall be revised to one space per unit for second units and 0.6 spaces per unit for
         senior housing. Parking standards for group housing, transitional housing, and publicly assisted
         housing projects shall be determined based on the specific characteristics of each project. The
         City will allow for these types of projects to apply for use permits that reduce parking standards,
         as deemed appropriate for the use.
        Establish minimum density requirements of at least 12 units per acre to ensure that parcels
         intended for multi-family development are not underutilized.
        Revise the Zoning Ordinance to prohibit the development of single-family detached residences
         in the highest density residential zone (currently anticipated to be called “R-3”).
        Allow multi-family housing in non-residential zones, except in zones intended for industrial or
         light industrial development.
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-2

                                                                                    LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                  Housing Plan
       Amend Chapter 17 of the Zoning Ordinance to permit the placement of manufactured homes on
        permanent foundations in any zone that permits single-family homes without the need for a
        special combining district, conditional use permit, or other discretionary process.
       As a part of the ongoing comprehensive General Plan update, the City will identify lands for
        housing that can be developed by 2013 and that accommodate Live Oak’s share of the regional
        housing needs by income category. Among the various changes currently being considered by
        the City for this General Plan update is allowing higher-density housing in commercial and
        commercial mixed use land use designations. Currently, the zoning code allows higher-density
        residential uses in commercial zones, but the current (pre-update) General Plan does not. The
        City will provide a minimum of 11 acres in zoning districts that allow multi-family development
        of 20 units per acre or more by right, with at least 50 percent of this total land area in a zoning
        district that does not permit nonresidential use without a conditional use permit. The City has
        identified 46.29 acres within existing City limits, near infrastructure, and without substantial
        environmental constraints that will be considered for rezoning to accommodate the remaining
        City RHNA for lower-income households. As a part of the General Plan and subsequent rezoning,
        the City will consider lands listed on the following table and identified on Figure Housing Plan-1,
        and/or other appropriate parcels for rezoning to accommodate lower-income housing.
 Assessor’s Parcel   Existing Land                                                                Development
      Number              Use                                                                      Capacity (in
                                     Existing GP LU Designation (pre-update)     Zoning     Acres
                                                                                                      units)
06530026                Orchard                Highway Commercial                  C-3      1.34       21
06310006                Orchard               Low Density Residential              R-1      0.98       16
06330004                Vacant                    Light Industrial                 C-3      1.70       27
06310005                Orchard              Community Commercial                  C-3      10.33      165
06310002                Orchard      Split: Community Commercial and Low     Split: C-3 and 12.55      201
                                                Density Residential                R-1
06303008             SF Residential           Low Density Residential              R-2      1.41       23
06310009                Orchard               Low Density Residential              R-1      4.56       73
06310008                Orchard               Low Density Residential              R-1      6.01       96
06630008                Vacant                Low Density Residential              R-1      2.72       44
06092023                Vacant                Low Density Residential        Split: R-1 and 1.25       20
                                                                                   R-2
06060006             SF Residential  Split: Community Commercial and Low     Split: C-3 and 1.18       19
                                                Density Residential                R-1
06470039                Orchard                Highway Commercial                  C-3      2.26       36
Total                                                                                       46.29
        These parcels will be specifically evaluated by the City during the General Plan update and
        rezoning process. The City will rezone these parcels or others of equal or greater affordable
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-3

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
         housing development capacity to provide the minimum amount of land required to
         accommodate the City’s RHNA. Parcels rezoned shall be within the current City limits, vacant,
         have infrastructure available, and be free of environmental constraints that would reduce their
         development capacity or feasibility.
Responsibility:           Planning Department, City Manager
Timeframe:                 Update the General Plan by December 31, 2009. Modify the Zoning Ordinance
                           within 12 months of Housing Element adoption. The City will apply for state
                           planning grants and applications for state and federal project development
                           grants as such grant applications become available on an ongoing basis between
                           2009 and 2013. The City will inform property owners and developers of
                           regulatory and financial incentives on an ongoing basis between 2009 and
                           2013.
Funding:                   Live Oak Redevelopment Agency, Community Development Block Grant, Home
                           Investment Partnership Program (HOME), California Housing Finance Agency
                           (CalHFA) HELP Program, CalHome Program, other state and federal funds
                           identified for specific projects/planning activities.
Objective:                 Accommodate the development of a minimum of 174 additional dwelling units,
                           including 34 low income units, 70 very low income units, and 70 extremely low
                           income units, in Live Oak between 2009 and 2013 to meet the City’s share of
                           the RHNA, according to income level, by ensuring that adequate sites for such
                           development are available.
Program A.2                Identify Opportunity Sites for Infill Development
Investigate ways to encourage residential infill development on vacant and under-utilized lots in older
sections of the City. Prepare a report to the City Council regarding the supply of vacant and underutilized
lots in the City, including commercial and retail sites with opportunities for mixed use and second floor
residential. Once these “opportunity sites” are documented, the City will apply for funding for state and
federal planning and development grants to develop these sites to assist in accommodating a portion of
the City’s RHNA.
Responsibility:            Planning Department, City Manager
Timeframe:                 Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption
Funding:                   Live Oak Redevelopment Agency, Community Development Block Grant, HOME
                           Program, USDA Rural Development Services grants
Objective:                 Provide for sites that could accommodate 100 units. Prepare report detailing
                           vacant and underutilized sites that could potentially be used for infill
                           development and determine whether a portion of those sites could be
                           developed to accommodate the City’s housing needs
                                           Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                    HOUSING-4

                                LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                            Housing Plan
                                   Figure Housing-1
                             Potential Rezone Sites
Live Oak General Plan Update
         HOUSING-5
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
Program A.3                Special Housing Needs
Continue existing zoning practices that allow for the permitting of a wide range of alternative housing
and shelter facilities in both the residential and non-residential zones. The City shall revise the Zoning
Ordinance, as necessary, to specifically define and allow residential care facilities, single-room
occupancy units (SROs), boarding houses, apartment hotels, group care facilities, institutional group care
facilities, and other special needs housing by right in at least one residential zone (with facilities of six or
fewer allowed by right in all residential zones). The Zoning Ordinance shall be revised to allow
apartment hotels, group care facilities, institutional group care facilities, and other special needs
housing in non-residential zones. The Zoning Ordinance will further be amended to allow community
apartments and stock cooperative apartments in the R-3 by right.
The City will also revise the Zoning Ordinance, as necessary, to provide exceptions for reasonable
accommodations necessary to make housing available for persons with disabilities, and speed the
processing time for such requests. This procedure will be a ministerial process, with minimal or no
processing fee, subject to staff approval so long as the requested exception does not impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the City, and would not require a fundamental alteration in the
nature of the City’s land use policies and Zoning Ordinance.
Though the region includes significant agricultural activity that attracts farmworkers and their families,
agricultural activity and farmworker housing is expected to occur largely outside City limits. The most
likely alternative housing need would be for temporary housing during those times of year when crop
harvesting and processing occur. The City will coordinate with the Housing Authority to meet the needs
of farmworkers and their families by increasing the supply of affordable housing – both temporary and
permanent – for lower-income families, many of whom are farmworkers. Although the City does not
currently have any agricultural zones defined in the Zoning Ordinance other than the agricultural
combining zone, the City will revise the Zoning Ordinance to define farmworker housing and permit such
housing by right in any future agricultural zones according the requirements of the Employee Housing
Act (sections 17000 – 170652.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Multifamily housing for
farmworkers and their families shall be allowed under the same standards as any other type of
multifamily housing.
Responsibility:            Planning Department
Timeframe:                 Revise Zoning Ordinance within 12 months of the adoption of the Housing
                           Element
Funding:                   General Fund
Objective:                 Ensure adequate sites for special housing types by continuing zoning practices
                           that currently allow these uses within the City and by revising the Zoning
                           Ordinance to comply with state law regarding the placement of these uses.
Program A.4                Second Units
Consistent with Assembly Bill (AB) 1866, the City will continue to support the use and construction of
second units on single family residential lots to provide additional affordable housing options. Revise the
Zoning Ordinance, as necessary, to allow second units by right in all residential zones. Modify
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-6

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                  Housing Plan
development standards to encourage the development of second units on existing and future residential
properties by right in all of the residential zoning districts and by reducing parking requirements for
second units to one space per unit. The City will develop an over-the-counter permitting program for
second unit development, as long as proposed second units meet architectural compatibility
requirements. Create and distribute brochures containing information about the benefits of building
second units and the City’s permitting process. The City will ensure that any impact fees related to
second units are proportional to the actual impact of this type of development, rather than using a flat
fee for each unit.
Responsibility:             Planning Department
Timeframe:                  Revise Zoning Ordinance within 12 months of Housing Element adoption;
                            Develop over the counter permitting program within 18 months of Housing
                            Element adoption with brochures distributed; revise development impact fees
                            within 18 months of Housing Element adoption.
Funding:                    General Fund, permit fees
Objective:                  Educate residents about second units and how they can help the City meet its
                            affordable housing obligation
Program A.6                 Emergency Shelters, Transitional, and Supportive Housing
The City will also revise chapter 17.10 of the Zoning Ordinance to include definitions for “emergency
shelter,” “transitional housing,” “group care home,” and “farmworker housing” consistent with
definitions for these types of shelter in state law (Health and Safety Code section 50801 for emergency
shelter and transitional housing, section 1566.3 for group care home, and section 50517.5 for
farmworker housing).
Emergency shelters shall be permitted use without the need for a conditional use or other discretionary
action in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 zones, which are the City’s neighborhood, central, and general
commercial zones, respectively. These zones collectively provide 21 parcels and 5.79 acres of vacant
land, is located in developed portions of the City near where these services would be required, and
allows uses compatible with these services. In other zones, the City will continue to allow emergency
shelter facilities for six or fewer persons as a permitted use and add language to allow larger facilities for
up to 12 persons as a conditional use, and require such facilities to meet the same development
standards as other permitted uses in the designated zones.
The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance, as necessary to ensure that ‘”transitional housing” and
“supportive housing,” as those terms are defined in California Government Code section 65582, are
treated as residential uses subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the
same type in the same zone, in conformance with section 65583 of the California Government Code. The
City will revise the Municipal Code also to remove the distinction between residential care homes for
children and those provided for adults.
In addition, the City will work with the Sutter County Social Services & Welfare Department and regional
non-profit organizations providing services for the homeless to find ways Live Oak can assist in
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-7

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
addressing homelessness in the region. Explore alternative housing options for the homeless or people
in danger of becoming homeless, such as shared housing. The City should also consider reducing the
permitting and development impact fees that would be collected by the City to allow the development
of facilities like emergency shelters, transitional housing, and supportive housing; this would ensure that
if such facilities become needed, the extra cost associated with the permitting and development impact
fees will not present a constraint to the facilities’ development.
Responsibility:            Planning Department
Timeframe:                 Revise the Zoning Ordinance within 12 months of the adoption of the Housing
                           Element. Revise development impact fee schedule and permit fees to reduce
                           fees for emergency shelters, transitional housing, and supportive housing within
                           18 months of the adoption of the Housing Element.
Funding:                   General Fund and permitting fees
Objective:                 Accommodate any future needs for housing that can support those without
                           permanent residents, including the homeless
Program A.7                Design Review
As noted in the Community Character Element, the City will adopt changes to Municipal Code and
revisions to the Public Works Improvements Standards for consistency with the 2030 General Plan,
including any changes needed to be consistent with the Community Character and Design Element. The
Zoning Ordinance will be revised to provide flexibility in setbacks and other components of development
standards in order to accommodate compact housing development.
Also following adoption of the General Plan, as noted in the Community Character Element, the City will
consider drafting a design manual or design guidelines. The City will consider whether a discretionary or
administrative process will be used for design review to ensure compliance with the Community
Character and Design Element. Until such time as a design manual or design guidelines are adopted, the
City will clarify the temporary process for design review before a design manual is adopted.
The City will clarify and specify what types of projects are subject to design review by a design review
committee or the Planning Commission. The City will clarify which specific aspects of proposed projects
are subject to City design review and the application materials required to demonstrate compliance.
The City will review the design review process on an annual basis and report to the City Council and
Planning Commission. As a part of this review, staff will examine the procedures, processing time, and
expense of design review to ensure that this is not an impediment to higher-density housing
development. The City will make changes to the procedures for design review, the Municipal Code, and
the design review manual, as necessary, to facilitate the production of higher-density housing.
Responsibility:            Planning Department
Timeframe:                 Revise the Zoning Ordinance within 12 months of the adoption of the Housing
                           Element. Prepare design guidelines within 18 months of Housing Element
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-8

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   Housing Plan
                        adoption. Monitor on an annual basis starting in June 2010 and through June of
                        2013.
Funding:                General Fund and permitting fees
Objective:              To clarify the design review process to provide certainty for development and
                        facilitate higher-density housing development.
ASSIST IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Goal B: Provide for a variety of housing opportunities and affordability levels within the City of Live
Oak.
    Policy B.1          Facilitate and encourage the construction of a variety of housing types to
                        provide alternatives to single family housing, provide housing for all income
                        levels, and address special housing needs.
    Policy B.2          Encourage the development of "move-up" housing to provide opportunities for
                        residents to trade up to housing with more amenities without the need to
                        relocate outside the City of Live Oak.
    Policy B.3          Encourage the construction of new homes that vary in cost, size, and design to
                        meet the needs of existing and future residents of all income levels. Promote
                        balanced distribution of housing that is affordable to lower and moderate
                        income households rather than concentrating such housing in a single location.
Program B.1             Density Bonuses and Other Incentives
The City will encourage the use of density bonuses in accordance with the State Density Bonus Law. In
compliance with current state law, the City’s density bonus program used a sliding scale for density
bonuses based on the percentage and affordability level of the housing developed. Developers can
receive a maximum density bonus of up to 35 percent when they develop at least 10 percent very-low-
income housing, 20 percent low-income housing, or 40 percent moderate-income housing, along with
other cost-saving incentives. Other ratios of different levels of affordability result in lower density
bonuses. These incentives may include, but are not limited to reductions in zoning standards, different
development standards and design criteria, mixed-use zoning, expedited staff review and permit
processing, and financial assistance from the Live Oak Redevelopment Agency, if appropriate, to fill
financing gaps.
Responsibility:         Planning Department
Timeframe:              Ongoing as projects qualifying for density bonuses are proposed
Funding:                General Fund, permit fees, Live Oak Redevelopment Agency
                                        Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                 HOUSING-9

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
Objective:                 Provide developers with incentives to encourage the construction of housing
                          that if affordable to all income levels and meets the needs of special housing
                          groups
Program B.2                Large Unit Multi-Family Development
         Encourage the construction of 3 and 4 bedroom units when subsidized affordable multi-family
         projects are proposed within the City. The City will coordinate with the Housing Authority to
         encourage inclusion of larger rental units. To increase the financial feasibility of meeting those
         needs, the Live Oak Redevelopment Agency will consider additional tax-increment funding for
         large family housing units. The City will ensure that development standards do not impede the
         development of larger uses, including parking, open space requirements, and other
         requirements.
Responsibility:           Planning Department, City Manager, City Council
Timeframe:                 Current and ongoing, 2009-2013, through pre-application meetings for
                          affordable housing projects that request City assistance
Funding:                   General Fund, Live Oak Redevelopment Agency
Objective:                Create a greater number of affordable housing units, primarily rental units,
                          which can accommodate larger families
Program B.3               Financing Programs and Agreements
Participate in financing programs and agreements such as mortgage credit and bond financing to
provide assistance to first time lower and moderate income homebuyers. In addition, the City will
determine the feasibility of participating in a consortium with other public agencies to take advantage of
tax-exempt bond financing. Assist the funding of these programs through the submission of HOME
applications. Feasibility will be based on the amount of funding that could be used within the City in
relation to the cost of participation and the attractiveness of these certificates to first-time homebuyers.
The City will identify existing public agency consortiums and determine the most feasible group in which
to participate. The availability of these programs will continue to be publicized locally through
brochures, quarterly newsletter, and education of local finance agencies and real estate offices. Credit
certificate allocations are available at a countywide level on a first-come first serve basis.
Responsibility:           City Manager, Finance Department, Consolidated Housing Authority of Sutter
                          County
Timeframe:                 Identify consortiums within 12 months of the adoption of the Housing Element.
                          Funding:          General Fund
Objective:                Increase financing options for affordable housing projects
Program B.4                 Pursue Funding Under State and Federal Programs
Provide assistance in preparing funding applications for affordable housing projects proposed by or with
the Housing Authority. The City will also consider providing financial support through the
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-10
                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                 Housing Plan
Redevelopment Agency and/or staff support in providing needed information for funding requests to
increase the likelihood of receiving state or federal funding. To promote its application assistance
efforts, a representative of the City will meet annually, and additionally during the year as needed, with
the Housing Authority to determine their interest in, and plans for, constructing affordable housing in
Live Oak. Based on the clients to be served by proposed projects and the type of housing and services to
be incorporated into funding requests, the City will assist the Housing Authority in identifying the most
appropriate state and/or federal funding sources.
Responsibility:            Planning Department, City Manager, Finance Department
Timeframe:                 Ongoing, 2009-2013, as well as annual contact with affordable housing
                           providers, and additional contact as needed to discuss project-specific issues
Funding:                   Various state or federal programs, depending on the clients to be served and
                           the type of housing to be provided
Objective:                 Assist the Housing Authority in seeking funding to provide affordable housing to
                           meet the City’s affordable housing obligations
Program B.5                Community Reinvestment
The City will meet with representatives of each of the locally/regionally-based lending institutions to
determine their interest in funding community development and housing activities, including
participation in Federal Home Loan Bank Board affordable housing programs. For participating lenders,
the City will serve as a liaison between the institution and housing providers seeking funding sources for
their projects.
Responsibility:            City Manager, Finance Department, Live Oak Redevelopment Agency
Timeframe:                 Meet with representatives of local lending institutions within 12 months of the
                           adoption of the Housing Element, and as needed thereafter for project-specific
                           funding requests
Funding:                   General Fund
Objective:                 Increase funding options for affordable housing projects
Program B.6                Joint Effort with Sutter County and Non-Profit Organizations
The City will seek the assistance of the Consolidated Housing Authority of Sutter County and non-profit
housing organizations to identify and secure funding sources to develop vacant properties and to
rehabilitate and convert non-residential buildings to residential use. To accomplish this, the City will:
        Meet with Housing Authority representatives to provide information on potential sites and
         housing development proposals that would be appropriate for the use of housing vouchers in
         conjunction with state or federal new construction or rehabilitation subsidies.
        Meet with representatives of non-profit housing providers to seek their interest in securing
         funding and developing infill sites or converting nonresidential buildings.
                                           Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-11

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
Responsibility:            Planning Department and City Manager
Timeframe:                 Conduct initial meetings with the Housing Authority and non-profit
                           organizations within the first 12 months after Housing Element adoption, and
                           then meet annually thereafter
Funding:                   General Fund, Live Oak Redevelopment Agency
Objective:                 Improve collaboration among public and private agencies that provide housing
                           and supportive services to lower-income households
Program B.7                Impact Fees
         Review impact fees and revise for multi-family projects and other high-density residential uses
         so that fees are proportional to unit size, rather than using a flat fee for each unit regardless of
         unit type or size. Seek public funding options that would help subsidize impact fees for
         affordable housing projects. Delay payment of development impact fees for affordable housing
         development until the certificates of occupancy is issued, instead of at issuance of a building
         permit.
Responsibility:            Planning Department, City Manager, City Council
Timeframe:                 Within 18 months of the adoption of the Housing Element
Funding:                   General Fund, grants, redevelopment funding, and other potential funding
                           options to help subsidize fees
Objective:                 Reduce the cost of development impact fees in order to provide incentive to the
                           Housing Authority and other housing developers to build affordable housing
Program B.8                Service Provision
         The City will prioritize service for affordable housing. The City provides water and wastewater
         service. Although this is not currently planned, it is possible in the future that the City could
         contract with another water or sewer service provider. If this happens, the City will provide a
         copy of the adopted Housing Element to such water and wastewater service providers and
         ensure that they are aware of their legal requirement to prioritize service for affordable
         housing. Refer to Government Code Section 65589.7 in the conditions of approval for
         subdivisions that require “will-serve” letters from sewer and water districts.
Responsibility:            Planning Department, City Manager
Timeframe:                 Current and ongoing, 2009-2013
Funding:                   General Fund
Objective:                 To make applicants and service providers aware of state law requirements for
                           serving affordable housing.
                                           Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-12

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                  Housing Plan
Program B.9               Extremely Low-Income Households
        The City will direct its housing programs to consider the needs of extremely low-income
        households, including the funding programs discussed throughout the Housing Element that
        address production/preservation of residential care facilities, supportive housing, farmworker
        housing, and other types of housing that would be expected to serve extremely low-income
        households. Examples of such programs in this Housing Element include Program A.1, Program
        A.3, Program A.6, Program B.6, Program D.1, and Program D.2.
        The City shall coordinate with the Housing Authority and other operators of subsidized housing
        projects to track the number of units provided to extremely low-income households and
        maintain the affordability of existing housing units that provide housing to extremely low-
        income households. The City, in coordination with the Housing Authority, shall seek funding for
        programs that would add subsidy to existing subsidized projects to increase the number of units
        provided in the project for extremely low-income households. This "buy down" of units could
        apply to both projects that are entirely income-restricted and those that provide mixed-income
        housing. The City, in coordination with the Housing Authority, shall apply for, and use available
        housing resources, including project-based rental subsidies and other resources to support
        housing for extremely low-income households.
Responsibility:           Planning Department, City Manager
Timeframe:                Current and ongoing, 2009-2013
Funding:                  General Fund, General Fund, regional, state, and federal housing grants, loans,
                          and other funding
Objective:                To increase the supply of housing for extremely low-income households.
CONSERVE AND IMPROVE EXISTING HOUSING STOCK
Goal C:                   Encourage and assist in the rehabilitation of housing units in need of repair
                          and occupied by extremely low-, very low-, and low-income residents. Strive
                          to enhance the overall quality of the City's existing housing stock.
   Policy C.1             Provide property owners with assistance to inspect and identify code violations
                          in residential buildings.
   Policy C.2             Encourage property owners to rehabilitate units in deteriorating or critical
                          condition and promote room additions that can eliminate overcrowding.
   Policy C.3             Advertise the availability of grants, loans, and other funds available for the
                          rehabilitation of housing stock to homeowners, landlords, and other investors.
   Policy C.4             Continue to apply for state and federal assistance for housing rehabilitation for
                          low-income households. Rental housing that is repaired with government
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                  HOUSING-13
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
                           assistance shall remain affordable to low-income households for a specified
                           period of time.
Program C.1                Housing Survey
Continue to conduct housing condition surveys every five years to monitor the overall condition of the
City’s housing stock. Maintain an inventory of properties in need of improvement and track
improvements or increasing deterioration over time.
Responsibility:            Planning and Building Departments
Timeframe:                 Every five years after the last survey, conducted in 2008.
Funding:                   Live Oak Redevelopment Agency, CDBG planning grant, General Fund
Objective:                 Monitor the City’s housing stock to help target which properties need to be
                           rehabilitated
Program C.2                Voluntary Inspections
The City will, on a request basis, arrange for inspections of residential properties where building code
violations may be present and may need to be corrected. A more comprehensive voluntary building
code inspection would be performed by the Building Department for an inspection fee that covers the
cost of this service, or at no cost to the property owner in conjunction with an application for housing
rehabilitation assistance.
Responsibility:            Building Department
Timeframe:                 Current and ongoing, 2009-2013
Funding:                   Inspection fees, Live Oak Community Development Department, Rehabilitation
                           Program funds (Community Development Block Grant, Home Investment
                           Partnership Program)
Objective:                 Increase the rate of compliance with City code requirements and participation
                           in housing rehabilitation programs.
Program C.3                Code Enforcement and Abatement
The City will initiate appropriate code enforcement action on dwelling units that are so substandard that
they represent an imminent threat to health and safety. The City will require that property owners
comply with building code standards or that property owners remove such housing units. If necessary,
the City may abate the unsafe building. These actions will be taken only in the most extreme cases in
which the owner of the dwelling unit is unable or unwilling to make necessary repairs, in which repairs
are not feasible, or in which the dwelling unit has been abandoned.
Responsibility:            Building Department
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                   HOUSING-14

                                                                                   LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   Housing Plan
Timeframe:                Current and ongoing, through 2013
Funding:                  General Fund, code enforcement fees, Housing Rehabilitation Program funds
Objective:                Correction of the most serious code violations
Program C.4                Rehabilitation of Substandard Dwelling Units
To encourage private rehabilitation efforts, the City will undertake the following actions:
       The City will apply for and/or assist eligible households in applying for various private, state, and
        federal sources of funding for housing rehabilitation and home repairs, which would include the
        correction of health and safety hazards, weatherization, and the addition of space to alleviate
        overcrowding. The City will continue to contribute Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside
        funds, as available, to support its rehabilitation program. Owners of rental properties who are
        assisted in financing the rehabilitation of their dwelling units will be required to rent the units to
        low-income households and to sign a rent limitation agreement for specified minimum time
        period.
       The City will apply for state funding as frequently as the City has the capacity to expend and
        manage grant funds. The City will promote the housing rehabilitation program through program
        information included in semi-annually in utility billings, brochures available at City Hall, the
        City’s web site, and distribution of program information to property owners in targeted
        neighborhoods.
       The City will maintain current information on the condition of dwelling units by periodically
        updating its housing conditions data base. Approximately every 5 years, the City will resurvey
        housing conditions to ensure the currency of its housing conditions information.
Responsibility:           Planning Department, Building Department
Timeframe:                Current and ongoing, through 2013
Funding:                  Community Development Block Grant, Home Investment Partnership Program
                          (HOME), Live Oak Redevelopment Agency, Multifamily Housing Program, USDA
                          Rural Development Services
Objective:                Rehabilitate 25 dwelling units that do not conform to City code and are a risk to
                          personal and public health
PRESERVE UNITS AT-RISK OF CONVERSION
Goal D: Preserve, and if necessary replace, the City's publicly assisted affordable housing.
    Policy D.1            The City will seek to preserve the affordable housing developments in Live Oak.
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                  HOUSING-15

LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
     Policy D.2           Require replacement housing per state law (or relocation of displaced
                          residents) within the Redevelopment Project Area whenever subsidized
                          affordable housing units are demolished as a result of government activity;
                          including development, road widening, and other improvements.
Program D.1               Monitoring and Preservation of At-Risk Housing
The City will coordinate with the Housing Authority and property owners of privately-owned,
government-subsidized affordable housing projects with the goal of maintaining affordability status of
properties in the long term. The City will contact property owners of such affordable housing projects at
least one year in advance of the date where properties could convert to market rate. The City, in
collaboration with the Housing Authority, will describe options for maintaining affordability status. If the
owner expresses an interest in selling or converting their properties, the City will contact the Housing
Authority to determine interest in acquisition and operation of such properties, or to get assistance in
seeking another interested investor or nonprofit housing corporation to acquire and continue operating
the rental development for low-income households. The City will, in coordination with the Housing
Authority, assist in identifying and applying for funds to maintain the affordability of rental units.
Responsibility:           Planning Department, City Manager
Timeframe:                Contact property owners of publicly assisted rental housing at least one year
                          prior to the expiration of the affordable housing covenant for each property to
                          determine future ownership plans; implement preservation strategy if owners
                          indicate desire to sell or convert their properties
Funding:                  Multifamily Housing Program, California Housing Finance Agency Preservation,
                          Acquisition Financing Mortgage Insurance for Purchase/Refinance (HUD)
Objective:                Preservation of affordable rental housing units
Program D.2                 Housing Replacement Relocation Assistance
The City will seek funding to pay for the relocation expenses of low-income residents displaced as a
result of the condemnation or required vacation of dwelling units due to code violations. The City will
follow the requirements of state law regarding the demolition or conversion of dwelling units occupied
by lower-income households within the city.
 Responsibility:          Planning and Building Departments
Timeframe:                Current and ongoing, 2009-2013
Funding:                  Community Development Block Grant, Home Investment Partnership Program,
                          Live Oak Redevelopment Agency
Objective:                Avoidance of permanent displacement and replacement of housing demolished
                          as a result of code enforcement and implementation of housing rehabilitation
                          program
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                  HOUSING-16
                                                                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                      Housing Plan
PROMOTE EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Goal E.1:                  Ensure that no person seeking housing in the City of Live Oak is discriminated
                           against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status,
                           ancestry, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sexual orientation, source of
                           income, or age.
     Policy E.1            Continue to provide information and referral services to people with fair
                           housing complaints.
     Policy E.2            Support the enforcement of fair housing laws by appropriate State and County
                           agencies.
     Policy E.3            Promote equal housing opportunities and programs for all housing within the
                           City.
Program E.1                Fair Housing Program
The City will continue its present information and referral services for equal housing opportunities. The
City will provide published information from state and federal agencies that investigate housing
discrimination complaints. The City will also assist individuals with complaints in contacting the
appropriate agency and filing a complaint. The City will provide a point of contact for these services at
City Hall for referral information. The City will consider other means, as well, for distributing such
information. For example, City building inspectors could distribute information, as appropriate.
Responsibility:            Finance and Planning Department
Timeframe:                 Within six months of adoption of the Housing Element the City shall provide
                           public information on housing discrimination; assist individuals as necessary,
                           ongoing, 2009-2013
Funding:                   General Fund, Community Development Block Grant, Live Oak Community
                           Development Department
Objective:                 Resolution or referral of fair housing complaints to the appropriate agency
Program E.2                Public Information and Education
Promote education and awareness of fair housing laws by making this information widely available to
the public. Fair housing law materials in printed in several languages will be posted in prominent
locations throughout the City. The City shall also post and make available informational flyers on fair
housing complaints. This information will also be made available at the local library branch and City Hall.
The City shall, during all public hearings, program seminars, and other housing related meetings, provide
fair housing information to all attendees and will include fair housing materials in all housing program
application packages.
Responsibility:            City Manager
                                          Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                  HOUSING-17
LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
Housing Plan
Timeframe:               Provide public information on fair housing law within 6 months of Housing
                         Element adoption and as appropriate when housing is proposed, ongoing,
                         2009-2013
Funding:                 General Fund, Community Development Block Grant, Live Oak Community
                         Development Department
Objective:               Inform the public about fair housing laws
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Goal F.1:                To promote energy conservation.
    Policy F.1           Continue to implement state energy efficiency standards.
    Policy F.2           Seek funding to provide weatherization assistance to low-income households.
Program F.1              Implement State Energy Conservation Standards
The City will continue to require applicants for building permits to demonstrate compliance with the
state energy conservation requirements at the time building plans are submitted.
Responsibility:          Building Department
Timeframe:               Current and on-going, 2009-2013
Funding:                 Permit fees
Objective:               Compliance with minimum energy efficiency standards.
Program F.2              Energy Conservation Assistance for Low-Income Households
The City will include weatherization and energy conservation as eligible activities under its housing
rehabilitation program. The City will provide information and refer eligible property owners to other
programs offered by Pacific Gas & Electric and nonprofit organizations. The City will promote
weatherization and energy efficiency home improvement options through general advertisement of its
housing rehabilitation program. The City will also refer interested individuals to energy rebate and
conservation assistance programs offered by others and maintain information on these programs at City
Hall. Information on other energy conservation and weatherization programs will be included in City
mailings and advertisements of its housing rehabilitation program.
Responsibility:          Finance and Planning Department
Timeframe:               Current and on-going, 2009-2013
Funding:                 Community Development Block Grant, Home Investment Partnership Program
                         (HOME), USDA Rural Development Services
                                        Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                 HOUSING-18
                                                                                     LIVE OAK GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                     Housing Plan
Objective:              Weatherization and energy efficiency improvement of between 25 and 30
                        dwelling units
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Table Housing Plan-1, below, summarizes the City of Live Oak housing needs and its objectives for
production, rehabilitation, and conservation of housing through the end of the Housing Element
Planning Period.
                                              TABLE HOUSING -1
                                           QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                         CITY OF LIVE OAK 2009-2013
   Income Category         New Construction                 Objectives for Conservation and Rehabilitation
                       New Housing Construction                                        Total Conservation and
                                                     Conservation Rehabilitation
                               Objective                                                   Rehabilitation
Extremely Low                     70                      7               7                      14
Very Low                          70                      7               8                      15
Low                              104                     15              10                      25
Moderate                         141                      7               5                      12
Subtotal Affordable
                                 385                     36              30                      66
Units
Above Moderate                   240                      0               0                      0
Total                            625                     72              60                     132
                                        Live Oak General Plan Update
                                                 HOUSING-19
