Economic Development Element 
                                        SECTION 8
                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
(
  8.1    INTRODUCTION
  8.1.1 SCOPE OF ELEMENT
  The economic development element is not a mandatory element as are the previous
  elements and their components. Section 65303 of the government code states that
  cities and counties may incorporate
                                   , ,
                                        optional elements to complement those elements
  required under state law. The number and type of additional issues that may be
  addressed in these optional elements are left to the discretion of the city or county
  preparing and adopting the optional element or elements.
  The government code does state that once an optional element has been adopted, the
  optional element has the same force and authority as the mandatory elements. The
  optional elements can significantly expand the authority of the local government
  over a particular issue area that is unique to that particular jurisdiction and not
   adequately covered in the required elements. The other state requirements that
(  pertain to the mandatory elements, such as internal consistency, apply also to
   optional elements as well.
   The economic development element for the City of Maywood General Plan is
   specifically concerned with the identification of a development strategy which will
   address development potentials that will broaden and stabilize the city's economic
   base. The goals and policies contained in this element have been formulated for the
   city so that it may utilize existing programs whenever possible and to provide a
   continuity with implemented policies of the previous general plan.
   8.1.2 ISSUES
   The background report documents past and current economic trends in the City of
   Maywood.     A number of emerging issues and trends which have occurred in recent
   years are the focus of this element:
                                              8-1
    JBX1733000lAI
          •    Commercial development in Maywood is generally spread out along the
               two major arterials that traverse the city. A number of undeveloped
               parcels and vacant buildings are located along this arterial.
(,        •    There is a commercial center that has been created at the Atlantic!
               Slauson intersection through the efforts of redevelopment. New shopping
               centers occupy three of the four corners of this intersection and the
               greatest concentration of retail floor space is located at this
               intersection.
          •    Industrial development is located along the periphery of the city adjacent
               to residential neighborhoods.        Currently, new industrial growth has
               occurred through redevelopment.
   8.2    GOALS AND POLICIES
   8.2.1  ISSUE: COMMERClAL AND INDUSTRlAL DEVELOPMENT
   The following goals and policies focus on promoting new commercial and employment
   generating uses in the city.
   GOAL 1       Encourage businesses to locate in Maywood.
   Policies
(          1.1 Encourage businesses that wiil increase sales tax revenue in the city.
           1.2 Establish enterprise zones to attract new business to the city.
   GOAL 2       Promote Maywood's location in Southern California as an ideal place for
                businesses.
   Policies
           2.1 Promote Maywood's proximity to downtown Los Angeles and transporta-
                tion accessibility as attributes for business location.
   8.3      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
   The economic development element addresses issues that are common to other
   elements of the General Plan, such as the land use element.               The economic
   development element is especially concerned with commercial and employment
   generating development provided by industrial, research and development, and office
   activities.
                                                8-2
    JBX17330001Al

  Commercial development in Maywood is primarily located along Slauson Avenue and
  Atlantic Boulevard. Growth and renewal in these areas has been achieved in recent
c years promoting revitalization through redevelopment. As a result, new commercial
  activity occurred in key commercial areas of the city. New development located at
  the intersection of Slauson Avenue and Atlantic Boulevard is an example of this
  redevelopment effort.
  The land use policy map promotes continued industrial development in the city. New
  industrial activity is currently occurring along Maywood Avenue in the western
                                                                     .
  section of the city. Land in the eastern section along Walker ,Avenue and 59th Place
  is currently designated industrial. Fruitland Avenue and portions of 52nd Street in
  the northern section of the city also contain industrial activity.
   Redevelopment
  Currently, there are two redevelopment project areas in the city: Maywood Westside
   Redevelopment Project and Redevelopment Project Area No. 2 (see Exhibit 8-1).
  The economic development element allows for expansion of redevelopment activities
   into other areas in the city. These areas include: West Slauson Target Area; North
(  Central Target Area and East Maywood Target Area (see Exhibit 8-1).
   West Slauson Target Area connects the two existing redevelopment project areas
   along the western corridor of Slauson Avenue. The primary focus of this target area
   includes general commercial activity which corresponds to the land use designated by
   the land use element policy map.
   North Central Target Area extends north of the Redevelopment Project Area No. 2
   to the city limits along Atlantic Boulevard.      The target area encompasses the
   residential neighborhoods on the west side of Atlantic to Pine Avenue and on the east
   side between 52nd Drive to 56th Street. The impetus for creating this target area is
   to provide funds for residential property owners to fix up existing residential uses in
   the area.
    East Maywood Target Area extends east from redevelopment project area along
   Slauson Avenue to the city limits. This area includes the existing industrial uses
   along Walker Avenue, as well as the residential uses between Slauson Avenue south
(
                                             8-3
    JBX17330001Al
(
                                                                                      EAST MAYWOOD
                                                                                       TARGET AREA
      Legend
      ~                                  i
                                                                     •i     ;•     i•     i •
             COMMERCIAL
                            •i                                                  I   •     I ;
                             0
                             !
                                         E
                                         ~
                                                                      i
                                                                      i     !   •:
                                                                                          I
                                                                                           .
                                                                                             •
                                                                                             ~
                                                                                             :
      •      COMMERCIAL
                                               -                        -      --
      m      COMMERCIAL-MFG
                               PAOrtC It.lct-.c MIl.W"''f eo-M., _ _ OF WAY
                            1Illlllllilfinnili
      a      INDUSTRIAL
  Redevelopment
                                                                                                   Exhibit 8-1
  Maywood General Plan

  to 60th Street ending at Woodlawn Avenue. The idea of creating this target area is
  to expand existing industrial uses and create new commercial opportunities.
(
(
(
                                             8-4
   JBX/733000lAl
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
Economic Development Element  
            Background Report 
            MAYWOOD GENERAL PLAN 

             ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
  8.4     INTRODUCTION
(
  This background report documents past and current trends for the City of Maywood.
  Most of this discussion focuses on commercial and industrial development in the
  city. A number of emerging issues and trends which have occurred in recent years
  are summarized below:
           •   Commercial development in Maywood is generally spread out along the
               two major arterials that traverse the city. A number of underdeveloped     .... ,~
               parcels and vacant buildings are located along this arterial.
           •   There is a commercial center that has been created at the Atlantic!
               Slauson intersection through the efforts of redevelopment. New shopping
               centers occupy three of the four corners of this intersection and the
               greatest concentration of retail floor space is located at this
               intersection. City has agreement for development of 4th corner.
           •   Industrial development is located along the periphery of the city adjacent
               to residential neighborhoods.      Currently, new industrial growth has
               occurred through redevelopment.
  8.5      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY
(
  In 1978, the Redevelopment Agency was established to eliminate blighted and
  deteriorated areas within designated sections of the city. The agency created two
   project areas--Project Area Number One, established in 1978, and Project Area
   Number Two, established in 1982.
   8.5.1 PROJECT AREA NUMBER ONE
   Boundaries of Project Area Number One of the Maywood Westside Redevelopment
   Project include the western and northwestern fringes of the city, as indicated in
   Exhibit 2-5.
   Existing land uses within the project area include a mix of commercial, industrial,
   and   residential   uses.    Industrial  uses   include  manufacturing,   warehousing,
   distribution, and research and development facilities, along with compatible service
   and office uses.
                                              8-5
   JBX17330001AI

  While the existing iand use of the western area starting south of Slauson to Fruitland
  Avenue is a mixture of industrial and residential uses, the redeveiopment plan
( provides for only industrial development.     The portion of the project area along
  Slauson Avenue from Maywood Avenue to Everett Avenue is designated for
  commercial uses only.
  The northwestern project area along Fruitland Avenue from Maywood Avenue to one-
  half block west of Carmelita Avenue is designated as industrial.        Three parcels
  starting at the corner of Maywood Avenue and 52nd Street on the north side of the
  street are designated for a mix of res'idential and industrial uses; these parcels are
  currently residential.
  8.5.2 PROJECT AREA NUMBER TWO
   Project Area Number Two encompasses the city's central business district which
   includes Slauson Avenue from Fishburn to Heliotrope Avenues and Atlantic Boulevard
   from Randolph Street to the intersection of Atlantic Boulevard and Cudahy Avenue.
   This project area was established in 1982 to redevelop scattered blighted sites and
  properties within the designated project area.
(
   The redevelopment plan divided Slauson Avenue commercial district into two
   categories--medium commercial and commercial           manufacturing.      The areas
   designated as commercial-manufacturing include an area south of Slauson Avenue
   between Fishburn Avenue to Pine Avenue and east of Atlantic Boulevard to
   Heliotrope Avenue. Light commercial is designated on the north side of the street at
   Fishburn to one parcel west of Atlantic and on the southside from Flora Avenue to
   Atlantic Boulevard.
   8.6    ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
    Maywood's economic base is one of the smallest compared to the other surrounding
    and unincorporated districts in the study area, with an estimated 2,040 persons
    employed in the city according to 1984 estimates prepared by the Private Industry
    Council of Los Angeles.        Of this number, 597 persons were employed in
    manufacturing activities at 43 worksites.    The next largest sectors in terms of
                                            8-6
    JBX/7330001Al
  employment      are   retail   trade,    services,    wholesale  trade,   transportation,
  communication, and utilities, with employment numbering 447, 358, 355, and 241
  persons, respectively.    Overall, the city's economic base between 1976 and 1984
(
  changed slightly, with an increase in the employment population of 252 persons and
  13 worksites. Table 8-1 summarizes employment statistics for the city for 1976 and
  1984.
                                          TABLE 8-1
                                    CITY OF MAYWOOD
                         CHANGE IN EMPLOYMENT: 1976 - 1984
                                                                           1976-1984
                           1976 Employment         1984 Employment         Employment
  Employment Sector        Number Percent          Number Percent       Number Percent
  Agriculture                21         1.0           21       0.9          0       0.0
   Mining                      0        0.0            0       0.0          0
   Construction              98         4.8           91       4.0         -7      -7.1
   Manufacturing            490       24.0           597      26.0        107      21.8
  Transportation            232       11.4           241      10.5          9       3.9
   Wholesale Trade          244       12.0           355      15.5        111      45.5
   Re tail Trade            379       18.6           447      19.5         68      17.9
   Financial                 76         3.7           98       4.3         22      28.9
(
   Services                 227        11.1          358      15.6        131      57.7
   Public Admin.            258       12.6            64       2.8       -194      75.2
   Nonclassified              15        0.7           20       0.9          5     ,33.3
   Total                  2,040        99.9       2,292      100.0        252      12.4
   Source: Private Industry Council, 1976, 1984.
   The fastest growing sectors of the local economy between 1976 and 1984 included
   the wholesale trade, services, and manufacturing sectors as indicated in Table 8-1.
   Employment characteristics and the change in employment between 1976 and 1984 is
   depicted in Exhibit 8-2.
   Most of the recent commercial and industrial construction has occurred within the
   redevelopment project areas.      Since 1983, over 140,000 square feet of retail floor
   space has been built in the city. In 1988, construction started on a number of light
   industrial buildings west of Maywood Avenue within the redevelopment project area.
(
                                               8-7
   JBX/733000 lAl
                              150 , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
  CHANGE IN
  EMPLOYMENT                  1001-----
C 1976-1984
                    '"
                    w          501-----
                    w
                    >
                    9a.
                     :l!
                     w
                     u.       -501--------------
                     o
                     a:
                     w
                     lD       -1001-------------
                     !5z
                              -1501-------------
                                    AGRle.    CONST.     TRANS.   RETAIL   SERVICES NONeLASS.
                                        MINING       MFG,    WH$ALE.   FINAN. PUB.ADMIN.
                                                    EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
  EMPLOYMENT - 1976            500,-----
                               4001-----
                      '"III
                       ~
                       :l!
                               3001-----1
                       w
                         u.
                         o
                         a:    2001------
                         w
(                        §l
                         ::>
                         z     100 1----;;;;;;
                                     AGAIC.     CONST. TRANS.      RETAIL SERVICES NONCLASS.
                                         MINING       MFo.    WHSALE. FINAN. PUS.ADMIN.
                                                     EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
   EMPLOYMENT-1984             700,---------------,
                               6001-----
                         '"ww  ~OO 1 - - - - -
                          ~
                          ~
                          :l!  400 I-----....J
                          w
                          u.
                          o    3001------
                          a:
                          w
                          §l   2001------
                          ::>
                            z
                                100 - - -
                                  o
                                      AGRIC.     CON ST.   TRANS.  RETAIL SERVICES NONCLASS.
                                           MINING      MFG.   WHSALE.    FINAN. PUB.ADMIN.
                                                      EMPLOYMENT SECTORS
   Employment 1976 - 1984
   Maywood General Plan                                                                       Exhibit 8-2

  A major factor in the city's small employment base compared to that of cities in the
  surrounding region is the distribution of land uses within the city. The majority of
( land in the city is developed as residential with limited area devoted to commercial
  and industrial uses.   This largely results from historic development patterns in the
  region in which industrial activities were concentrated in the cities of Vernon and
  Commerce and workers lived in the predominantly residential communities located
  next to the industrial districts.
  In Table 8-2, the distribution of land use in Maywood is compared to similar
  categories for the east central region of the Los Angeles Co~nty (which includes
   Maywood, adjacent cities, South Gate, Montebello, and parts of Los Angeles) and to
   the urbanized area of Los Angeles County as a whole. While the city's proportion of
  commercial land use compares favorably with the region and county, the city's share
  of industry is sUbstantially less than that found in both the region and the county.
   Comparisons like the ones shown in Table 8-2 may be misleading since the
   comparison is based solely on land area and not population.       Because the city's
   population density is much higher than the average for the county, its share of
   commercial and industrial land uses should be considerably greater than that shown
   in Table 8-2.
(
(
                                              8-8
    JBX/7330001Al
                                       TABLE 8-2
                                 LAND USE BY USE TYPE
C                                                  East Central
                                Maywood             Region a        Urban L.A. County
                              Acres Percent      Acres   Percent    Acres    Percent
  Residential                  427    72.9      15,395     49.8    407,579     61.8
  Institutional                 31     5.3       1,390       4.5    41,720      6.3
  Parks and Open Space          10     1.7         659       2.1    73,356     11.1
  Utilities   , •. <             2     0.1       1,226       4.0    26,069      4.0
  Commercial                    45     7.7       2,380       7.7    45,090      6.8
  Industrial                    71    12.1       9,852      31.9    65,893     10.0
         Totalb                586    99.8      30,902    100.0    659,707    100.0
  a   East Central Regional includes Maywood, the adjacent cities of South Gate and
      Montebello, and parts of Los Angeles.
  b Totals do not include streets, easements, etc.
  Note:     Figures for county and east central area excludes agriculture, mining, and
            wilderness areas.
( Source: Los Angeles Regional Planning Commission and Maywood General Plan.
(
                                            8-9
   JBX17330001A1

Noise Element 
                                          SECTION 7
                                     NOISE ELEMENT
7.1            INTRODUCTION
7.1.1          SCOPE OF ELEMENT
The state requirements governing noise elements are the most specific in terms of required
content and the methods used in the analysis and preparation. Noise elements must contain
a thorough analysis of the existing noise environment and project future noise levels based
on buildout. Finally, the goals and policies contained in the noise element are concerned
with protecting residents from noise that might affect their health and welfare.
This noise element includes a comprehensive program for including noise control and
related concerns in the planning process. This element will be used by planners to achieve
and maintain land use compatibility with environmental noise levels. The noise element
identifies noise sensitive land uses and noise sources, and defines areas of noise impact for
the purpose of developing programs to ensure that Maywood residents will be protected
from excessive noise intrusion. In addition, the noise element requires the consideration of
any possible adverse impacts related to noise in future decision-making concerning future
development. For this reason, the goals and policies in the noise element must be
considered when implementing policies outlined in the land use element.
The noise element follows the recently revised state guidelines in the State Government
Code Section 65302.1(f) and Section 46050.1 of the Health and Safety Code. Government
Code, Section 65302.1(f) states that a noise element should be prepared according to
guidelines established by the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health
Services. The government code further requires that the noise element contain an analysis
and quantification "to the extent practicable," of existing and projected noise levels for the
following:
           •   Highways and freeways.
           •   Primary arterials and major local streets.
           •   Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid transit
               systems.
           •   Commercial, general aviation, helicopter, and military airport operations;
               aircraft overflights; jet engine test stands; and all other ground facilities and
               maintenance functions related to airport operation.
                                               136

          •    Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad classification
               yards.
          •    Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as
               contributing to the community noise environment.
In addition, the government code, as amended January 1, 1986, provides some specific
direction in the preparation of noise elements. Section 65302.1(f) states:
       "Noise contours shall be shown for all of the sources and stated in terms of
       community noise equivalent level (CNEL) or day-night average level (Ldn). The
       noise contours shall be prepared on the basis of noise monitoring or following
       generally accepted noise modeling techniques for the various sources identified in
       paragraphs 1 to 6, inclusive.
       "The noise contours shall be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of land uses
       in the land use element that minimizes the exposure of community residents to
       excessive noise.
       "The noise element shall include implementation measures and possible solutions
        that address existing and foreseeable noise problems, if any. The adopted noise
       element shall serve as a guidelines for compliance with the state's noise insulation
       standards."
7.1.2          ISSUES
A number of major issues related to noise in the city are identified in the background report
and are the focus of noise mitigation policy and programs:
           •   The major mobile noise sources include vehicles operating on the two major
               arterials that serve the city: Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson Avenue. Noise
               levels along these streets are much greater during daytime hours due to the
               number of trucks that use these roadways.
           •   The Long Beach Freeway at its closest point to the city (1/4 mile) is elevated
               and contributes to ambient noise levels in the city.
           •   Residential areas located near Atlantic and Slauson avenues and near the
               industrial areas are exposed to traffic noise that exceeds 60 dBA in many
               areas.
           •   In those areas where industrial operations are located in close proximity to
               homes, there is a potential for noise impacts from machinery, work activities,
               and truck traffic.
                                              137

7.2           GOALS AND POLICIES
7.2.1         ISSUE: NOISE CONTROL
The city has established one general goal for the noise element that is directed toward
protecting the public from excessive and offensive noises. The policies reinforce the city's
noise ordinance as the main implementation measure of the noise element goal. The city
also encourages Caltrans to build sound walls to help reduce excessive noise levels from
vehicles on the nearby freeway.
GOAL 1:       Prohibit any unnecessary, excessive, offensive noises, or increase in noise
              levels over acceptable levels, which are detrimental to the public health and
              welfare.
Policies
       1.1    Implement criteria and guidelines established in this noise element for use in
              setting standards for the control and abatement of noise emission,
              transmission, and exposure as set forth in the noise element.
       1.2    Control any sounds which exceed community accepted levels at their source
              through enforcement.
       1.3    Provide assistance to all persons, groups, or organizations engaged in
              developing and implementing noise abatement procedures and/or programs.
       1.4    Prevent any increase in acceptable ambient levels of sound in the residential
              areas of the community by implementing local noise standards.
       1.5    Where appropriate, require sound attenuation walls to separate commercial
              and industrial uses from noise-sensitive land uses, such as schools and homes.
        1.6   Encourage Caltrans to build a sound wall along the Long Beach Freeway.
        1.7   Control the following noise sources through increased enforcement: (1)
              excessive amplification of stereo and radios; (2) car alarms; (3) autobody and
              other similar fabrication; (4) some industrial activities related to residential
              areas. This problem shall be controlled by local authority.
                                             138
7.3            NOISE MITIGATION PROGRAM
The primary source of noise in Maywood are the two main arterial roadways, Slauson
Avenue and Atlantic Boulevard, that traverse the city. Another noise source for Maywood
is the 1-710 (Long Beach Freeway) located northeast of the city.
The roadway and freeway traffic noise represents relatively steady constant noise sources.
Another noise source is train traffic which presents periodic sources of noise for Maywood.
In addition, there are short-term irritant noise generated by loud playing stereos, the
operation of motorized garden equipment, and shrill sounds of a school yard full of school
children.
There are local and state laws established to regulate noise sources. The Maywood Noise
Ordinance is used to mitigate and protect residents from excessive noise. The California
State Government has established noise insulation standards to protect multiple-family
residential dwelling units from excessive and unnecessary noise.
7.3.1          NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
It has been established in this noise element the goal to protect the residents from excessive
or irritating noise. The impacts from noise can be decreased through regulatory noise
controls, and land use planning. These standards are used to create a more healthful
environment for residents.
Several federal and state agencies have developed guidelines relative to land use and noise.
These agencies include the Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Highway
Administration, Department of Housing and Urban Development, American National
Standards Institute, and the State of California.
These agencies standards are based upon cumulative noise criteria, such as the Community
Equivalent Level (CNEL) and Day-Night Average (Ldn). These guidelines represent
weighted averages of twenty-four I-hour Leq measurements, with decibel weights assigned
to the evening, night, and early morning hours.
In 1976, the California Department of Health established noise element guidelines that
contained a recommended noise/land use compatibility matrix. The matrix, Exhibit 7-1,
outlines acceptable levels of noise for different land uses. The matrix is a good guide for
noise responsive land use planning. These standards displayed in the matrix for conditionally
acceptable uses are relevant to Maywood.
7.3.2          PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
The primary mechanism used to implement noise policy will be the noise ordinance. The
ordinance gives the city the authority to regulate noise at its source and, thereby, protect
                                             139
noise sensitive land uses.
Having an established land use pattern prevents the city from using wide scale land use
planning as a tool to minimize noise impacts. However, there are other noise reduction
strategies that can be used to achieve acceptable noise environments for existing and new
developments.
Noise reduction barriers can be constructed between noise sensitive land uses, such as
residential development and incompatible land uses. For example, noise reduction barriers
can reduce the exposure of residential neighborhoods to industrial noise; thus reducing the
noise impact on adjacent residential developments.
The city can require new residential development to use new construction techniques and
materials to achieve state standards for interior ambient noise levels. Also, the city can
encourage Caltrans to install sound walls along the 1-710 Freeway near Maywood to reduce
the noise generated by freeway traffic.
7.3.3          IMPLICATIONS FOR LAND USE
As discussed, the primary sources of noise in Maywood are Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson
Avenue, as well as the 1-710 Freeway. These noise sources impact the land uses located
along these transportation routes. Residential development will contain noise sensitive uses
that include senior housing. This type of use will not be a great contributor to greater noise
but will be sensitive due to the type of users, as well as potential locations along Atlantic
Boulevard and Slauson Avenue.
Increased traffic anticipated for Slauson Avenue and Atlantic Boulevard will result in
increased noise levels along these roadway segments. Noise levels are projected to increase
by 0.67 dB CNEL along Atlantic Boulevard and by 1.09 dB CNEL along Slauson Avenue.
This projected increase in noise is not expected to be discernible by residents in the area.
Table 7-1 indicates the distance from the roadway centerline to the noise level contours
depicted in Exhibit 7-2. New development located in areas subject to high noise levels
should implement mitigation measures to reduce interior noise to acceptable levels (see
Exhibit 7-1).
                                             140
                                                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                           COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
                                                                                L," OR CNEL, dB
LAND USE CATEGORY                                       55                  60              65 70 75      80
RESIDENTIAL - LOW DENSITY                                                                                                NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
SINGLE FAMILY, DUPLEX,                                                                                                   Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the
MOBILE HOMES                                                                                                             assumption that any buildings involved are of normal
                                              :'IKm:lJ?i~_                                                               conventional construction, without any special ,noise
                                                                                                                         insulation requirements.
RESIDENTIAL - MULTIFAMILY
                                                                                                                         •
                                              ;~;~;~:;{:~:~:;~:;:~:j:;:~:~:;:~:f:;:~:j:ji~:j::
TRANSIENT LODGING -
MOTELS, HOTELS                                               .                ~'llIlltJjlllllljjjlllllljj_
                                                                                                                          CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES,                                                                                                       New construction or development should be under·
CHURCHES, HOSPITALS,                                                                                                      taken only after a detailed analysis of the noise
NURSING HOMES                                                                                                             reduction requirements is made and needed noise
                                                                                                                          insulation features included in the design. Conven·
                                                                                                                          tional construction, but with closed windows and
AUDITORIUMS, CONCERT
                                                                                                                          fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will
HALLS, AMPHITHEATRES                                                                                                      normally suffice.
SPORTS ARENA, OUTDOOR
SPECTATOR SPORTS
 PLAYGROUNDS,                                                                                                              NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS                                                                                                         New construction or development ,should generally
                                                                                                                          be discouraged. If new construction or development
                                                                                                                          does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise
                                                                                                                           reduction requirements must be made and needed
                                                                                                                           noise insulation features included in the design.
                                                                                                                          •
 OFFICE BUILDINGS, BUSINESS
 COMMERCIAL AND
 PROFESSIONAL
                                                                                                                           CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
                                                                                                                           New construction or development should generally
                                                                                                                           not be undertaken.
                         CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINATION OF NOISE·COMPATIBLE LAND USE
 A.    NORMALIZED NOISE EXPOSURE INFORMATION DESIRED                                                  residential uses located in Community Noise Exposure Areas greater than 65 dB
                                                                                                       should be discouraged and considered located within normally unacceptable
 Where sufficient data exists, evaluate land use suitability with respect to a
                                                                                                       areas.
 -normalized" value of CNEL or L<ln' Normalized values are obtained by adding or
 subtracting the constants described in Table 1 to the measured or calculated
                                                                                                       C.     SUITABLE INTERIOR ENVIRONMENTS
 value of CNEL or L<ln'
                                                                                                       One objective of locating residential unUs relative to a known noise source is to
 B.     NOISE SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS                                                                   maintain a suitable interior nOise environment at no greater than 45 dB CNEL of
                                                                                                       L~n' This requirement, coupled with the measured or calculated noise reduction
 The land use-noise compatibility recommendations should be viewed in rnlation
                                                                                                       performance of the type of structure under consideration, should govern the mini-
 to the specific source of the noise, For example, aircraft and railroad nOise is
                                                                                                       mum acceptable distance to a noise source.
 normally made up of higher single noise events than auto traffic but occurs less
 frequently. Therefore, different sources yielding the same composite noise
                                                                                                       D.     ACCEPTABLE OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
 exposure do not necessarily create the same noise environment. The State
  Aeronautics Act uses 65 dB CNEl as the cnterion which airports must eventually                       Another consideration, which in some communities is an overriding factor, is the
 meet to protect existing residential communities from unacceptable exposure to                        desire for an acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more
 aircraft noise. In order to facilitate the purposes of the Act, one of which is to                    restrictive standards for land use compatibility, typically below the maximum con-
 encourage land uses compatible with the 65 dB CNEl criterion wherever                                 sidered -normally acceptable- for that land use category, may be appropriate.
 possible, and in order to facilitate the ability of airpons to comply with the Act,
                                                      SOlllee: California Department of Health. Guidelines lor the Preparation and Conlent 01 Noise Elemenls of The General Plan, February. 1976
Noise Compatability
Maywood General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                              Exhibit 7·1

                                       TABLE 7-1
                        FUTURE ROADWAY NOISE LEVELS
                Distance (in feet) to CNEL From Roadway Centerlinea
                                                                           CNELat
Roadway            70 CNEL        65 CNEL       60 CNEL       55 CNEL      50 Feetb
Atlantic                61.3          180.1        564.8        1,784.3         69.07
Slauson                 61.2          179.6        563.2        1,779.4         69.05
 a     Noise model does not consider any barriers or obstructions to the noise path.
 b     CNEL         measured in feet from centerline to near travel lane.
Note: Computer worksheets calculating noise levels are included in Appendix B of the EIR.
Source: Michael Brandman Associates, Inc., 1989.
                                            141
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
Noise Element Background Report 
              MAYWOOD GENERAL PLAN 

                   NOISE ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
7.4            INTRODUCTION
Maywood residents are exposed to a wide range of noise levels that are common to such an
environment. Major mobile noise sources in the city include automobiles, trucks, and trains.
Much of this traffic noise comes from the two major arterials that traverse the city.
Automobile and truck noise from the nearby Long Beach Freeway is also apparent in the
city. Noise from trains also affects those areas located along the northern, western, and
eastern margins of the city. In addition, stationary noise sources within Maywood also
generate noise that affects noise-sensitive uses located nearby. These stationary noise
sources include a wide range of recreational, commercial, and business activities.
A number of major issues related to noise in the city are identified in this Background
Report:
          •    The major mobile noise sources include vehicles operating on the two major
               arterials that serve the city: Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson Avenue. Noise
               levels along these streets are much greater during daytime hours due to the
               number of trucks that use these roadways.
          •    The Long Beach Freeway at its closest point to the city (1/4 mile) is elevated
               and contributes to ambient noise levels in the city.
          •    Residential areas located near Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson Avenue and
               near the industrial area are exposed to traffic noise that exceeds 60 dBA in
               many areas.
          •    In those areas where industrial operations are located in close proximity to
               homes, there is a potential for noise impacts from machinery, work activities,
               and truck traffic.
                                               142

7.5            CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND
Before the existing noise environment can be described, there are a number of terms that
need to be explained. In addition, there are a number of methods used to evaluate the
loudness of a particular noise. The most commonly used units for measuring the level of
noise are decibel (dB), Equivalent Noise Level (Leq), and the Community Noise Equivalent
Level (CNEL).
A decibel is a unit used for measuring the intensity of sound. A scale of 0 to 140 is used in
which zero represents the lowest sound that can be heard by humans and 140 is the rupture
point of the eardrum. The Leq measure represents the average of the sound level energy
for a I-hour period and employs an A-weighted decibel correction which corresponds to the
optimal frequency response of the human ear. The CNEL is based upon 24 I-hour Leq
measurements. The average noise levels for the late evening and early morning hours (the
period between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.) are weighted 10 decibels.
Intermittent or occasional noise, such as noise associated with stationary noise sources, is
not of sufficient volume to exceed community noise standards, based on a time averaged
scale such as the CNEL scale. The Percent-Noise Level (L percent) method is used to
characterize and evaluate intermittent noise. This method gauges the percentage of time
that intermittent noise exceeds the average decibel level during the measurement period.
Noise ordinances are typically specified in terms of the percent noise levels. These
ordinances are designed to protect people from non-transportation-related noise sources
such as music, machinery, and traffic on private property. Noise ordinances do not apply to
motor vehicle noise on public streets or other transportation-related noise sources that are
preempted by the state or federal governments.
 7.5.1         NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
Noise/land use guidelines have been produced by a number of state and federal agencies
 including the Federal Highway Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the
 Department of Housing and Urban Development, the American National Standards
 Institute, and the State of California. These guidelines, presented in the following
paragraphs, are all based upon cumulative noise criteria such as Leq, Ldn, or CNEL.
            •  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In March 1974, the EPA published
               a very important document entitled "Information on Levels of Environmental
               Noise Required to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate
               Margin of Safety" (EPA 550/9-74-004). According to this publication 55 LDN
               is described on the required level with an adequate margin of safety for areas
               with outdoor uses including residences and recreational areas. The EPA
               "levels document" does not contribute a standard, specification or regulation,
               but identifies safe levels of environmental noise exposure without
                                             143

               consideration for economic cost for achieving these levels.
           •   Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The FHWA has adopted and
               published noise abatement criteria for highway construction projects. The
               FHWA noise abatement criteria basically establishes an exterior noise goal
               for residential land uses of 67 Leq and an interior goal for residences of 52
               Leq. The noise abatement criteria applies to private yard areas and assumes
               that typical wood frame homes with windows open can achieve 10 dB noise
               reduction with windows closed.
           •   State of California. The state requires every city and county to adopt noise
               elements as part of their general plans. Such noise elements must contain a
               Noise/Land Use compatibility matrix. A recommended (but not mandatory)
               matrix is presented in the "Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of
               Noise Elements and the General Plan," (Office of Noise Control, California
               Department of Health, February 1976).
7.6            ANALYSIS OF EXISTING NOISE ENVIRONMENT
This general plan considers a wide range of land use and development types as noise
sensitive. Noise sensitive land uses include residences, both single- and multi-family, schools,
medical facilities, and certain types of businesses that use precision equipment that could
be impacted by excessive noise and vibration.
7.6.1           RESULTS OF NOISE SURVEY
A noise study was conducted by Michael Brandman Associates, Inc. (MBA) in December
1988, to document the existing noise environment in the city. This analysis consisted of three
primary tasks: (1) identification of noise sensitive land uses such as schools; (2) measuring
noise levels at selected locations in the city; and (3) computerized modeling of ambient
traffic noise levels along major roadways in the city.
The noise measurement program was conducted in December 1988 at 12 locations
throughout the city. The results are depicted in Table 7-2. Each site was monitored for a
minimum of 15 minutes. The locations are indicated in Exhibit 7-3. The quantities measured
were the CEQ and the L percent. L percent is a method used to characterize ambient noise.
For example, L90 is the noise level exceeded 90 percent, L50 is the level exceeded 50
percent, and LI0 is the level exceeded 10 percent of the time. L90 represents the
background or minimum noise level, LSO represents the average noise level, and LIO the
peak or intrusive noise levels.
                                              144

G)  NOISE MONITORING LOCATIONS REFER-TO TABLE 7-2 IN NOISE ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT.
Existing Noise Environment                                                              I I
                                                                                      o    250   500 FEET
Maywood General Plan                                                                           Exhibit 7-3
                                            TABLE 7-2
                           NOISE MEASUREMENT SURVEY RESULTS
      Location                           LEO         LMAX     LiO    LSO      L90
1.    Southeast corner of                   58.0        83.0   62.5    51.5    470
      Everett and 52nd Street
2.    Between Lorna Vista and
      Carrnelita on 55th Street             49.0        77.5   62.0   -st);0"  440
3.    Southeast corner of                   44.0        74.5   61.5    52.5    480
      Everett and 58th Street
4.    Southwest corner of                   46.5        72.5   62.0    55.0    515
      Gifford and 57th Street
5.    4319 Slauson (Maywood City            74.0        94.5   77.0    69.0    610
      Hall) northside between
      Fishburn and Pine
6.    6019 Pine (west side)                 54.0        81.5    64.5   52.0    465
      between 69th and 61st Streets
7.    Eastside of Atlantic                  66.5        87.5    73.5   68.0    640
      between Slauson and 59th Place
8.    6035 Prospect (west side)42.5         74.5        56.5    49.5   46.5
      between 60th and 61st Streets
9.    Heliotrope School -                   71.5        86.5    77.0   69.0    605
      southeast corner of
      Heliotrope and Slauson
 10.  Maywood Park, 57th and                47.5        74.0    59.0    54.0    575
      Heliotrope northside of
      Heliotrope
 11.  Northside of 57th Street               41.0        71.0   53.5    46.5    445
      4637 East 57th Street
      between King and Mayflower
 12.  Atlantic and 56th Street               67.0        84.0   74.5    69.0    620
      east of mid-block
Source: Michael Brandrnan Associates, 1988.
                                                 145
In general, commercial land uses predominate along both Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson
Avenue; however, a few residential homes and apartments are located along Slauson
Avenue. The noise survey table indicates that the noise measurement sites on these major
streets contained Leq readings above 65 dB.
For residential land uses, the noise level of 65 dB is generally used by a number of federal
agencies as the dividing line between acceptable and unacceptable noise environment. For
many noise sensitive land uses, such as schools, churches, hospitals, etc., 65 dB is also used
as the dividing line between acceptable and unacceptable noise environment. The residents
located along Slauson Avenue are exposed to noise levels greater than the acceptable noise
environment. Noise measurement sites located within residential areas contained Leq
calculations lower than 65 dB.
Two of the three public elementary school sites contained Leq measurements lower than
65 dB. These schools, Fishburn Elementary and Lorna Vista Elementary, are located within
residential neighborhoods away from the major roadways. Heliotrope Elementary School,
however, is located along Slauson Avenue and is exposed to a high Leq measurement of 75
dB. The three private elementary schools are all located in residential neighborhoods with
acceptable noise levels.
Pinecrest Convalescent Hospital located on Piue Avenue between 60th Street and 61st
Street is another noise-sensitive location. This site contained an Leq measurement of 54 dB,
which is an acceptable noise level.
7.6.2          ROADWAY NOISE STUDY
The dominant noise source in Maywood is roadway traffic from Atlautic Boulevard (north-
south street) and Slauson Avenue (east/west street). Additional noise sources include
adjacent rail lines that surround the city along the western, southern, eastern, and
northeastern sections of the city. The 1-710 (the Long Beach Freeway) located to the
northeast and east of the city in close proximity, is also a noise source for Maywood.
Noise levels along Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson Avenue are affected by a number of
traffic characteristics. These factors include the average daily traffic, the percentage of
trucks, vehicle speed, the time distribution of traffic, and the gradient of the road. Both
Atlantic Boulevard and Slauson Avenue contain a significant volume of truck traffic
traveling through the city. This is due in part to the intense industrial uses located in
neighboring jurisdictions. Additionally, these roadways provide direct access for the
industries to the 1-710 Freeway and the 1-5 (the Santa Ana Freeway) in Commerce.
Existing traffic noise along the major roadways was calculated using the Federal Highway
Administration's Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (FHWA-RD-77-108), December
1978. This model was modified to general CNEL values. Model input data was derived from
the traffic consultant and field observations, which included average daily traffic levels,
                                              146
       day/night percentages of autos, medium and heavy trucks, vehicle speeds, ground
       attenuation factors, and roadway widths.
       The distances from existing roadway centerlines to the 55, 60, 65, and 70 dB CNEL contour
       lines and the CNEL at 50 feet from the centerline of the near travel lane are provided in
       Table 7-3 and depicted in Exhibit 7-3 The noise contour distances describe worst-case
       conditions since they do not take into account any obstructions to the noise path (I.e., walls,
       buildings, etc.). The roadways that were analyzed include Slauson Avenue, Atlantic
       Boulevard, Maywood Avenue, Fruitland Avenue, and Randolph Street.
                                                TABLE 7-3
                                EXISTING ROADWAY NOISE LEVELS
                                   Distance (in Feet) to CNEL From
                                           Roadway Centerlinea
                                                                                     CNEL at
Roadway Segment              70 CNEL       65 CNEL       60 CNEL       55 CNEL       50 Feetb
Atlantic Boulevard                0.0          154.8        484.3         1,529.6          68.40
Slauson Avenue                    0.0          140.3        437.8         1,382.6          67.96
  a     Does not consider any obstructions to the noise path.
  b    CNEL measured in feet from centerline of near travel lane.
Note: Computer worksheets calculating noise levels are included in Appendix B of the EIR.
Source:        Michael Brandman Associates, 1989.
                                                     147
Conservation Element 
                                         SECTION 5
                                CONSERVATION ELEMENT
(
  5.1     INTRODUCTION
  5.1.1   SCOPE OF ELEMENT
  The state requires every local general plan to have a conservation element
  (Section 65302(d» that focuses on the protection and maintenance of the state's
  natural resources and prevents their wasteful exploitation and destruction.
  The conservation element also must include an analysis of the natural environment.
  Maywood's natural resources are limited and as a result, there is little to conserve.
  This is attributed to the growth of the city which altered the natural setting from an
  open grassland area to a built urban environment.
   5.1.2   ISSUES
   Maywood is primarily a residential community with most of its land zoned for
(  multiple-family detached units.      The city is completely urbanized, except for
  scattered vacant lots.     In addition, Maywood is surrounded by other incorporated
   cities that are urbanized to the same degree as Maywood.
   The vegetation and wildlife species that exist in Maywood are for the most part
  supported by people. The groundwater is utilized by people for urban uses. The air is
   contaminated by transportation and industrial emissions, both within and outside the
   city limits.
   As a city within the larger Los Angeles metropolitan region, the focus of this
   element is Maywood's role in this region as an active participant in dealing with
   regional issues, such as water and air quality. The goals and policies stated in this
   element refer to the city's commitment to conserving the resources that have been
   impacted by urbanization.
   [n addition to addressing natural resources, this element discusses the city's cultural
   resources that have been identified in the background report of this document. Since
                                             5-1
   JBX!7330001Al

   little is known about the prehistory of the area due to the extent of urbanization that
   has taken place, cultural resources focus on the historical development of Maywood.
(
   5.2      GOALS AND POLICIES
   5.2.1 ISSUE: PRESERVING NATURAL RESOURCES
   The natural environment of Maywood has been altered by urbanization.                The
   following goal requests that a balance between the natural and urban environment be
   created to prevent further deterioration of both environments. To accomplish this
                                                                     C<
   task, the policies following the goal require more vegetation to be planted that not
   only provide sources of clean air but provide habitats for small wildlife species.
   These policies also require air pollution control.
    GOAL 1:      Provide a sensitive integration of natural and urban environments.
    Policies
             1.1 Require landscaping and vegetative cover for its own value and for its
                 value as wildlife habitat.
            1.2 Require the lowest pollutant emissions from the city's own vehicle pool
(                and equipment used for government purposes.
    5.2.2 ISSUE: REGIONAL COOPERATION IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT
    The following goal and SUbsequent policies pertain to the city's role in the region by
    actively participating and adhering to programs established by regional agencies.
    GOAL 2: Promote cooperation between the city and other agencies and local
                 governments to improve the environment.
    Policies
             2.1 Continue cooperation and coordination between jurisdictions pertaining to
                 regional environmental quality.
             2.2 Support all actions and/or programs that will result in the development of
                 a comprehensive regional mass transit system.
(
 (
                                                5-2
    JBX17330001AI
   5.2.3  ISSUE: IMPROVING AIR AND WATER QUALITY IN THE REGION
(  The following goal recognizes that the only way to ensure that natural resources,
   such as air and water, are preserved in the future is through established supervision.
   The following policies also establish cri teria for better air and water quality through
   conservation methods.
   GOAL 3:     Provide for the proper management of natural resources both in the city
               and region are so that they may be protected for the benefit of present
               and future residents.
   Policies       ,.
           3.1 Develop and enforce local criteria of air and water quality so that the
               city may reduce its share of these regional problems.
           3.2 Promote a water conservation program so the city may reduce its share
               of regional water consumption.
           3.3 Require drought resistant trees and plants for all new landscaping for
               commercial and industrial development.
           3.4 Encourage water conservation in residential, commercial, and industrial
               developments through the use of water saving irrigation systems.
(   5.3    NATURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM
    The natural resources plan addresses three issue areas: air quality, water resources,
    and plant and wildlife resources.
    5.3.1 AIR QUALITY
    Maywood is located in the South Coast Air Basin (SCAB), and is regulated by the
    South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). The conservation element
    goals and policies require the city to continue working with the SCAQMD to enforce
    regional air quality plans and policies.      The SCAQMD has been responsible for
    regulating pollutant emissions in the SCAB and has adopted an Air Quality
    Management Plan (AQMP) pursuant to the requirements of the Federal Clean Air
    Act.
(
 (
                                               5-3
    JBX/7330001A1
   The plan, titled "Long-Range Strategies for Improving Air Quality," has established
   regulatory programs designed to reduce pollutant emissions from stationary sources
c  (industry and commercial businesses) and mobile sources (cars, trucks, construction
   vehicles, etc.).
   New industries establishing businesses in the city will have to comply with the AQMP
   and will need to install new pollution control devices, as well as comply with strict
   emission restrictions. Cleaner burning fuels, such as natural gas and methanol, are
   encouraged by the plan. Maywood can ensure that industries comply with SCAQMD
   requirements through business license issuance process.
   A significant proportion of pollutant emissions in the basin are emitted by motor
   vehicles. The SCAQMD recommends a reduction in the total miles traveled that will
   reduce the level of pollutants emitted in the air. The AQMP recommends several
   options to be used to reduce the level of vehicle emissions. These options include the
    use of pUblic transportation, the establishment of transportation management
   systems, and staggered work hours.
    5.3.2 WATER RESOURCES
(
    Maywood relies on three water companies that depend on groundwater resources for
    supply.    The conservation element goals and policies recommend a water
    conservation program to reduce water consumption in the city. This program will
    require new landscaping standards set by the city that include drought resistant trees
    and plants for all new landscaping projects. The city may, also, encourage water-
    saving irrigation systems. The city will cooperate with other regional water
    conservation programs to the greatest extent possible.
    5.3.3 VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
    The native landscape of Maywood, as noted before, has been radically altered by
    urbanization. What was once California prairie grassland has been paved, built upon,
    and planted with ornamental trees, shrubs, and grasses.           The native wildlife
    population has been sUbstantially reduced as a result of the urbanization as well.
    Most species have either migrated to other regions of southern California, or have
(   been exterminated.
 (
                                              5-4
    JBX17330001Al
   The goals and policies of this element pertaining to vegetation and wildlife establish
   new standards for landscaping or street median, parkways, and new development.
(
   This provides more vegetation in the city and hence habitat for small wildlife species
   which are commonly found in urbanized areas.
   5.4    CULTURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM
   The background report (Section 5) identifies four structures in the city that have
   some historic significance to the community. These include Lorna Vista School, the
   Primasing Home, Maywood Post Office, 'and Maywood City Hall. The city may wish
   to designate these structures as being historically significant to the community,
   either locally or through the State Office of Historic Preservation. In addition, the
   city may request the assistance of interested community volunteers or students in
   conducting a citywide historic survey.
(
(,
 (
                                             5-5
    JBX17330001Al
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Conservation Element Background Report 
                     MAYWOOD GENERAL PLAN 

                   CONSERVATION ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
  5.5    INTRODUCTION
(
  The State of California requires every city and county to take steps to protect and
  preserve natural and cultural resources within the community.           While the state's
  natural resources continue to dwindle, its popUlation continues to grow at a
  phenominal rate; consequently, resource demand increases.
  Natural resources available in Maywood are limited due to the mature urban
  environment.      This background report will concentrate on describing remaining
  natural and cultural resources. The city's cultural resources include sites important
  in the city's historic development. The discussion on natural resources will focus on
  air and water quality, as well as energy and resource conservation. The following are
  considered in this report:
          •    The native natural environment of the city has been virtually replaced by
               urban development.
          •    Water bearing sediments underlie the city and serve as a principal source
               of water. Efforts need to be taken to ensure that this resource is not
(              contaminated or depleted.
          •    The city's air quality is generally low, as is the quality of the rest of the
               South Coast Air Basin airshed. The SCAQMD and SCAG intend to
               implement a strategy through which clean air standards will be met by
               the year 2010.
          •    Native vegetation and wildlife have been supplanted by other species of
               plants and animals introduced and maintained by humans, and include
               species commonly found in an urban setting.
          •    The region has a long history of human occupation; the remaining cultural
               resources are limited to a number of historic buildings and sites located
               in the community.
   5.6    DESCRIPTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
   The description of natural resources will focus on those resources that remain in the
   city that may be impacted by man's activities both within the city arid in the
   surrounding region.    The remaining natural resources important to the city include
(  air, water, and plant life.
(
                                              5-6
   JBX17330001Al

   5.6.1 AlR QUALITY
(
   Regional Air QualIty
   The South Coast Air Basin of California, which includes Orange County and the
   nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties,
   experiences some of the worst air quality in the United States. Although federal law
   required all areas of the nation to meet all air quality standards set to protect public
   health by December 31, 1987, peak readings in the basin in 1987 were three times the
                                                                               ,..
   standard for ozone, twice the standard for carbon monoxide and 80 percent of the
   standard for fine particulates.    Nitrogen dioxide levels were exceeded only in Los
   Angeles County and nowhere else in the nation.
   Climate and topography affect the basin's air quality. During the summer months, a
   warm air mass frequently descends over the basin, inhibiting the dispersion of
   pollutants.      Weak summer      breezes   also  slow dispersal,   allowing pollutant
   concentrations to build up. Strong sunlight, needed for the photochemical process
   which produces ozone, is also abundant in summer. Inversion layers also occur in
    winter, resulting in high concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide.
   Sunlight is not sufficiently intense in winter to produce high levels of ozone.
    Rainfall is infrequent in summer and is usually limited to occasional storm systems in
    winter, most often from December through February.
    Primary responsibility for monitoring and controlling pollution in the basin resides
    with the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). The California
    Air Resources Board (CARB) is responsible for regulating motor vehicle emissions,
    and both the CARB and EPA have some oversight authority over the SCAQMD.
    Air QUality in Maywood
    Due to its location within the center of Los Angeles County, Maywood shares many
    of the air quality problems associated with the urbanized core of the South Coast Air
    Basin. Emissions from industrial sources and from automobiles account for most of
    the region's air pollution. Cities that are downwind of coastal industrial sources and
 (  which are within the densely populated, heavily travelled central core of the Los
 (
                                               5-7
    JBX/7330001Al
   Angeles Metropolitan basin experience higher levels of pollution than do cities along
   the coast. Although cities farther inland have higher levels of ozone, these cities do
   not experience levels of automobile-related primary pollutants, principally nitrogen
(
   dioxide and carbon monoxide, as high as those in the central core cities.
   The SCAQMD monitors air quality at 29 stations in the basin. The closest station to
   Maywood is in Lynwood. The maximum readings for the years 1983-1987 are shown
   on Table 5-1, and the number of days air quality standards were exceeded during this
   period are shown on Table 5-2
                                        TABLE 5-1
                            MAXIMUM READING FOR 1983-1987
                                   LYNWOOD STATION
                                           Maximum Reading For Each Year
         Pollutant Standard          1983        1984     1985       1986      1987
    Ozone
         Maximum 1 hr (ppm)           0.23       0.27      0.21       0.20      0.24
    Carbon Monoxide
c        Maximum 1 hr (ppm)
    Nitrogen Dioxide
                                        24          29       33         27        26
         Maximum 1 hr (ppm)           0.27        0.27     0.31       0.26      0.26
    Sulfur Dioxide
         Maximum 1 hr (ppm)           0.06        0.07     0.06       0.13      0.06
    Particulates
         Maximum 24 hr (ug/m 3)        232         199      290        262       221
    Source:    South Coast Air Quality Management District, Air Quality Data, 1983-
               1987.
 (
(
                                             5-8
    JBX17330001Al
                                       TABLE 5-2
            ANNUAL SUMMARY OF AIR QUALITY STANDARDS VIOLATIONS
                                  LYNWOOD STATION
                                                 Number of Days Standards Exceeded
            Pollutant Standard                         1983 1984   1985  1986   1987
  Ozone
      1 hr ? 0.10 ppm (state)                           57    49     41    46    24
      1 hr > 0.12 ppm (federal)                         27    22     16    16    11
  Carbon Monoxide
      1 hr ? 20 ppm (state)                              5    11     12    11    10
      8 hr > 9.5 ppm (federal)                          31    51     36    41    40
  Nitrogen Dioxide
      1 hr? 0.25 ppm (state)                             1     2      1     3      1
  Sulfur Dioxide
      24 hr ? 0.05 ppm (state)                           0     0      0     0      0
  Suspended Particulates (PMI0) 150 ug/m 3 (fed.)      NM    NM     NM    NM    NM
  Source:     South Coast Air Quality Management District, Air Quality Data.      1983
              through 1987.
C
  Air Quality Management Plan
  The Southern California Association of Governments and the SCAQMD have been
  designated to prepare plans that set forth a strategy to attain federal and state air
  quality standards consistent with federal law (l977 Clean Air Act Amendments) and
  state law (Lewis-Presley Air Quality Management Act).         The agencies developed
  plans in 1979 and 1982, but were unable to demonstrate compliance by the 1987
  federal deadline.      In 1988 a federal court disallowed the 1982 Air Quality
  Management Plan (AQMP) for the South Coast Basin because it did not meet this
  deadline requirement.
  The two agencies have prepared a plan revision that would meet the standards in 20
  years.    At present, the federal deadline is still 1987. However, in 1988, congress
  considered, but did not adopt, a Clear Air Act Revision which would have extended
(  the deadline by 20 years for severely impacted areas. The California Legislature in
(
                                            5-9
   JBX/7330001Al
  1988 adopted a state Clean Air Act (SB 2598) which mandates an annual 5 percent
  reduction in emissions for the region.
(
  Other state legislation (SB 151-1987) gave the SCAQMD broad new authority to
  regulate indirect sources of emissions--sources that do not directly emit pollutants
  themselves but which attract vehicular sources of emissions.
  AQMP Conformity Requirements
  The federal Clean Air Act specifics that all federal actions are required to conform
  to the local AQMP, and prohibits the local metropolitan planning organization from
  approving any federal actions that do not conform. The Act specifically empowers
  the EPA Administrator to withhold, condition, or restrict grants for wastewater
  treatment facilities that may contribute directly or indirectly to an increase in
  emissions of any pollutants that would continue or cause a violation of the national
   air quality standards.      In 1981, the      EPA published criteria requiring that
   transportation plans, programs, and projects also conform with the AQMP.
   The 1979 and 1982 AQMP asked local governments to participate in a number of
(  activities, such as energy conservation, street light synchronization, and voluntary
   transportation management.       City actions were considered to be in conformity if
   they were within the growth forecasts in the AQMP and consistent with actions
   agreed to by the local jurisdiction.
   The 1988 AQMP would extend conformity demonstration to all projects considered to
   be of regional significance regarding review by SCAQMD.         Conformity would be
   demonstrated through showing consistency with the adopted AQMP job/housing
   balance forecast for the subregion and demonstrating that feasibile land use,
   transportation, and energy conservation mitigation measures were incorporated.
   Air Quality Elements
   Although air quality elements are not required as part of a general plan, the boards
   of both the SCAQMD and the Bay Area AQMD in Northern California have requested
    that cities and counties within their jurisdictional areas prepare air quality
(  elements. These elements would be directed at reducing local sources of emissions
(
                                              5-10
    JBX17330001Al
   that result from automobile use, energy consumption, and use of polluting materials
   in homes, offices, and other workplaces. The elements would set forth local
   strategies to reduce traffic congestion, promote energy efficiency, and establish
(
   design standards that result in fewer trips and lowered usage of polluting materials,
   such as certain types of architectural coatings.
   The 1988 AQMP revision calls for each city and county within the South Coast Air
   Basin to develop and adopt an air quality element by July 1, 1990 that would:
           •   Restrict local parking (suggested methods include: increasing parking
               fees, eliminating on-street parking, restricting parking in residential
               zones, establishing park and ride lots, etc.)
           •   Restrict parking at special event centers
           •   Restrict truck deliveries
           •   Establish programs to implement the job/housing balance goals of the
               AQMP
           •   Establish energy conservation programs
           •   Establish a program of telecommunications strategies
(   5.6.2  WATER QUALITY
    Three separate water companies supply water to city residences and businesses:
    Maywood Water Company Number 1, Maywood Water Company Number 2, and
    Maywood Water Company Number 3.
    The three mutual water companies rely on groundwater resources to supply the city's
    water demands. Analysis of groundwater levels in the area by the State Department
    of Water Resources shows that the elevation of the groundwater averages 65 feet
    below sea level and that the average distance between the surface of the ground and
    the surface of the water is 230 feet. The water is hard, averaging 400 milligrams of
    total dissolved solids per liter.   The public health standards for water used for
    domestic and municipal purposes have long defined the permitted level of total
    dissolved solids as 1,000 milligrams/liter and the recommended· level as
    500 miligrams.
 (
 (
                                              5-11
    JBX17330001Al

  Maywood's water supply meets the recommended standard for water quality by a safe
  margin.    Analysis of the groundwater for pesticides has detected no presence of
C chlorinated pesticides in the water.
  The quality of water available from local groundwater basins is a critical component
  of the region's overall water supply picture. Groundwater currently provides about
  33 percent of the region's water supply, and is used for both agricultural irrigation
  and for urban consumption. Groundwater basins around the region, including the one
  supplying Maywood, are being threatened by continuing overdraft, increasing levels
  of salinity and mineralization, and, most recently, by contamination by hazardous
  substances.
                                                                                         ..
  Efficient use of existing water supplies through water conservation is an inherent
  component of all of the above water issues. Water conservation measures contribute
  to the availability of water through reduction of demand.          Full realization of
  potential conservation activities would be particularly beneficial during drought
  periods.    in addition, all medium to large urban water suppliers were to have
  prepared, by December 31, 1985, Urban Water Management Plans that consider
  water conservation.
(
   5.6.3  VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
   The impacts of urbanization have greatly affected the Maywood environment.
   Today, Maywood is completely urbanized except for scattered vacant lots and some
   parkland open space. Over the years, the Maywood area has changed from being an
   open grasslands environment with a variety of vegetation and wildlife species, to an
   environment completely dominated by man.        Many species of wildlife have either
   migrated to another area or have simply disappeared from the local ecosystem.
   Urbanization has limited the variety of wildlife and vegetation to those species that
   have either adapted to life with man and are somewhat dependent on him, or simply
   tolerate man, while also taking advantage of man's agriculture and gardens.
   Maywood does, however, have a variety of flora and fauna that enhance the city's
   environment considerably. The vegetation growing in the city may be thought of in
   four categories:    (1) the interstitial forest consisting of trees growing between
(  buildings and streets; (2) parks and green zones; (3) gardens of ornamental and food
(
                                             5-12
   JBX17330001Al
  . plants; and (4) lawns or interstitial grassland.    In the mid 1970s, the street tree
    population numbered approximately 2,580.          There are about 50 more trees in
    Maywood City Park.
    Additional trees grow on private property. The predominant species include carobs,
    camphors, carolina cherries, jacorandas, ashes, crepe myrtles, and evergreen elms.
    The wildlife that lives in the relatively small habitats usually found in an urban area,
    such as Maywood. These species that have adapted to life with humans and are at
    least partly dependent on them for food and cover, or tolerate humans and
                                         ,."
    occasionally take advantage of their agriculture and gardens. The most common
    types of urban wildlife in Maywood include a wide variety of rodents, birds,
    amphibians, insects, and domestic dogs and cats.
    5.7     CULTURAL RESOURCES
    The city is located in an area that may have been visited by prehistoric peoples from
     time to time. While little is known about the local prehistory; the city's proximity to
     the Los Angeles River makes it likely that such visits did occur. Maywood is located
c    in an area close to a transition zone between the Chumash and Gabrielino peoples
     who occupied the region at the time of European contact.
     While prehistoric sites or artifacts could be discovered in the course of construction
     activities in the city, it is likely that any archaeological site on the surface would
     have been destroyed during past urbanization. For this reason, the cultural resources
     especially important to local residents include schools, the library, and significant
     historic structures.
      5.7.1 SCHOOLS
      Primary education for Maywood students is provided by three elementary schools
     located in the city. For secondary education, Maywood students attend a junior high
     school in Huntington Park and a high school located in Bell.       Los Angeles Unified
      School District administers all the elementary, junior high, and senior high schools.
      Table 5-3 summarizes the enrollment characteristics for those schools which serve
c     Maywood residents.
(
                                                5-13
      JBX!7330001A1
                                    TABLE 5-3
c             PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
                                                                             ,
  The City of Maywood is served by a single library facility located adjacent to City
  Hall on Slauson Avenue. This library is staffed and operated by the County of Los
  Angeles.
  5.7.3 HISTORIC SITES
  The area in which Maywood is located was historically Indian land that was passed to
  the Spanish Crown in 1781.     For the next century, the area remained largely
  undeveloped.
  By 1917, the area was part of a 2,300 acre ranch that was owned by a land
  development corporation.  The ranch was used primarily to grow produce sold to
  markets in Los Angeles.     The ranch was eventually subdivided to develop a
(
(
                                         5-14
  JBX!7330001Al
       community that selected the name Maywood. According to historical records, the
       name derived from a young woman who worked for the corporation. Christening of
("     the town took place on May 4, 1919.
       Shortly after the establishment "of the town, the first elementary school, called
       Washington (later renamed Loma Vista), was built in 1920. The other two schools
       were built soon after Loma Vista. The first structure in Maywood was a house at the
       corner of Slauson and Everett that was built in 1913. A number of other important
       historic structures and sites are indicated in Table 5-4
                                              TABLE 5-4
                                   mSTORIC SITES IN MAYWOOD
        Historic Site/Structure                                  Description
        Loma     Vista   School             Maywood's first school         (originally called
                                            Washington) built in 1920
        Primasing Home                      First home in Maywood, built in 1913
        Maywood Post Office                 Constructed in 1938
(       Maywood City Hall                   Constructed in 1938
        Source: Michael Brandman Associates, 1988.
        Maywood was incorporated on September 2, 1924. One year after incorporation, a
        group of disenchanted citizens set out to disincorporate Maywood. The issue was put
        to a vote and the City of Maywood survived.
 (~, /
 (
                                                  5-15
        JBX17330001AI
Open Space Element 
                                        SECTION 4
                                 OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
c 4.1    INTRODUCTION
  4.1.1  SCOPE OF ELEMENT
  The   state  requires   every general      plan  to  have  an   open space     element
  (Section 65302{e». The open space element must include an inventory of private and
  public open space. In addition, the open space element must identify goals and
  policies for managing these open space areas, and specific measures to implement
  them as defined in the general plan.
  The purpose of the open space element is to guide and set a policy framework for the
  existing and future open space uses within the City of Maywood. Open space is
  intended to encourage and contribute to economic, social and physical health, safety,
  and welfare of the city's residents. Open space should provide a variety of amenities
  by adding aesthetic relief to developed areas in addition to providing areas for active
  and passive recreation.
(
  4.1.2   ISSUES
  The city is completely urbanized with little open space remammg in the city.
   Recognizing that open space in the city is a premium, the community has emphasized
   the need to preserve existing open space used for recreation and to expand open
  space opportunities where this is feasible. The open space element and the policies
   contained herein are sensitive to the following issues:
          •   There are no large undeveloped parcels of land remaining in the city that
              could be used for groundwater recharge, wildlife reserves, or new park
              development.
          •   Existing parks in the city include Maywood City Park and Pixley Park
              which have a combined land area of 5.8 acres. The three elementary
              schools do have recreational facilities that are used by school children
              after hours under supervision.
          •   The city would need over 61 acres of park land to meet nationally
              recognized standards that evaluate needed park area for a given
              population.
(
                                              4-1
   JBX/7330001A1

  U     GOALS AND POLICIES
c 4.2.1 ISSUE: OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
  The following goal recognizes the importance of open space resources in an urban
  environment. A major goal in ensuring that open space is available is so residents
  and visitors are provided an opportunity to participate in outdoor recreation in the
  city.  Open space does not only refer to recreational opportunities but aesthetic
  enhancement of the community as well. The following
                                                    ,.
                                                            policies focus on the provision
  of new parks in the city, improving the appearance of roadways with landscaped
  parkways and medians, and emphasizing landscaping and open space in new
  commercial and industrial developments.
  GOAL 1: Continue to         p~ovide   open space to improve the quality of the
              environment.
  Policies
         1.1 Develop mini parks, where appropriate, on land acquired or donated to
              the city.
(
"        1.2 Improve the city image by planting and maintaining street trees.
         1.3 Require tree planting and landscaping in all commercial areas, including
              restaurants, and in industrial parking areas on a ratio of one 16-gallon
              size tree or greater for every 10 parking spaces or one tree for each 20
              parking spaces for a continuous double row of parking.
         1.4 All commercial street perimeters shall have minimum 5-foot wide
              planting borders, planted with trees not over 40 feet apart, with low
              shrub and ground cover. All will have automatic irrigation system. All
              will be a minimum of 2 percent of total land area of property.
          1.5 All median strips, islands, etc., shall be landscaped.
          1.6 Develop a park of adequate size on the central to west end of the city
              providing recreational facilities with adequate off-street parking.
          1.7 All new residential development shall have permanent landscaping in the
              front setback area, and at entry side of buildings, and must include a
               15-gallon size tree at the minimum.
(
                                              4-2
   JBX/7330001A1
  4.2.2 ISSUE: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
c The following goal and supporting policies respond to the community's desire to
  improve the appearance of the city. The policies following this goal are specific
  measures directed to new development establishing landscape standards.
  GOAL 2:      Provide open space to meet the specific needs of the citizens of the City
               of Maywood.
  Policies
          2.1 Require all developers to landscape all frontages and interior courts, open
               spaces, and boundary areas with appropriate trees and landscaping.
          2.2 Enforce maintenance of existing landscaping plantings in commercial and
               industrial development.
   4.3    OPEN SPACE PLAN
   Parks and recreational facilities, in general, provide relief from the harsh urban
   environment and enhance the livability of a city. The preceding goals and policies
   recognize the importance of open space and establish the policy framework to guide
   existing and future park services and facilities. This section of the open space
   element establishes open space and park development standards and long-range
   strategies for the development of new parks in Maywood.
   4.3.1 PARK STANDARDS
   The National Recreation and Parks Association   (~'A) has    prepared a classification
   system that has categorized parks by location, spatial requirements, and facilities.
   The following park standards contained in this element are specific to the City of
   Maywood and apply to both existing and future park land.
   Miniparks. Miniparks are small parks under 1 acre in size and generally designed to
   serve preschool aged children. The service area is generally less than one-quarter
   mile in radius. Pixley Park is the only existing park in this category in the City of
   Maywood.
(
                                            4-3
   JBX/7330001Al
  Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks are designed to promote active recreation
  at the neighborhood level and include a variety of facilities, including playground
  equipment, picnic areas, open courts, and athletic fields.      Neighborhood park area
  standards establish a minimum land area of 5 acres. This type of park will have a
  service area of one-quarter to one-half mile. Maywood City Park is included in this
  category.
  School Playgrounds. This category recognizes the important role schools have and
  will continue to have in providing recreational facilities for local youth.
  4.3.2 SiTE SELECTION FOR NEW PARKS
  A major issue of the open space element concerns the availability of open space and
  park land for residents of the city. It is difficult to anticipate future costs of
  parkland acquisition and development. Costs may vary widely depending upon the
  site location, type of facility, size of the proposed project, as well as the availability
  of financial resources to purchase land and construct improvements.
  In order to ensure that city residents now, and in the future, are provided with
  sufficient park land to meet recreational needs, the city has established a standard
   to acquire parcels of land, when they are available, for construction of miniparks in
  the parkland development zones. It is also the intent of the open space plan to
   encourage the continuation of the shared use of school sites for recreational purposes
   and to expand services and facilities, as needed, at the existing parks.
   The City of Maywood is a mature urban city with limited opportunities for open
   space expansion. The city has identified areas of the community in need of ,park
   facilities and has included these areas in parkland development zones indicated In
   Exhibit 4-1. The intent of the zones is to indicate areas where land Is to be acquired
   and developed for park and recreational use in the future.
   The parkland development zone serves as an overlay zone in a fashion similar to a
   floating zone in some zoning ordinances. This designation functions as a floating
   zone in that it does not specify a particular location, parcel, or property on the
   zoning map for the prescribed use. Instead, it indicates a general area or district in
   which a future park development will occur at some point during the lifespan of the
(  General Plan.
                                              4-4
   JBX/7330001Al
  The goals and policies of this element recommend that parks of sufficient size be
  located in the two areas of the city. The area west of Atlantic Boulevard and north
(
  of Slauson Avenue has been identified as a park development overlay zone so that a
  minipark can be located somewhere in this area sometime during the planning
  period.    The area south of Slauson and east of Atlantic Boulevard has also been
  selected as a parkland development zone.
   4.3.3 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
   The goals and supporting policies of this General Plan establish a policy framework
   that relates to open space and landscaping in the city.     Table 4-1 indicates the
   policies and the elements in which they are located that relate to open space and/or
   landscaping.
   A number of open space policies are quite specific concerning the landscaping and
   open space requirements that will apply to development in the city. These standards
   are summarized in Table 4-2 and the corresponding implementing policy is identified.
(
                                             4-5
    JBX/7330001Al
                                   TABLE 4-1
                    OPEN SPACE LANDSCAPING POLICY MATRIX
(
                            Open
  Element/Polley      Parks Space   Landscaping             Measure
  Land Use: 3.4         x                       New park development
  Land Use: 5.3                           x     Develop and implement landscape
                                                standards
  Land Use: 6.8                           x     Landscaping required in industrial
                                                development
  Land Use: 7.6         x                       Expand recreational facilities in
                                                west and central Maywood
  Open Space: 1.1       x                       Develop mini parks
  Open Space: 1.2                         x     Plant and maintain street trees
  Open Spac"e: 1.3                        x     Landscape requirement in
                                                commercial areas
  Open Space: 1.4                         x     Street tree standards
  Open Space: 1.5                         x      Median landscaping
  Open Space: 1.6       x                        New park development
  Open Space: 1.7                          x     Landscape requirements for
                                                residential
  Open Space: 2.1                          x     Landscape standards
  Open Space: 2.2                          x     Landscape requirements for
                                                commercial
  Conservation: 1.1                        x     Require landscaping
  Conservation: 3.3                        x     Require drought resistant
                                                 landscaping
  Source:  Michael Brandman Associates, 1989.
(
                                         4-6
   JBX!7330001A1
                                    TABLE 4-2
                           LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
c General Plan Policy               Use                       Standard
  Open Space: 1.3      Industrial and commercial  Landscaping in parking areas:
                       landscaping                One 16-gal tree per 10 park-
                                                  ing spaces or one 16-gallon
                                                  tree per 20 parking spaces in .
                                                  a continuous double row
  Open Space: 1.4      Industrial and commercial  All street perimeters must
                       landscaping                hal1e: minimum 5-foot wide
                                                  planting borders; trees must
                                                  not be over 40 feet apart; low
                                                  shrub and groundcover must
                                                  be provided; automatic irriga-
                                                  tion system must be provided;
                                                  and landscaped area must be a
                                                  minimum of 2 percent of the
                                                  total land area
  Open Space: 1.7       Residential landscaping   Permanent landscaping must
                                                  be provided in front setback
                                                  area and at entry side of
                                                  structure; landscaping must
(                                                  include at least a 15-gallon
                                                  sized tree
  Open Space: 2.1       All development            All frontages, interior courts,
                                                   open space areas, and bound-
                                                   ary areas must be landscaped
  Open Space: 2.2       Commercial and industrial  All existing landscaped areas
                        development                must be maintained
  Conservation: 3.3     Commercial and industrial  Drought-resistent trees and
                        development                landscaping required
  Source: Michael Brandman Associates, 1989.
(
                                         4-7
  JBX17330001AI
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
Public Safety Element Background Report 
                      MAYWOOD GENERAL PLAN 

                        OPEN SPACE ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
      4.4    INTRODUCTION
(
      This section of the City of Maywood General Plan Background Report serves as the
      technical appendix to the Open Space Element. State law requires that open space
      elements focus- on land used for natural resource preservation, scenic areas, open
      space used for groundwater recharge and watershed protection, agricultural land,
      wilderness areas set aside for habitat protection, and open space used for
      recreation. Only the latter category of open space applies to the City of Maywood
      since the city is completely urban in character.
      The following issues and trends related to open space apply to the city:
              •   There are no remaining parcels of land in the city which serve to protect
                  watersheds, provide habitats for wildlife, or are used for agricultural
                  purposes. The amount of open space remaining in Maywood is limited
                  because the city is entirely developed. As a result, there are no large,
                  undeveloped areas or parcels remaining of the city.
              •   Open space in the city used for pUblic recreation Is limited to the two
                  existing parks (Maywood City Park and Pixley Park). Maywood City Park
  (                consists of 5.5 acres and Pixley Park has an area of 0.3 acre.
              •    Aside from the two parks located in Maywood, the only other primary
                  sources of recreational open space are provided by the local schools.
                   Loma Vista, Fishburn, and Heliotrope Elementary schools have
                   approximately 7.25 acres of playground area, though these are paved.
               •   The city would need over 61 acres of parkland to meet commonly used
                   open space standards established by the National Recreation and Parks
                   Association. These standards may not be applicable to urbanized areas
                   similar to Maywood. However, the city's residents would clearly benefit
                   from new park development and/or recreational opportunities.
       4.5     PARKS AND RECREATION
       4.5.1 DESCRIPTION OF EXISTING FACILITIES
       The City of Maywood Parks and Recreation Department operates Maywood City Park
       and Pixley Park. The combined area of the two parks is 5.8 acres.
    (
                                                  4-8
        JBX/7330001A1

          Maywood City Park. This park consists of 5.5 acres and is located on the
          eastern portion of the city. The facilities located in this park include a
          baseball diamond softball field, picnic facilities, playground equipment, and a
c         recreational building. Park-sponsored programs and community activities are
          available at the community building. A wide range of activities include scout
           meetings, craft classes, and senior citizen gatherings.
           Pixley Park. This small park, located in the western portion of the city, has
           an area of approximately 0.3 acre.          This park serves the immediate
           neighborhood and includes playground equipment for small children with
           swings, slides, a merry-go-round, and climbers.          Summer park activity
           programs are also conducted at this park. Picnic and barbeque facilities are
           available.
    In addition to the two parks, the three pUblic elementary schools in Maywood ha~e
    playgrounds that are available to the community when school is not in session.
    Playgrounds are open after school until dark during the winter, and until 6 p.m.
    during other months.
    The usable open space available at the two parks and these elementary school
    playgrounds are sum marized in Table 4-3
                                          TABLE 4-3
(                                RECREATIONAL LAND USES
                Parks                                                    Acreage
                Maywood City Park and Community Center                      5.5
                Pixley Park                                                 0.3
                           Total Parks                                    5:8
                School Playgrounds
                 Lorna Vista Elementary                                     0.75
                 Fishburn Elementary                                        0.50
                 Heliotrope Elementary                                      0.50
                           Total School Playgrounds                        1:75
                           Grand Total                                      7.55
     Source:   City of Maywood Parks and Recreation Department, 1988.
  (
                                               4-9
     JBX17330001Al
      4.6         NEEDS ASSESSMENT
      The National Parks and Recreation Association (NRPA) established standards
(     indicating the amount of recreational open space that should be available for any
      given population. These standards indicate that at least 2.5 acres of parkland should
      be provided for every 1,000 persons living in a city.       According to this criteria,
      Maywood would need approximately 61.5 acres of parkland to meet the recreation
      needs of the 24,600 persons living in the city.      The city is deficient by at least
      56 acres in the required acreage that would enable the city to meet the NRP open
      space standards.
      The City of Maywood will not be able to achieve the NRPA open space standards
      since there are limited opportunities for new park development. Open space is at a
       premium and the few vacant parcels that do exist in the city are too small or too
       expensive to develop as larger parks. Furthermore, it is unlikely that land presently
       occupied by structures would be converted to parks. Such a conversion would be very
       expensive due to costs associated with land acquistion and demolition of existing
       structures, in addition to the expense of actually developing the park.
  (    Another factor. that needs to be considered is the location of the two existing city
       parks in relation to the neighborhoods where the parks are located. The larger of the
       two parks, Maywood City Park, is located in the northeastern quadrant of the city
       while the smaller Pixley Park is located in the western portion of the city. The one-
       half mile service area radius of Maywood City Park covers over half of the city.
       Virtually all of Maywood is located within 1 mile of the park so that most of the
       residents are relatively close to the larger park.
       There are few available recreation facilities located near the city and all of these
       are neighborhood and community parks located in adjacent jurisdictions.          These
        include Corona Park in Huntington Park and Al Treder Park in the City of Bell.
    (                                             4-10
        JBX17330001A1
