  III. Mobility and Infrastructure
Introduction                                     The Mobility and Infrastructure
                                                 Element’s Purpose
As Escondido matures, transportation plan-       The Circulation Element is one of seven
ning and infrastructure needs must respond to    mandated elements that each local govern-
changing conditions. The community‟s quality     ment must maintain in its General Pan. The
of life depends upon accessibility and services  Circulation Element must include the general
provided to each land use. The relationship      location and extent of existing and proposed
between the community‟s land uses, circu-        major thoroughfares, transportation routes, ter-
lation system and utility infrastructure net-    minals, and other local public utilities and
work is a vital consideration for comprehen-     facilities. Circulation and utility improvements
sive planning.                                   must also correlate with the city‟s Land Use
                                                 and Community Form Element
Ensuring good mobility to transport residents,
goods and services, as well as providing re-     The Mobility and Infrastructure Element‟s
liable utilities to adequately serve the commu-  purpose is to identify the types, locations and
nity requires that regular evaluations be con-   extent of existing and proposed transportation
ducted when new development and redevelop-       and utility facilities, and to establish goals and
ment occur. Efficiency, access, and safety for   guiding policies for implementing improve-
all modes of travel, including pedestrian,       ments necessary to serve existing and future
bicycling, and transit will afford residents     residents. The element introduces planning
options when trip planning and lessen depen-     tools essential for achieving the community‟s
dence on single passenger automobile travel.     transportation and utility goals and policies
The result will be cleaner air, a safer environ- with the intent of providing a sustainable
ment, improved economy, and higher quality       system to serve residents and businesses.
of life.

                   Figure III-1
          GENERAL PLAN
    QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #1
                  (Part 1 of 2)
 TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION
       Circulation Element streets and
     intersections shall be planned and
developed to achieve a minimum level
 of service “C” defined by the Highway
  Capacity Manual as amended or up-
dated, or such other national standard
 deemed appropriate by the city. Level
of service “C” may not be feasible in all
  areas at all times and level of service
  “D” shall be considered the threshold
for determining significant impacts and
                                            A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
appropriate mitigation. Due to physical            General Plan
design characteristics, implementation
  of pedestrian-oriented „smart growth‟     The Mobility and Infrastructure Element is most closely related to the
      and Complete Streets design im-       Land Use and Community Form Element due to the inherent two-way
  provements, high density infill areas,
                                            relationship between land use and transportation. Escondido‟s mobility
      environmental resource consider-
 ations, existing development, freeway
                                            and infrastructure systems do not function independently; they are an
  interchange impacts, and incomplete       integral part of the city‟s land use planning. They also function as a
     system improvements, alternative       link in the regional system. The circulation system strongly influences
   levels of service may be appropriate     how, where, and what type of development will occur. Land use
    for isolated areas as determined by     patterns directly affect the demand for transportation facilities and
                    the city.               utilities. Intensive land uses generate more traffic, requiring greater
                                            degrees of accessibility and higher levels of utility service. Conversely,
   Where existing street or intersection    transportation facilities and utility infrastructure, existing or proposed,
   capacities are below level of service
                                            influence the use of land adjacent to these facilities.
    “C,” street, operational or Transpor-
 tation System Management improve-
                                            The location of residential, commercial, and industrial uses can in-
 ments shall be required or planned to
improve the service level to “C” when-      fluence how a road will function along with its design, condition,
   ever feasible based upon impacts of      maintenance requirements, and community character. Existing and
     future development. Such require-      proposed development areas must be considered when making future
 ments or plans may be incremental to       road and utility programming decisions. In turn, future development
  accommodate future development or         patterns should not adversely affect the circulation and utility systems.
 the recycling of existing development.     It is necessary to follow appropriate design standards and improve
  Feasibility of level of service “C” shall existing roads and utilities in order to manage the infrastructure net-
    be based on impacts upon existing       works so they will be capable of performing their intended functions.
    development or environmental con-
      straints along street segments or
                                            To this end, Master Plans for larger utility systems are critical for
                 intersections.
                                            programming future improvements and establishing standards for
           Escondido’s Rapid Bus            implementation and must relate to General Plan policies. Policies
         service departing from the         contained in this element aim to direct city efforts to promote
          Westfield Shoppingtown            integration of the mobility and infrastructure systems with land use
                    Station                 policies and regional transportation and utility system plans.
 Page III-2                                                Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                                                           Figure III-1
                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #1
                                                                                         (Part 2 of 2)
                                                                          TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION
                                                                         Capital improvement programs and/or
                                                                           facility plans shall include Transpor-
                                                                        tation System Management measures
B. Regional Transportation Planning                                     designed to maintain or improve levels
                                                                            of service at existing or developed
Federal law requires that all regional transportation planning agencies  intersections that may be impacted by
                                                                          further development or traffic volume
prepare and adopt a Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) establishing
                                                                                            growth.
the region‟s priorities for funding transportation infrastructure pro-
jects and programs. As the region‟s governmental agency, The San         The city shall support public transpor-
Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) collaborates with             tation facilities through such measures
Escondido and member agencies to achieve a coordinated and              as requiring right-of-way for commuter
balanced RTP that considers all transportation systems, as well as         rail or park-and-ride facilities, transit
their users and associated facilities and services including, but not   stops or facilities, or for other transpor-
limited to: mass transit, highways, railroads, bicycle, walking, goods    tation needs. The city shall establish
movement, maritime, and aviation.                                         Transportation System Management
                                                                            measures and shall cooperate with
The RTP is meant to be action-oriented, practical, and flexible and to   agencies and coordinate with regional
                                                                        transportation plans and transportation
consider both short-term and long-term issues with clear, concise
                                                                          agencies. Adopted San Diego Asso-
policy guidance to local and state officials, which is updated every       ciation of Governments (SANDAG)
four years. Federal guidelines also recommend identifying both the        models shall be utilized to determine
unconstrained and revenue constrained financial resources necessary              Quality of Life compliance.
to accelerate programming to retrofit existing roads with safe and
convenient multimodal transportation improvements. The guidelines
also encourage local jurisdictions to ensure that general plan
circulation elements and local street and road standards include the
necessary planning, design, construction, operations, and main-
                                                                                    Interstate 15 through
tenance procedures, to support all transportation system users.
                                                                              Escondido looking south, and
Escondido‟s Traffic and Transportation Quality of Life Standard              State Highway 78 Interchange
prescribes thresholds for the community‟s acceptable level of service                 in the foreground
(Figure III-1).
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                                   Page III-3

                 Figure III-2
          Complete Streets
Complete Streets Vision:
Consistently design and plan all trans-
portation and land use projects in
Escondido with all users of all ages and
abilities in mind. Provide a balanced
multimodal transportation network with
context sensitive solutions throughout
the city and promote non-vehicular fa-
cilities, walkability, active living, transit
usage and Transportation Demand
Management (TDM) measures in
downtown & mixed use villages.
Complete Streets Features:
Complete streets involve a well main-
tained, comprehensive, integrated, and
connected network with the following
features:
 Balanced design to accommodate
    walking, cycling, transit, driving,
    parking, and deliveries;
 Variety of uses and activities that
    create a varied streetscape;
 Design that relates well to the
    street‟s bordering uses and allows
    for continuous activity;
                                              C. Complete Streets
 Pedestrian and biking facilities that
                                              Complete Streets is a national movement to ensure that transpor-
    promote safety and maximize
    access to bordering uses;                 tation planners and engineers consistently design and operate the
 Aesthetically designed street lights        entire roadway with safety and accessibility of all users—bicyclists,
    that provide sufficient illumination of   transit vehicles and riders, and pedestrians of all ages and abilities, as
    sidewalks;                                well as goods and services. Complete streets involves changing
 Consistent landscaping that includes        Escondido‟s orientation toward building streets primarily for cars by
    street trees for shade, landscaped        instituting smart growth policies that expand transportation choices to
    medians and sidewalks;                    ensure roads function as a truly “multimodal” transportation net-work
 Sustainable design that minimizes           (Figure III-2).
    runoff, minimizes heat island effects,
    and climatic demands and
    conserves scarce resources; and,          What it takes to make a street "complete" varies depending on many
 Well-maintained facilities.                 factors. Components may include sidewalks, bike lanes (or wide
                                              paved shoulders), special bus lanes, comfortable and accessible transit
                                              stops, frequent crossing opportunities, median islands, accessible
                                              pedestrian signals, curb extensions, and more. A complete street near
                                              Daley Ranch will look quite different from a complete street in
          Downtown Escondido’s                downtown, but both are designed to balance safety and convenience
               Grand Avenue                   for everyone using the road.
 Page III-4                                                 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

The benefits of implementing multimodal complete streets include
increased transportation choices that give people the option to avoid
traffic congestion, and increase the overall capacity of the transpor-
tation network. Economic benefits are derived from complete streets
because transportation costs and travel times are reduced while
property values and job growth are enhanced. Additionally, integra-
ting sidewalks, bike lanes, transit amenities, and safe crossings into
the initial design of a project spare the expense of retrofits later.
Communities that incorporate complete streets gain quality of life
benefits; increased bicycling and walking are indicative of vibrant and
livable communities. Public health experts are encouraging walking
and bicycling as a response to the nation‟s obesity epidemic. Streets
that provide room for bicycling and walking help children get
physical activity and gain independence.
Smart growth land use patterns and instituting complete streets play a
direct role in the rate and growth of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) by
influencing the distance that people travel and the mode of travel they
choose. Developing a complete streets system provides an oppor-
tunity for reducing the amount that people drive by increasing the
opportunity for walking, bicycling, and transit, thus reducing vehicle
emissions. Transportation accounts for a significant percent of
California‟s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, which must be
reduced pursuant to state law. Studies show that even with aggressive   Sidewalk installation program
                                                                         in Escondido’s established
state and federal vehicle efficiency standards and the use of
                                                                          neighborhoods promotes
alternative fuels, meeting the state‟s GHG reduction goals will require pedestrian activity, improves
expanding transportation choices to increase opportunities for re-      neighborhood linkages, traffic
ducing how much the average Californian drives. Reducing the               safety, aesthetics, and
number of automobile trips will reduce fuel consumption and GHG                property values
emissions.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                        Page III-5

     “All truly great thoughts are
      conceived while walking.”
                    Friedrich Nietzsche
                    Philosopher and Poet
                                         1. Pedestrian Network
                                         A safe and accessible pedestrian network for all ages and all abilities
                                         is a key component to creating a livable community. People need to
                                         feel safe, both from traffic accidents or hazards, and also from crime.
                                         Well-designed pedestrian networks can improve the safety of a
 The Escondido Creek path offers
 pedestrian access to residential        neighborhood on both levels. An environment in which people are
     neighborhoods, city parks,          comfortable using the sidewalks helps build a healthy community and
     shopping and employment             prevents crime by adding “eyes on the street,” while facilitating a
             areas (above)               lively atmosphere. Ensuring that streets and intersections are acces-
                                         sible to all ages and ability levels ensures safety, opportunities for
                                         physical activity and a pleasant pedestrian experience for everyone.
 The shaded sidewalks and tree-          Escondido‟s General Plan envisions a pedestrian-friendly environ-
  lined streets of Old Escondido         ment where public spaces, including sidewalks and off-street paths,
  Neighborhood make the area a           offer a level of convenience, safety and attractiveness to the pedes-
      popular place for walking
                                         trian that will encourage and reward the choice to walk.
              (above right)
Page III-6                                             Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

2. Bicycle Network
Escondido is committed to supporting bicycling as a form of mobility
and recreation. Bicycling is a basic, fundamental mode of transpor-
tation that in today‟s motorized world of travel is often overlooked as
an option to help manage circulation issues and concerns. As part of
the General Plan‟s long-term vision, Escondido supports the planning
and development of bicycle-friendly projects, streets, and neighbor-
hoods for both commuter and recreational riders.
An underlying principle in planning for bicycling is to provide a
system that allows users ample transportation mode choices, and a
reasonable balance in accommodating those choices, without favoring
one mode at the expense of all others. This means in order to achieve
a balance within the current transportation network, bicycling must be
made more attractive and truly be a viable option for transportation.
This includes creating a network comprised of on-street facilities, off-
street facilities, and end-of-trip facilities.
                                                                         Cyclists must share the road
To this end, Escondido has adopted a Citywide Bicycle Master Plan            with vehicles on most
that serves as a policy document to guide the development and main-            Escondido streets
tenance of bicycle facilities throughout the community as part of its                (above)
complete streets network (Figure III-3). The policies in the Bicycle
Master Plan address issues related to Escondido‟s bikeways such as
                                                                          The Escondido Creek path
planning, community involvement, utilization of existing resources,
                                                                         offers bicycle access to many
facility design, safety and education, funding and more.                    areas of the community
                                                                                   (above left)
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                         Page III-7

                                                           Figure III-3
Page III-8 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
3. Transit System
Transit includes a variety of transportation modes that provide
mobility to the public in shared vehicles, ranging from shared taxis
and shuttle vans, to local and intercity buses and passenger rail.
Transit plays an integral role in improving local and national
prosperity, equity, and mobility, and has been cited as crucial part of
the solution to economic, energy, and environmental challenges -
helping to bring a better quality of life.
Escondido is served by the North County Transit District (NCTD),
which includes the cities of Escondido, San Marcos, Vista,
Oceanside, Carlsbad, Encinitas, Solana Beach, Del Mar, and portions
of the unincorporated county. From Escondido‟s multimodal transit
center NCTD operates the BREEZE bus system, with bus stops
located throughout the community, and also manages the SPRINTER
light rail line that provides passenger service from Escondido to         Escondido’s Multi-Modal Transit
Oceanside.                                                                 Station provides rail, bus, taxi,
                                                                           and bicycle path connections
During General Plan community meetings residents expressed con-                       (above)
cern regarding the high number of vehicles on city roadways and the
declining traffic levels of service. Transit is envisioned to help Escon-
dido‟s crowded network by providing energy efficient, pollution-
reducing transportation choices thereby reducing greenhouse gas
                                                                            Rapid Bus service connects
(GHG) emissions. Additionally, transit continues to be one of the            downtown Escondido and
safest modes of travel in the United States. Studies indicate that riding    Westfield’s Shoppingtown
a transit bus is 91 times safer than car travel.                                    (above right)
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                           Page III-9

                                    The many benefits derived from a robust transit system establish the
                                    basis for its inclusion in Escondido‟s vision of building a stronger
                                    community. Transit is a key feature in smart growth complete streets
                                    by creating corridors that become natural focal points for economic
                                    and social activities. Studies have shown that the ability to travel in an
                                    area conveniently, without a car, is an important component of a com-
                                    munity‟s livability. These activities help create strong neighborhood
                                    centers that are more economically stable, safe and productive.
                                    Transit offers many economic benefits for the individual rider and the
                                    community. The American Automobile Association cost of driving a
                                    single-occupant vehicle compared with one adult‟s average fee for
                                    traveling on transit is several thousand dollars savings per year,
                                    depending upon mileage, time of day and type of vehicle or service.
                                    For communities, land values are increased near convenient transit,
                                    which is viewed as a public amenity. Additionally, areas well served
                                    by transit stimulate economic development and increase local sales
                                    and property tax revenues.
                                    The San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) in co-
                                    operation with Escondido and NCTD initiated a Rapid Bus service
                                    that provides an enhanced transit connection between the Escondido
                                    Transit Center and Westfield Shoppingtown. The infrastructure
                                    includes bus stop improvements, queue jump lanes at congested
                                    intersections, and transit signal priority. This service also connects to
                                    the SPRINTER passenger rail line at Escondido‟s Transit Center, to
                                    existing Metropolitan Transit System services, and to future I-15
                                    transit services.
    Features of the Escondido’s
      Rapid Bus service include     Long-term plans to develop a state-wide high speed rail system call
      specially designed shade      for a future station in Escondido near the Downtown Transit Center.
   structures, solar powered LED    Existing and proposed transit opportunities improve the travel time
  lighting, seating, and electronic and reliability without adversely impacting the local infrastructure
      displays announcing BRT       system. The implementation of these facilities complements the
             arrival times
                                    General Plan‟s vision of establishing ample transit facilities and
          (above and right)
                                    services to serve the community (Figure III-4).
Page III-10                                         Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                      Figure III-4
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure Page III-11
                                   4. Traffic Calming
                                   Traffic calming measures are proposed for Escondido‟s circulation
                                   system to make streets more enjoyable, and reduce traffic speeds and
                                   volumes to more acceptable levels. Definitions of traffic calming
                                   vary, but they all share the goal of reducing vehicle speeds, improving
    Traffic calming measures       safety, and enhancing quality of life. Traffic calming reduces acci-
    designed for the Mercado       dents, collisions, noise, vibration, pollution, and crime. In Escon-
     District are features that    dido‟s downtown area certain intersections have incorporated textured
   promote pedestrian activity     paving and curb extensions that effectively calm traffic and enhance
   and include corner and mid-     the pedestrian experience. Incorporating these and other traffic
     block curb extensions,
                                   calming features in mixed use and urban neighborhoods and other key
  decorative paving, landscaped
   medians, plantings close to     areas of the community will be important for ensuring pedestrian-
 travel lanes, low traffic speeds, friendly environments that still accommodates vehicular traffic
       and angled parking
         (above and right)
Page III-12                                       Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                                                     Figure III-5
                                                                         Engineering Department
                                                                                  Definitions
                                                                       Traffic Level of Service (LOS):
                                                                       Describes traffic congestion ratings
                                                                       (“A” through “F”) during morning and
                                                                       evening peak travel periods.
                                                                                     LOS “A”
                                                                        Generally free-flowing operations
                                                                                     LOS “C”
                                                                       Stable operation with some limits on
                                                                        maneuverability that affect speeds
5. Street Network                                                                    LOS “D”
                                                                       Maneuverability and flows reduced by
Escondido‟s street network serves as the backbone of the com-            longer queues and slower speeds
munity‟s transportation system (Figure III-6). Streets and highways
contribute to the overall community in three ways. First, they connect
neighborhoods with each other, and to areas beyond. Second, they
allow for the movement of commodities or freight and, therefore,
provide economic benefit. Third, they are a focal point for activity
and social events that help establish community identity. At
community workshops residents reiterated their desire for main-
taining a more smoothly operating street network.
                                                                                      LOS “F”
The General Plan‟s Quality of Life standard strives for a level of     Extremely slow “stop and go” speeds
                                                                       with congestion and lengthy queues
service “C” (defined by the Highway Capacity Manual) that provides
for minimal delays (Figure III-5). The standard also acknowledges
that physical design characteristics, implementation of pedestrian-
oriented „smart growth‟ and Complete Streets design improvements,
high density infill areas, environmental resource considerations,
existing development, freeway interchange impacts, and incomplete
system improvements, may override the ability to meet this standard
(Figure III-1).
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                            Page III-13

                                                          Figure III-6
Page III-14 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Escondido‟s roadways are defined using a hierarchical classification
system. Each type of roadway is described by size, function, and
capacity. The street network establishes types of roadways, ranging                        Figure III-8
from high capacity state and interstate highways, to two-lane                      GENERAL PLAN
undivided roadways. Some roadway types will have a standard rural             ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
cross-section for use in selected areas. Additional rights-of-way,                  (Summary Descriptions)
greater than the standard widths, may be required at certain locations
to accommodate specific circumstances. The standard roadway                Prime Arterial:
classifications are illustrated in Figure III-7, summarized in Figure III- High design standards, six to eight
8, and described in the paragraphs that follow.                            travel lanes, raised / landscaped
                                                                           medians, no parking, and very limited
                                                                           access. Provides regional, intra-city
                        ROADWAY PROFILES                                   and sub-regional travel service.
                                 Figure III-7                              8 lanes: 116‟ – 136‟ right of way
                                   (Part 1)                                6 lanes: 106‟ – 126‟ right of way
                                                                           Major Road:
                                                                           Four to six travel lanes, controlled
                                                                           access, no parking, and raised / land-
                                                                           scaped medians for added safety and
                                                                           efficiency in providing protected left
                                                                           turns at selected locations. Provides
                                                                           intra-city, and sub-regional service.
                                                                           6 lanes: 90‟ – 110‟ right-of-way
                                                                           4 lanes: 82‟ – 102‟ right-of-way
                                                                           Collector Street:
                                                                           Four travel lanes, controlled access,
                                                                           and no parking or restricted to areas
                                                                           where turn pockets or continuous
                                                                           turn lanes are provided. Provides
                                                                           intra-city travel.
                                                                           4 lanes, no parking: 84‟ right-of-way
                                                                           2 lanes, parking: 64‟ right-of-way
                                                                           Local Collectors:
                                                                           Two travel lanes with parking, except
                                                                           where parking is removed to provide
                                                                           turn lanes. Provides access between
                                                                           neighborhoods and to the Collector
                                                                           Street system.
                                                                           2 lanes, no parking: 42‟ right-of-way
                                                                           2 lanes, parking: 66‟ right-of-way
                                                                           Note: Street classifications identify
                                                                           right-of-way widths. Lane, median
                                                                           and pedestrian zone dimensions and
                                                                           improvements may vary based on
                                                                           bicycle improvements, location and
                                                                           traffic conditions.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                                   Page III-15

                                             Figure III-7
                                               (Part 2)
  Escondido’s asphalt patching
  program repairs local streets
       and fills potholes
Page III-16                     Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

a. Freeways
Interstate 15 and State Highway 78 design standards are dictated by
Caltrans District 11. Interchange improvements are identified in the
Circulation Plan and require coordination and approval by Caltrans.
Interchange on-ramps along Interstate 15 and State Highway 78
within Escondido are subject to peak period ramp metering. The city
supports the concurrent implementation of high occupancy vehicle
(HOV) bypass lanes at the ramps (where possible) to promote ride
sharing and transit use.
                                                                       Interstate 15 and Highway 78
b. Prime Arterials                                                         Freeway Classification
Prime Arterials are six-lane thoroughfares with raised landscaped
medians. In some circumstances, eight lanes may be required. Access
to Prime Arterials may vary depending on where the facility is located
within the community, but is typically limited to adjacent commercial
properties at signal-controlled intersections. Traffic carrying capa-
cities of 70,000 vehicles per day can be achieved depending on the
degree of access control, peak period traffic loadings, and lane con-
figurations at the major intersections
Curbside parking is prohibited and generally, one-quarter mile
intersection spacing is considered as a distance minimum. Where
overriding circumstances will not allow the desired intersection
spacing to be met, left turn restrictions should be considered at all       Valley Center Road
unsignalized intersections. Design features such as curb radii and      Prime Arterial Classification
acceleration/deceleration lanes to accommodate higher speeds may be
incorporated where appropriate for the intersection design. Prime
Arterials roadways in Escondido include West Valley Parkway
between Tulip Street and Ninth Avenue, Via Rancho Parkway south
of Westfield Shoppingtown, and East Valley Parkway, east of
Midway Drive.
c. Major Roads
Major Roads are four lane roadways with painted or raised
landscaped medians. Minimum spacing for intersections along Major
Roads should be one-eighth mile. Left turn restrictions will generally
be placed at minor unsignalized driveways. Bike lanes are
incorporated into Major Road design standards, however, as a
primary traffic carrier, curbside parking may not be appropriate along
most of the more heavily traveled Major Road street segments within
the community. Traffic carrying capacities of 50,000 vehicles per day
can be achieved depending on the degree of access control and peak             Auto Park Way
period loadings. Major Roads in Escondido‟s circulation system            Major Road Classification
include Centre City Parkway, El Norte Parkway, and Broadway
between Washington and Vista Avenues.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                       Page III-17

                                  d. Collector Streets
                                  Collector Streets are four-lane roadways without medians (undivided)
                                  with minimum intersection spacing approximately one-sixteenth mile
                                  (330 feet). Direct access from private residential properties is not
                                  prohibited, but should be avoided where possible. Collector Street
                                  design standards accommodate bicycle lanes with no curbside parking
                                  upon build out of the city. However, many Collector Streets in the
                                  community currently include curbside parking with no bicycle lanes
                                  provided. This requires cyclists to share a travel lane with vehicles. In
                                  some locations, Collector Streets may include a limited median, or be
                                  striped to provide a left-turn pocket. Traffic carrying capacities of
         Grand Avenue             approximately 34,200 vehicles per day can be achieved depending on
  Collector Street Classification the degree of access allowed and peak period traffic loadings.
                                  Collector Streets in Escondido include Washington Avenue, Grand
                                  Avenue, Country Club Lane, and Escondido Boulevard.
                                  e. Local Collector
                                  Local Collector streets often provide access between neighborhoods
                                  and connection to larger streets in the circulation system. Local
                                  Collectors are two-lane roadways that may include painted medians
                                  for left turn movements depending on location within the community.
                                  Direct access from individual residential properties is permitted. The
                                  desirable intersection spacing for Local Collectors is approximately
                                  330 feet. Minimum intersection/access spacing on all Local Collector
                                  roadways should be 200 feet. Local Collectors provide for curbside
                                  parking and bicycle lanes. Parking should be restricted near inter-
            Tulip Street          section approaches where separate right-turn lanes are provided.
  Local Collector Classification  Traffic carrying capacities of 15,000 vehicles per day can be achieved
                                  depending on the degree of access control and peak period traffic
                                  loadings. Local Collector streets in Escondido include Sheridan
                                  Avenue, Tulip Street and Seven Oakes Road.
                                  f. Local Streets
                                  Local Streets are two-lane roadways without medians and not shown
                                  on the Circulation Plan but do provide a vital service by connecting
                                  subdivision and neighborhoods to the city‟s street system. Centerline
                                  striping is typically not provided, and curbside parking is allowed.
                                  Traffic carrying capacity is physically similar to a Local Collector,
                                  however the qualitative limit of acceptable traffic volumes in a
                                  residential environment is substantially lower (less than 10,000
                                  vehicles per day).
Page III-18                                      Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

D. Goods and Services Transport
Transportation is central to Escondido‟s economic competitiveness.
The retail, manufacturing, finance, insurance, real estate, and service
sectors of Escondido‟s economy make up a large percentage of the
city‟s revenue sources. Interstate 15 and State Highway 78, as well as
the NCTD rail line providing freight service, comprise a critical link
of the city‟s circulation system. Ensuring an efficient city street
system to facilitate the movement of goods and services helps ensure
that those revenues remain reliable.
1. Freight Rail
Escondido‟s rail line from Oceanside that offers North County Transit
District (NCTD) passenger service also provides freight service on a
scheduled basis. The rail line played an important role in Escondido‟s
early history years when transporting agricultural goods was the
community‟s primary revenue generator. Rail freight service has
played a declining role in Escondido‟s circulation system over the
past several decades. However, policies are included in the General
Plan to guide this transportation component.
2. Truck Transport
Truck transport of goods on local surface streets is the most frequent
method of delivery for products in the community. Designating
appropriate truck routes are important for balancing quality of life       Goods and Services are
factors for quiet residential neighborhoods and economic interests that    primarily transported to
ensure efficiency in service. Figure III-9 identifies certain truck routes and through Escondido
to control the size and type of trucks that travel within an area of the    via Interstate 15 and
city, thereby lessening the impact on residents.                              State Highway 78
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                         Page III-19

                                                           Figure III-9
Page III-20 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
E. Aviation
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulates airspace over
Escondido. San Diego International Airport located 30 miles south of
Escondido serves as the region‟s primary facility for business and
pleasure air travel. McClellan-Palomar Airport, approximately 10
miles west of Escondido in the City of Carlsbad, accommodates
private and smaller commercial aircraft on a scheduled basis. Both
airport facilities have undergone facility expansions in recent years. A
small private airfield located northwest of Lake Wohlford has no
scheduled flight service.
1. Air Ambulances
The FAA regulates the operability of air ambulances for emergency
patient helicopter flights to Palomar Hospital. Although there are
guidelines for departures and approaches to hospital landing sites,
there are no laws or regulations regarding the specific flight patterns
of air ambulances because they are non-scheduled, fly in various
directions transporting patients to and from hospitals and must vary
their path to adjust for other air traffic, tall buildings and weather
conditions. They generally fly certain corridors over major arterial
streets and freeways until they are in the proximity of the hospital.
2. Airport Operations
The County of San Diego is owner and operator of McClellan-
Palomar Airport, 12 miles west of Escondido, and under regulations
by the FAA. The San Diego County Regional Airport Authority is
responsible for preparing an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
(ALUCP) to protect the general welfare of people and property within
the vicinity of airports, inform the public regarding airport operations,
and provide guidance on appropriate land uses surrounding the
facility.
An Airport Influence Area (AIA) is established in the ALUCP based
on the airport‟s size, current and future operations with compatibility
criteria including noise, safety, airspace protection, and over-flight
considerations that may affect or restrict land uses. Portions of
Escondido are within the airport‟s AIA Review Area 2 (Figure III-10)
which defines airspace protection and/or overflight notification areas.
Limits on the heights of structures, particularly in areas of high
terrain, are the only restrictions on land uses within Review Area 2.
No overflight notification areas from the McClellan-Palomar Airport
ALUCP apply to land within Escondido, nor does any terrain in the
community penetrate the airport‟s airspace. Also refer to airport Noise    McClellan–Palomar Airport is
Policies in the Community Protection Element.                             located approximately 10 miles
                                                                                west of Escondido
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                          Page III-21

                                                          Figure III-10
Page III-22 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
F. Utility Infrastructure
The availability of, and access to utility infrastructure are significant   The Hale Avenue Resource
factors that ensure a high quality of life for residents and determine       Recovery Facility (in blue)
growth rates, patterns, densities, and intensities of land use. This       including Escondido’s 14-mile
portion of the Mobility and Infrastructure Element discusses the          underground land outfall to San
                                                                             Elijo Lagoon, and 1.5-mile
community‟s existing and future utility needs including water, sewer,
                                                                                    ocean outfall
storm drains, solid waste, energy, and telecommunications.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                           Page III-23

              Figure III-11
       GENERAL PLAN                  1. Water System
 QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #10
                                     Escondido‟s water supply originates primarily from two sources:
           WATER SYSTEM              local water, derived from precipitation and stored in Lakes Dixon,
 The city shall maintain provisions  Henshaw, and Wohlford, as well as imported water transmitted by the
  for adequate water supply, treat-  San Diego County Water Authority. The General Plan Quality of Life
 ment and infrastructure capacity to Standard establishes a service threshold and identifies the Water
 meet normal and emergency situ-
                                     Master Plan as the guiding document for ensuring the adequacy of
 ations and shall have the capacity
  to provide a minimum of 540 gal-   facilities to meet the demands of existing and future growth projected
  lons per day per household or as   over the General Plan horizon (Figure III-11).
    established by the city‟s Water
   Master Plan. Federal and state    The City of Escondido provides water service to most of the territory
   drinking water quality standards  within the General Plan area. In addition, portions of Rincon del
 shall be maintained. The city shall Diablo, Valley Center, and Vallecitos Municipal Water Districts‟
continue efforts to implement water  territories are included within Escondido‟s planning area (Figure III-
reclamation and water conservation   12). The city collaborates with these agencies in the development and
              programs.              maintenance of water infrastructure facilities.
                                     Potential limitations on the availability of supplies require the need to
                                     combine long-term planning for water supply with long-term plan-
                                     ning for community development. Water conservation measures will
                                     be implemented to increase water use efficiency. Existing water
                                     infrastructure will be maintained and priority given to fund critical
    Escondido’s Water Treatment      infrastructure in need of improvements, while new development will
 Facility located east of Lake Dixon not be constructed until adequate infrastructure is in place.
Page III-24                                          Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                     Figure III-12
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure Page III-25
              Figure III-13
       GENERAL PLAN                 2. Wastewater Services
 QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #5
                                    Escondido‟s wastewater is treated at the Hale Avenue Resource
      WASTE WATER SYSTEM            Recovery Facility (HARRF) treatment plant, conveyed over land, and
 The city wastewater system shall   discharged through an ocean outfall. The HARRF also treats and
 have adequate conveyance pipe-     recycles a significant portion of wastewater and provides reclaimed
lines, pumping, outfall, and secon- water for irrigation and industrial/commercial use. The General Plan
 dary treatment capacities to meet
                                    Quality of Life Standard establishes a service threshold and identifies
both normal and peak demands to
  avoid wastewater spills affecting
                                    the Wastewater Master Plan as the guiding document for ensuring the
   stream courses and reservoirs.   adequacy of facilities to meet the demands of existing and future
Capacity to treat a minimum of 250  growth projected over the General Plan horizon (Figure III-13).
gallons per day for each residence
on said system or as established in The City of Escondido is the primary agency providing wastewater
the city‟s Wastewater Master Plan   treatment within the General Plan area, and also treats wastewater
         shall be provided.         involving areas in northern Rancho Bernardo (City of San Diego).
                                    Wastewater treatment is also provided to areas in the General Plan by
                                    Vallecitos Municipal Water District (Figure III-14). The city col-
                                    laborates with area agencies in the development and maintenance of
                                    wastewater infrastructure facilities.
   Aeration chambers at the city’s
     wastewater treatment facility  The availability of wastewater service distinguishes between urban
       (Hale Avenue Resource        and rural development. Thus, the extension of services and the avail-
      Recovery Facility; HARRF)     ability of capacity will influence how much and where Escondido
                (above)             grows. Existing wastewater infrastructure will be maintained and
                                    priority given to fund critical infrastructure in need of improvements,
                                    while new development will not be constructed until adequate infra-
      Aerial view of the HARRF      structure is in place.
             (above right)
Page III-26                                         Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                     Figure III-14
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure Page III-27
                                   3. Stormwater Management
                                   Escondido‟s planning area is located within three hydrologic units:
                                   Escondido Creek, San Dieguito River, and San Luis Rey Creek. The
                                   city‟s drainage master plan requires that adequate flood control
                                   facilities be installed to protect all structures and major roadways
                                   from hazards associated with proximity to a 100-year flood plain.
                                   New development and redevelopment is required to either avoid flood
     More recent stormwater        hazards or incorporate them into the overall design.
  management facilities include
   Reidy Creek Golf Municipal
  Course designed to improve
                                   Stormwater management also includes ensuring adequate capacity
  water quality, control flooding, necessary to collect and carry storm-water to avoid flooding, and
  and provide open space and       reducing pollutants and erosion as part of regional efforts to improve
        recreation (above)         water quality. The city maintains an extensive storm drain system that
                                   is capable of protecting and properly managing stormwater to prevent
     Workers inspecting the        flooding and pollution of rivers, lakes and ultimately the ocean by
   Escondido Creek Channel,        contaminants from urban runoff (Figure III-15). Also refer to Floods
   originally constructed in the   in the Community Protection Element, and Water Resources in the
       1960s (above right)         Resource Conservation Element.
Page III-28                                       Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

                                                     Figure III-15
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure Page III-29
                                  4. Solid Waste and Recycling
                                  Solid waste generated in Escondido is collected by a private service
                                  provider who collects solid and green waste (grass clippings, tree and
                                  shrub trimmings), hazardous household waste, and recyclable
                                  materials. Escondido‟s solid waste is first brought to a collection and
                                  sorting transfer facility in the city before being taken to Sycamore
                                  Land Fill in Santee, California. The City of Escondido is committed
                                  to encouraging recycling and waste reduction. A variety of programs
 Trash collection and transfer at are offered to assist Escondido residents in their conservation efforts.
   Escondido’s EDCO facility      General Plan policies are consistent with the city‟s desire to be a more
             (above)              sustainable community as it has been recognized that recycling
                                  reduces green house gas emissions through energy savings, and
                                  reduced solid waste results in less land devoted to landfills.
  Separating recyclables at the
   EDCO facility (above right)
Page III-30                                      Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

5. Gas and Electric Energy
The reliable availability of energy for the community is important for
the community‟s existing population and future growth. Escondido‟s
primary sources of energy are electricity and natural gas provided by
San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E) which serves San Diego
County and portion of southern Orange County totaling 4,100 square
miles. SDG&E is a subsidiary of Sempra Energy Corporation and
regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).
SDG&E operates Palomar Power Plant, a 550-megawatt electric
energy generating facility in the Escondido Research Technology
Center. SDG&E and the city work together to promote energy conser-
vation and ensure sufficient energy supplies are available to the com-
munity through collaboration and coordination of development
applications and future planning efforts. Policies in this section
require reducing the peak electric load for city facilities, reducing the
city fleet fuel consumption, improving energy efficiency of city
facilities, and encouraging residents to consume less energy. Policies
also support an increasing reliance on renewable energy to reduce
Escondido‟s dependence on nonrenewable energy sources.
6. Telecommunications
Several private companies provide telecommunication services to
Escondido residents and business, including AT&T, Cox, Verizon,
and others. Communication technology continues to evolve and
advancements in the field of telecommunications provide more
efficient options that improve quality of life and enhance economic
opportunities. Benefits of a sophisticated telecommunications system
provide residents opportunities to utilize technology for establishing
home offices, which decrease commutes, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, improve neighborhood security, and provide flexibility for
working parents.
The city will continue to work with providers to ensure high quality
reliable telecommunications services. Policies in the General Plan
promote a wide range of innovative systems and services to attract
and retain state-of-the-art businesses citywide, provide access to all
residents, and facilitate public education.
                                                                          An electric generating “peaker
                                                                           plant” in Escondido provides
                                                                            additional energy capacity
                                                                               during high demand
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                           Page III-31

            G. Mobility and Infrastructure Goals and
                 Policies
            A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and
            Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to mobility and infra-
            structure provided below are intended to guide development to meet
            present and future needs, achieve a vibrant community, and enhance
            the character of Escondido.
            1. Regional Transportation Planning
            GOAL 1      An accessible, safe, convenient, and integrated multi-
                        modal network that connects all users and moves
                        goods and people within the community and region
                        efficiently.
            Regional Transportation Planning Policy 1.1
            Cooperate with the San Diego Association of Governments (SAN-
            DAG), North County Transit District (NCTD), adjacent communities
            and other appropriate agencies to prepare, adopt, and implement a
            Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). The RTP shall define mobility
            improvements and programs to support local and regional growth,
            and promote reduction of single-occupancy vehicle travel and
            increased use of alternative modes of transportation.
            Regional Transportation Planning Policy 1.2
            Collaborate with SANDAG and NCTD for the efficient allocation of
            funding resources for transit and transportation improvements and
            operations.
            Regional Transportation Planning Policy 1.3
            Coordinate local traffic management efforts to be compatible and
            provide connectivity with adopted circulation plans in the region and
            regional transportation planning efforts.
            2. Complete Streets
            Complete Streets Policy 2.1
            Ensure that the existing and future transportation system is inter-
            connected and serves multiple modes of travel, such as walking,
            biking, transit, and driving for safe and convenient travel.
Page III-32                 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Complete Streets Policy 2.2
Provide a safe, efficient and accessible transportation network that
meets the needs of users of all ages including seniors, children, dis-
abled persons, and adults.
Complete Streets Policy 2.3
Promote integrated transportation and land use decisions that enhance
human-scale smart growth development served by complete streets,
which facilitate multimodal transportation opportunities.
Complete Streets Policy 2.4
Evaluate access, safety, and convenience of various transportation
modes for every project involving the following eight user groups:
pedestrians, children, disabled individuals, seniors, bicyclists, transit
riders, motorists, and goods and services.
Complete Streets Policy 2.5
Design streets in a manner that is sensitive to the local context and
recognizes that the needs vary between mixed use, urban, suburban,
and rural settings.
Complete Streets Policy 2.6
Ensure that the entire right-of-way is designed to accommodate
appropriate modes of transportation.
Complete Streets Policy 2.7
Remove barriers, where feasible, to allow people of all abilities to
access the mobility infrastructure serving the community.
Complete Streets Policy 2.8
Promote the provision of multimodal access to activity centers such as
commercial centers and corridors, employment centers, transit
stops/stations, schools, parks, recreation areas, and tourist attractions.
Complete Streets Policy 2.9
Regularly review, update and collect adequate traffic impact fees and
ensure the efficient allocation of state and regional funding sources
for the development and maintenance of local transit and trans-
portation improvements and operations.
                                                                           “Complete Streets” features
                                                                              installed in the Mercado
                                                                            include pedestrian lighting,
                                                                                seating, landscaping,
                                                                             decorative pavement and
                                                                               traffic calming features
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                             Page III-33

                               3. Pedestrian Network
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.1
                               Prepare and regularly update a Pedestrian Master Plan that identifies
                               and defines the following: level of service standards for pedestrian
                               facilities; type and location of pedestrian-oriented streets and path-
                               ways; way-finding program, standards for sidewalk width, improve-
                               ments, amenities, and street crossings; outline and timeframe of
                               needed public improvements; and developer responsibilities.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.2
                               Develop and manage pedestrian facilities to maintain an acceptable
                               Level of Service as defined in the Pedestrian Master Plan.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.3
                               Maintain a pedestrian environment that is accessible to all and that is
                               safe, attractive, and encourages walking.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.4
                               Preserve and enhance pedestrian connectivity within existing
                               neighborhoods via the Escondido Creek trail, sidewalks, and trails,
                               and require a pedestrian network in new developments that provides
                               efficient and well-designed connections to adjacent land uses,
                               commercial districts, schools, and parks.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.5
                               Promote walking and improve the pedestrian experience by requiring
                               pedestrian facilities along all classified streets designated on the
                               Circulation Plan; implementing streetscape improvements along
                               pedestrian routes that incorporate such elements as shade trees, street
                               furniture, and lighting; orienting development toward the street;
                               employing traffic calming measures; and enforcing vehicle speeds on
                               both residential and arterial streets.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.6
                               Enhance pedestrian visibility by enforcing parking restrictions at
                               intersection approaches, improving street lighting, and identifying
                               required clearances to minimize obstructions.
                               Pedestrian Network Policy 3.7
                               Encourage and support the development of pedestrian-friendly
     Along Second Avenue,      mixed-use, commercial, transit-oriented, and multi-tenant office
  decorative paving, shade and districts with active, accessible, connected, and unique public spaces
    separation from vehicles   that promote walking.
   promote pedestrian activity
Page III-34                                    Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Pedestrian Network Policy 3.8
Repair sidewalk and pedestrian paths in the public-right-of-way that
impede pedestrian travel, and maintain the pedestrian network in a
manner that facilitates accessibility and safety.
Pedestrian Network Policy 3.9
Support “safe routes to schools” programming and partner with
schools, non-profit organizations, and transit agencies with the goal of
encouraging more children to walk and bike to school in a safe
environment.
Pedestrian Network Policy 3.10
Design and construct pedestrian-friendly streetscape improvements
that reduce stormwater and pollutant runoff into the drainage system,
using such techniques as urban bio-swales for the filtering of pollu-
tants and permeable hardscapes.
4. Bicycle Network
Bicycle Network Policy 4.1
Maintain and implement a Bicycle Master Plan that enhances existing
bicycle routes and facilities; defines gaps and needed improvements;
prescribes an appropriate Level of Service; outlines standards for their
design and safety; describes funding resources; and involves the
community.
Bicycle Network Policy 4.2
Develop and manage bicycle facilities to maintain an acceptable
Level of Service as defined in the Bicycle Master Plan.
Bicycle Network Policy 4.3
                                                                         Escondido’s Eureka Springs
Promote bicycling as a common mode of transportation and recre-
                                                                          single family development
ation to help reduce traffic congestion and improve public health.           with landscaped and
                                                                            shaded parkways is a
Bicycle Network Policy 4.4                                                   desirable example of
Develop bicycle routes and facilities that connect to transit stations,   pedestrian improvements
employment and commercial centers, schools, libraries, cultural              that promote walking
centers, parks, the Escondido Creek trail, and other frequently visited             (above)
destinations throughout the community and region where they do not
already exist.
                                                                         Escondido Creek provides a
                                                                             Class III Bicycle Path
Bicycle Network Policy 4.5
                                                                              experience through
Coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions the development of bicycle
                                                                          urbanized Escondido with
routes that provide connectivity between the communities.                 separation from motorized
                                                                                    vehicles
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                         Page III-35

                                  Bicycle Network Policy 4.6
                                  Incorporate bicycle parking facilities in public places such as transit
                                  stops, libraries, and parks where feasible.
                                  Bicycle Network Policy 4.7
                                  Require larger new development projects (e.g., employment centers,
                                  educational institutions, and commercial centers) to provide connec-
                                  tions to existing and proposed bicycle routes, as well as bicycle
                                  parking, personal lockers, showers, and other bicycle support facilities
                                  to encourage biking.
                                  Bicycle Network Policy 4.8
                                  Support education programs for motorists and bicyclists regarding
                                  bicycling safety and the public health and environmental benefits of
                                  bicycling.
                                  5. Transit System
                                  Transit System Policy 5.1
                                  Collaborate with the North County Transit District (NCTD) to
                                  facilitate effective, convenient, and efficient transit modes to meet the
                                  needs of residents and visitors including seniors, disabled persons,
                                  and transit-dependent persons.
                                  Transit System Policy 5.2
                                  Cooperate with the North County Transit District (NCTD) to increase
                                  the use of transit by maintaining services within the city that are
                                  timely and cost effective; establishing criteria for transit improve-
                                  ments (including grade separated rail crossings); locating routes and
                                  access points that are responsive to growth patterns; developing short
                                  and long-range service plans; and preserving the rights-of-way for
                                  commuter rail lines.
                                  Transit System Policy 5.3
                                  Coordinate with the NCTD to establish transit stops in areas of
  Bicycle racks on North County   concentrated activity such as near senior housing projects, medical
  Transit District (NCTD) busses  facilities, major employment centers, and mixed use areas.
     accommodates cyclists
              (above)             Transit System Policy 5.4
                                  Coordinate with the NCTD to accommodate transit centers and major
                                  stops with adequate bicycle and pedestrian access and secure bicycle
  Stations along NCTD’s Rapid
   Bus route incorporate solar    storage where appropriate. Include facilities that are well designed,
 energy lighting, shade, seating, provide appropriate lighting and are safe, comfortable, and attractive.
  and bus schedule information
Page III-36                                       Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

Transit System Policy 5.5
Cooperate with NCTD, Caltrans, SANDAG, and other appropriate
agencies to expand the commuter rail system. This shall include the
appropriate location of stops, service schedules, bus routes and
parking needs.
Transit System Policy 5.6
Work with the High Speed Rail Authority (HSRA), SANDAG, and
other pertinent agencies to coordinate the development of a high-
speed rail station and ensure its compatibility with adjoining uses and
connectivity with local pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and automobile
transportation systems.
Transit System Policy 5.7
Provide connections to transit stations by identifying roadway,
bikeway, and pedestrian way improvements to be constructed within
½ mile of every major transit station.
Transit System Policy 5.8
Require that new developments incorporate transit-supporting
facilities into the project design, where appropriate.
Transit System Policy 5.9
Construct, when appropriate, transit facilities such as bus pullouts on
Prime Arterials, Major Roads, and Collector streets.
Transit System Policy 5.10
Provide safe and efficient multimodal access to and within transit
stations, complying with ADA standards.
Transit System Policy 5.11
Evaluate the transportation needs of seniors, including paratransit
service for seniors and disabled persons.
6. Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
TDM Policy 6.1
Develop and implement Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
and complete street programs to reduce automobile travel demand
that may include, but shall not be limited to: preparing site-specific
peak-hour traffic-management plans; promoting ride-sharing and
carpooling for residents and non-residents through preferential
parking; providing park-and-ride facilities adjacent to the regional
transit system; and supporting transit subsidies.                       Crews installing a new traffic
                                                                          signal on Grand Avenue
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                        Page III-37

                                TDM Policy 6.2
                                Encourage employers to offer programs, facilities, and incentives to
                                their employees that would promote carpooling, transit use, and use of
                                other alternative modes.
                                TDM Policy 6.3
                                Establish a TDM program for city employees that promote car-
                                pooling, use of transit, and use of alternative modes of transportation.
                                7. Street Network
                                Street Network Policy 7.1
                                Plan, design, and regulate roadways in accordance with the street
                                classification in the Circulation Element Diagram.
                                Street Network Policy 7.2
                                Allow Specific Alignment Plans for unique situations when standard
                                widening is not adequate for future needs or when special conditions /
                                constraints exist which require a detailed implementation plan.
                                Street Network Policy 7.3
                                Strive to maintain LOS C or better throughout the city except for
                                within the urban core. Establish LOS D as the threshold for
                                determining significant impacts and appropriate mitigation. Due to
                                physical design characteristics, implementation of pedestrian-oriented
                                „smart growth‟ and Complete Streets design improvements, high
                                density infill areas, environmental resource considerations, existing
                                development, freeway interchange impacts, and incomplete system
                                improvements, alternative levels of service may be appropriate for
                                isolated areas as determined by the city.
                                Street Network Policy 7.4
                                Provide adequate traffic safety measures on all new roadways and
                                strive to provide adequate traffic safety measures on existing road-
                                ways (subject to fiscal and environmental considerations). These
                                measures may include, but not be limited to, appropriate levels of
                                maintenance, proper street design, traffic control devices (signs,
                                signals, striping), street lighting, and coordination with the school
                                districts and other agencies.
                                Street Network Policy 7.5
                                Provide high priority to funding capital improvement projects that
                                complete links to the circulation system, relieve existing congestion in
  Traffic Engineers programming the urban core as defined by the city, correct unsafe conditions on
  signal synchronization system existing streets and/or improve the regional circulation system.
       to manage traffic flow
Page III-38                                     Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

Street Network Policy 7.6
Ensure that identified mobility system improvements are developed in
a timely manner to meet the needs of the community.
Street Network Policy 7.7
Require new development projects to analyze local traffic impacts,
and construct and implement the improvements required for that
development.
Street Network Policy 7.8
Require new development projects to analyze traffic impacts on the
regional transportation system, and pay a fair-share contribution to
regional transportation improvements.
Street Network Policy 7.9
Synchronize traffic signals where feasible and appropriate to facilitate
the flow of through traffic, thus enhancing the movement of vehicles
and goods through the city while reducing fuel consumption and air
pollution.
Street Network Policy 7.10
Implement street beautification programs to improve the visual
quality and character of roadway corridors and provide a distinct
identify for key gateways into the city.
Street Network Policy 7.11
Enhance the safety and efficiency of accessing the public street
network from private properties by:
a) Controlling driveway access locations on Prime Arterials and
     Major Roads;
b) Installing medians and access controls on Collector Roads and
     higher classifications;
c) Maintaining minimum distances from intersections for accessing
     Prime Arterials, Major Roads, and Collector streets;
d) Consolidating driveway access; and,
e) Encouraging interconnected parking lots.
8. Parking
                                                                            Citywide synchronized
Parking Policy 8.1                                                          traffic signals facilitate
Ensure off-street and on-street parking is adequate, considering access   through-traffic reduce fuel
to transit facilities and mix of uses in the surrounding area.           consumption and pollution
                                                                             (At the intersection of
                                                                         Broadway and Highway 78)
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                          Page III-39
                              Parking Policy 8.2
                              Consider reducing parking requirements in the downtown and at
                              transit stations as transit ridership increases over time due to increased
                              development intensities and a broader mix of land uses.
                              Parking Policy 8.3
                              Encourage parking in shared surface lots or parking structures to
                              make the most efficient use of land.
                              Parking Policy 8.4
                              Maximize shared parking opportunities for uses with varied peak
                              parking periods.
                              9. Traffic Calming
                              Traffic Calming Policy 9.1
                              Reduce congestion in areas surrounding schools, parks, and other
                              activity centers by applying effective traffic management solutions.
                              Traffic Calming Policy 9.2
                              Encourage the use of innovative methods for traffic control (such as
                              roundabouts, curb extensions, and traffic circles) that add character
                              and create opportunity for improved aesthetics while effectively
                              managing traffic.
                              Traffic Calming Policy 9.3
                              Protect residential neighborhoods from cut-through traffic and other
                              traffic-related issues by implementing appropriate traffic calming
                              measures.
                              10. Goods and Services Transport
                              Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.1
                              Designate official truck routes to minimize the impacts of truck traffic
                              on residential neighborhoods and other sensitive land uses.
                              Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.2
                              Minimize noise and other impacts of truck traffic and deliveries in
                              residential and mixed-use neighborhoods by limiting when these can
                              occur.
    Widening corners along    Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.3
     truck routes facilitates Discourage use of public streets for freight loading and unloading.
    turning movements for
          large vehicles
                              Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.4
       (Grand Avenue and
   Rose Street intersection)
                              Encourage businesses to schedule deliveries at off-peak traffic
                              periods.
Page III-40                                   Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.5
Work with railroad operators to facilitate the rail transport of goods
through the city.
Goods and Services Transport Policy 10.6
Work with railroad operators to coordinate freight train schedules to
occur during off-peak travel hours.
11. Aviation
Aviation Policy 11.1
Monitor private and public airport related activities in the vicinity of
the Planning Area to ensure compatibility with General Plan land uses
and policies.
Aviation Policy 11.2
Require all development in the General Plan boundary located within
the Airport Influence Area of the Airport Land Use Compatibility
Plan (ALUCP) for the McClellan-Palomar Airport to be located and
constructed in conformance with the ALUCP.
Aviation Policy 11.3
Review San Diego International and McClellan-Palomar Airports‟
expansion plans to ensure their range of aviation services meets the
present and future needs of residents and the business community.
Aviation Policy 11.4
Collaborate with Palomar/Pomerado Health District regarding
emergency medical helicopter services to facilitate access and
minimize disruption to area residents.
12. Water System
GOAL 2: Adequate and sustainable infrastructure and water
            supply to serve a community that values and con-
            serves water.
Water System Policy 12.1
Regularly review and update a Water Master Plan that establishes
service standards; defines needed improvements to systematically
expand water distribution, delivery, treatment, and storage concurrent
with planned growth; and incorporates best practices to sustain scarce
water resources.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                       Page III-41

                                Water System Policy 12.2
                                Maintain adequate water supply, treatment, and distribution capacity
                                to meet normal and emergency situations to provide a minimum
                                standard of 540 gallons per day per household. This standard should
                                be periodically reviewed and modified by updates to the Water
                                Master Plan to account for changes in water supply, demands, and
                                conservation practices.
                                Water System Policy 12.3
                                Design the water supply and distribution system, and regularly
                                review, update and collect water connection fees to support the
                                development and ongoing maintenance and operations of each service
                                area at the intensity permitted by the General Plan.
                                Water System Policy 12.4
                                Ensure that the Escondido-Vista Water Treatment Plant and its
                                supporting infrastructure provides sufficient capacity to accommodate
                                the growth permitted by the General Plan.
                                Water System Policy 12.5
                                Require new development to provide adequate water facilities and/or
                                finance the costs of improvements necessary to serve the demands
                                created by the development and/or anticipated growth determined by
                                the city, as appropriate. Establish a system for the reimbursement of
                                construction costs for backbone water system improvements in master
                                planned development projects involving multiple phases and
                                developers.
                                Water System Policy 12.6
                                Permit the use of assessment districts or similar mechanisms to
                                finance backbone water infrastructure improvements.
                                Water System Policy 12.7
                                Require any new water facilities to be constructed to city standards.
                                Water System Policy 12.8
                                Prioritize water infrastructure improvements in target land use areas
                                as identified in the Land Use Element.
                                Water System Policy 12.9
                                Employ best practices to maintain the highest possible energy
                                efficiency in the water treatment plant and infrastructure system to
                                reduce costs and greenhouse gas emissions.
   Water treatment equipment
    at the city’s facility near
           Lake Dixon
Page III-42                                     Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

Water System Policy 12.10
Implement federal and state drinking water quality standards for
public water infrastructure facilities and private development projects.
Water System Policy 12.11
Continue to implement water conservation programs, such as
requirements for water efficient landscaping and enforcement of
water wise regulations, and amend as appropriate to reflect evolving
technologies and best practices.
Water System Policy 12.12
Require new development to incorporate water conservation tech-
niques into building and site design incorporating such elements as
water efficient fixtures (e.g., low flow shower heads); drought-
tolerant landscape, permeable hardscapes, and on-site stormwater
capture and re-use facilities.
Water System Policy 12.13
Continue to use and explore opportunities to increase the use of
recycled water in the city.
Water System Policy 12.14
Educate Escondido‟s residents and businesses about the importance
of water conservation and reclamation and techniques and programs
to achieve these goals.
13. Wastewater System
GOAL 3: Provision of adequate and sustainable wastewater
            infrastructure to serve residents, businesses and
            property
Wastewater System Policy 13.1
Regularly review and update the Wastewater Master Plan to establish
service standards, define needed improvements that systematically
expand wastewater collection and treatment facilities concurrent with
planned growth; and incorporate best practices that sustains and
prevents pollution of water resources.
Wastewater System Policy 13.2
Ensure that the Hale Avenue Resource Recovery Facility (HARRF)
and supporting infrastructure provide sufficient capacity to meet
normal and emergency demand for existing and future growth based
on a minimum standard of 250 gallons per day for each residence
served by the HARRF. This standard should be periodically reviewed
and modified by updates to the Wastewater Master Plan to account
for changes in sanitary waste generation and conservation practices.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                       Page III-43

                               Wastewater System Policy 13.3
                               Design the wastewater system to support development of properties at
                               the intensities specified by the General Plan Land Use Plan.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.4
                               Regularly review, update and collect wastewater connection fees for
                               new development to be serviced by the city‟s wastewater system.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.5
                               Require new development to provide adequate wastewater facilities
                               and finance the costs of improvements necessary to serve the
                               additional demands created by the development and /or anticipated
                               growth determined by the city, as appropriate. Establish a system for
                               the reimbursement of construction costs for backbone wastewater
                               system improvements in master planned development projects
                               involving multiple phases and developers.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.6
                               Permit the use of assessment districts or similar mechanisms to
                               finance backbone wastewater infrastructure improvements.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.7
                               Require any new wastewater system facilities be constructed to city
                               standards.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.8
                               Prioritize the construction of wastewater infrastructure improvements
                               to serve target land use areas as identified in the Land Use Element.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.9
                               Collect a “per-unit” wastewater connection fee for all new housing
                               units required to be serviced by the city‟s wastewater system.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.10
                               Design wastewater facilities to implement practices that avoid sewage
                               spills affecting stream courses and reservoirs.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.11
                               Explore alternative wastewater technologies and best practices that
                               reduce the amount of wastewater requiring treatment. Require new
                               development to implement appropriate and feasible systems.
                               Wastewater System Policy 13.12
      Wastewater treatment     Employ best practices to maintain the highest possible energy
  equipment at the Hale Avenue efficiency to reduce costs and greenhouse gas emissions of the Hale
   Resource Recovery Facility  Avenue Resource Recovery Facility (HARRF) and other wastewater
           (HARRF)
                               system facilities.
Page III-44                                    Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

Wastewater System Policy 13.13
Maintain a buffer zone around the HARRF limiting the amount of
new residential development, and permit compatible non-residential
development that utilizes site planning and architectural techniques
that minimize public exposure to odors and health risks.
14. Storm Drainage
GOAL 4:       Provision of adequate and sustainable infra-structure
              that is environmentally sensitive to serve residents,
              businesses, and property.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.1
Regularly review and update the Master Drainage Plan to establish
standards for each drainage basin, define needed improvements to
accommodate stormwater runoff on full development of the drainage
basin at the intensities specified by the Land Use Element, and
incorporate best practices to prevent pollution of water resources and
sustain natural habitats.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.2
Improve the existing storm drainage system by correcting identified
deficiencies.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.3
Levy Drainage Fees for subdivided and developed land to finance
drainage improvements. Periodically review and adjust for inflation,
construction costs, and changes in land development intensities and
timing.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.4
Require new development to create a mechanism to finance and fund
ongoing maintenance of stormwater facilities.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.5
Require new development to prepare drainage studies and improve-
ment plans that demonstrate no net increase in stormwater runoff and
compliance with adopted stormwater plans.
Storm Drainage Policy 14.6
Require new development to minimize alterations to natural land-
forms and the amount of impervious surfaces to minimize erosion,
while encouraging implementation of low impact development
measures and the maximum use of natural drainage ways, consistent
with sound engineering and best management practices.                  Crews installing a new storm
                                                                         drain on Mission Avenue
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                       Page III-45
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.7
                                 Require new development and redevelopment to minimize storm
                                 water runoff and contaminants entering drainage facilities by
                                 incorporating low impact development measures and other on-site
                                 design features such as bio-swales, retention ponds, and cisterns for
                                 storage and infiltration, treatment of flows, and appropriate best
                                 management practices (BMPs) consistent with the National Pollution
                                 Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.8
                                 Mitigate negative impacts to adjacent surrounding land uses from
                                 pertinent drainageway corridors by incorporating appropriate
                                 structural and non-structural best management practices (BMPs).
                                 BMP‟s may include the use of screening, landscaping, or open space
                                 setbacks.
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.9
                                 Construct nonstructural flood protection methods that incorporate
                                 vegetation to protect and stabilize land areas as an alternative to
                                 constructing concrete channels.
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.10
                                 Promote the joint use of stormwater drainage facilities for recreation
                                 and conservation purposes, such as integrating sports fields in
                                 detention basins, or trails along drainage courses.
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.11
                                 Maintain flood control channels and storm drains through periodic
                                 dredging, repair, desilting, and clearing to prevent losses in effective
                                 use, subject to approval from appropriate state and federal agencies.
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.12
                                 Design stormwater facilities to minimize the need for frequent
                                 maintenance.
                                 Storm Drainage Policy 14.13
                                 Design and maintain detention facilities that are environmentally
                                 sustainable and compatible with surrounding uses to maximize vector
                                 control, manage flows, and maximize opportunities for conservation
                                 of water.
                                 15. Solid Waste and Recycling
  Directing runoff to vegetated
    areas with absorbent soils   GOAL 5:       Reduction in the generation and disposal of solid
  filters pollutants and reduces               waste.
            off-site flows
Page III-46                                     Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure

Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.1
Regularly review and update the city‟s mandatory recycling ordi-
nance to reflect changes and new technologies regarding appropriate
recyclable materials acceptable in the city‟s recycling program.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.2
Support efforts to maintain adequate solid waste facilities and services
by working with local service providers of solid waste collection,
disposal, and recycling.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.3
Regularly review and update the city‟s participation in the County-
wide Integrated Waste Management Plan, including the Source
Reduction and Recycling Element to promote increased recycling,
composting, source reduction, and education efforts throughout the
community, as well as new diversion technologies designed to reduce
the amount of solid waste sent to landfills.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.4
Continue to support the residential, commercial, industrial and
construction / demolition recycling programs to minimize the solid
waste stream to landfills.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.5
Encourage and consider requiring non-residential uses and businesses
to participate in the city‟s recycling program.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.6
Encourage, and consider requiring, recycling and reuse of
construction wastes, including recycling materials generated by the
demolition and remodeling of buildings.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.7
Continue to coordinate with approved services providers and
businesses to recycle universal waste (electronic components,
batteries, fluorescent lights, etc.) and to provide convenient collection
and drop off locations in a manner that ensures safe and responsible
collection, processing and disposal.
Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.8
Encourage and promote the use of recycled materials in residential
and non-residential applications, including construction and building
materials, office supplies, and equipment. Continue the city‟s
purchase of recycled materials and supplies outlined in the Recycled
Products Purchasing Policy.                                               Managing waste stream and
                                                                           separating recyclables at
                                                                           Escondido’s EDCO facility
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                        Page III-47

            Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.9
            Support and promote the establishment of local businesses that manu-
            facture, distribute, and sell products using recycled materials.
            Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.10
            Sponsor clean-up events in which volunteers and community organ-
            izers help pick up litter along streams, at parks, in neighbor-hoods,
            and other public areas.
            Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.11
            Allow small beverage recycling facilities collection facilities in com-
            mercial and industrial areas, provided adverse circulation, parking,
            and visual impacts can be mitigated.
            Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.12
            Allow sites for solid waste transfer stations and / or Material Re-
            covery Facilities in areas designated for General Industrial, provided
            circulation, visual, and noise impacts do not adversely affect adjacent
            uses.
            Solid Waste and Recycling Policy 15.13
            Continue to divert green waste from landfills and support the estab-
            lishment of composting facilities that operate in a manner that assures
            safe and responsible collection, processing, and disposal practices.
            16. Energy
            GOAL 6:       An increased use of renewable energy sources, and
                          improved energy conservation and efficiency.
            Energy Policy 16.1
            Monitor federal, state and regional energy policies and lobby for
            appropriate changes that benefit the community.
            Energy Policy 16.2
            Continue to work with local utility providers to ensure that adequate
            electricity and natural gas services and facilities are available for new
            and existing development.
            Energy Policy 16.3
            Implement energy conserving land use practices that include compact
            development, provision of bikeways and pedestrian paths, and the
            incorporation of transit routes and facilities.
Page III-48                 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Energy Policy 16.4
Encourage site and building design that reduces exterior heat gain and
heat island effects (tree planting, reflective paving materials, covered
parking, cool roofs, etc.).
Energy Policy 16.5
Require, to the extent feasible, building orientations and landscaping
that use natural lighting to reduce energy demands.
Energy Policy 16.6
Evaluate and amend appropriate codes and ordinances in order to
facilitate and encourage the installation of renewable energy systems
and facilities (solar, wind, hydro-power, geothermal, and bio-mass),
where appropriate, for all development.
Energy Policy 16.7
Install energy-efficient lighting, appliances and alternative-energy
infra-structure, such as solar energy panels, within all city facilities, as
feasible.
Energy Policy 16.8
Coordinate with service providers to increase energy efficiency by
promoting the retrofit and renovation of existing buildings through
energy rebates and incentives.
Energy Policy 16.9
Coordinate with regional and local energy providers to increase
energy conservation through public education programs.
Energy Policy 16.10
Encourage energy production facilities that directly benefit the
community and pursue the direct purchase of energy to assure supply
and lower prices that guarantee energy to the city.
Energy Policy 16.11
Ensure that local power plants utilize state-of-the-art designs to
minimize emissions and encourage alternate technologies.
                                                                               Electric air compressors
Energy Policy 16.12                                                             formerly used at Lakes
Review power plant submittals to ensure they do not result in                   Dixon and Wohlford to
significant individual or cumulative environmental impacts.                  circulate and stabilize water
                                                                               temperatures have been
Energy Policy 16.13                                                           replaced by solar powered
Require new utility lines to be constructed underground, and along              facilities providing high
existing utility corridors, when feasible.                                     energy savings that also
                                                                             improves water quality and
                                                                                        fish habitat
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                                               Page III-49
            17. Telecommunications
            GOAL 7: Quality communication systems that enhance eco-
                         nomic viability, governmental efficiency, and equitable
                         access for all.
            Telecommunications Policy 17.1
            Work with service providers to ensure the access and availability of a
            wide range of state-of-the-art telecommunication systems and
            services for households, businesses, institutions, and public agencies
            throughout the community.
            Telecommunications Policy 17.2
            Work with utility companies to retrofit areas that are not served by
            current telecommunication technologies and promote strategic long-
            range planning of telecommunication facilities for newly developing
            areas, as feasible.
            Telecommunications Policy 17.3
            Encourage local industries, higher educational institutions, and other
            entities to support innovation in the design and implementation of
            state-of-the-art telecommunication technologies and facilities.
            Telecommunications Policy 17.4
            Establish requirements for the incorporation and accessibility of state-
            of-the-art telecommunication systems and services (e.g., internet) for
            public use in public buildings (e.g., libraries) and support the
            development of informational kiosks in public places and streetscapes
            (e.g., parks, plazas, shopping malls).
            Telecommunications Policy 17.5
            Establish requirements for the installation of state-of-the-art internal
            telecommunications technologies in new large-scale planned commu-
            nities, and office and commercial developments (e.g., wiring of all
            new housing and businesses).
            Telecommunications Policy 17.6
            Encourage the installation of telecommunications systems (e.g.,
            internet) in every city household to facilitate resident access to
            information about public services, transit, emergencies, and other
            information.
            Telecommunications Policy 17.7
            Continue to use telecommunications or new technologies to enhance
            the performance of internal city operations and the delivery of public
            services.
Page III-50                 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure
Telecommunications Policy 17.8
Require compatible colocation of telecommunication facilities that
are designed in a manner to minimize visual impacts on surrounding
uses.
Telecommunications Policy 17.9
Work with utility companies to provide opportunities for siting
telecommunications facilities on city-owned property and public
right-of-ways.
Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructure                 Page III-51
Page III-52 Escondido General Plan Mobility and Infrastructur
II. Land Use and Community Form
   Introduction                                   The Land Use / Community
                                                  Form Element’s Purpose
   How land uses are arranged in a community      The Land Use Element is one of seven ele-
   helps establish its identity and character.    ments required by state law to be included in
   Although Escondido is largely developed,       California General Plans. The Element guides
   there is a diversity of newly constructed and  citizens, planners, and decision makers on the
   established urban, suburban, and rural neigh-  desired pattern of growth, development and
   borhoods with unique qualities such as views;  change in the community. The purpose is to
   landscaping; types of streets and housing;     ensure that a balance of residential, employ-
   commercial activity; lively public spaces;     ment, commercial, recreational, civic/cultural
   schools; and civic buildings that combine to   and open space land uses are provided at
   create a unique ―small town‖ character.        appropriate intensities, locations and combi-
                                                  nations to enhance Escondido‘s sustainability.
   Escondido‘s General Plan Land Use Element
   arranges major land uses to preserve and en-   Goals identified in the Land Use / Community
   hance the integrity and character of estab-    Form Element foster Escondido‘s role as an
   lished residential neighborhoods, provide op-  urban center. The Plan emphasizes the revi-
   portunities for future growth to meet the      talization of the downtown area and estab-
   community‘s vision, and strengthen the eco-    lished neighborhoods, promotes economic
   nomic viability of employment areas and        development in the form of attractive, sus-
   commercial activity centers. Policies in this  tainable, economically viable industrial and
   Land Use Element will guide Escondido‘s        commercial areas, and concentrates high-
   efforts to become a more integrated, walkable, intensity activities in the urban core.
   and sustainable community that will enrich
   and improve residents‘ quality of life.

                            A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
                                 General Plan
                            The Land Use and Community Form Element serves a guide for
                            future development. The Element‘s relationship to other General Plan
                            components is central for many important aspects regarding the
                            community‘s growth. For example, different land uses influence the
                            capacity and service levels of transportation and utility systems
                            discussed in the Mobility and Infrastructure Element. Residential
                            standards described in this General Plan Element relate to the city‘s
                            housing goals, programs and objectives, discussed in the Housing
                            Element. Land use decisions also affect Escondido‘s economy and
                            have direct bearing on the policies and strategies outlined in the
                            Economic Prosperity Element.
                            The General Plan includes development strategies for several new
                            employment nodes, and advocates intensification of certain areas as
                            mixed use and higher intensity employment centers to provide a
                            stronger jobs-housing balance. Escondido‘s growth and development
                            patterns are to be managed in a way that does not overwhelm or
                            reduce the quality of community services, safety and protection
                            provided by the city. The goals and policies of the Community
                            Services, Community Safety, Public Utilities, Noise, and Growth
                            Management Elements are related to land use because they affect
                            property designations and requirements. An essential feature of this
                            Element is the General Plan Land Use Map (Figure II-1) that
    Escondido‟s Street Fair identifies the location of all land uses in the planning area and key for
  Grand Avenue at Broadway  directing land use decisions that integrate the community‘s vision.
Page II-2                            Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                      Figure II-1
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form Page II-3
Page II-4 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community For
B. Escondido’s Community Character
Escondido‘s geographic setting, characterized by hills and mountains
surrounding an open valley bisected by Escondido Creek, governs the
manner in which the community has matured over its long history.
Expanding out from its historic downtown and urban core (with their
traditional street grid patterns are established single and multi-family
neighborhoods that have long since replaced agricultural groves.
Densities and intensities diminish and streets follow topographic
contours in outlying areas as the community transitions to higher
elevations where agricultural operations remain in many areas. In this
outer area there are also several large natural expanses of preserved
open space that buffer Escondido from surrounding communities. The
community‘s primary employment area parallels Highway 78 and the
rail line first constructed in the 1880s that links Escondido to the
coast. Interstate 15 bisects Escondido in a north-south direction that
provides connections to San Diego and Riverside County.                  Escondido as viewed from
                                                                         Lake Dixon Regional Park
  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                     Page II-5

                                          C. Land Use Distribution
                                          Escondido‘s current land uses are arranged in a pattern largely
                                          defined by the community‘s historic growth and transition from an
“For every site there is an ideal use.    agricultural center at the terminus of a rail line to a town core
For every use there is an ideal site.”    surrounded by residential neighborhoods with supporting businesses
                                          and services. Based on an inventory conducted for the updated
         John Ormsbee Simonds             General Plan land use categories, single and multifamily residential
                  Landscape Architect     uses represented the dominate land uses occupying 36,145 acres and
                      and City Planner
                                          71% percent of Escondido‘s General Plan. The pie chart and bar
                                          graph in Figure II-2 identify the division of General Plan land uses.
                                       Figure II-2
                                                                General Plan Land Uses
                                                                          Commercial
                                                                   Office            Industrial
                                                                            2.1%                Multifamily
                                                                    0.9%               2.7%
                                                      Tribal Lands                              Residential
                                                          0.6%                                    3.0%
                                        Single Family
                                                                                                        Freeways, Roads,
                                         Residential
                                                                                                         Flood Channels
                                           37.9%
                                                                                                              8.4%
                                                                                                         Public Land,
                                                                                                         Open Space
                                                                                                            15.1%
                                                                           Rural Residential
                                                                                29.3%
 Page II-6                                         Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

D. Land Uses, Standards and Character
State planning law requires that General Plans establish land use
designations for the various areas in the plan as well as standards of
population density and building intensity. The city‘s Zoning Ordi-
nance also specifies standards for development, such as set-backs, lot
coverage, parking , open space thresholds, etc. that directly bear on
properties‘ development density and / or intensity. In concert with
Smart Growth principles, the Land Use Matrix (Figure II-6) identifies
each General Plan land use designation and specifies (1) Urban Form
Standards, (2) Description of Uses, and (3) Urban Form Charac-
teristics described below.
1. Urban Form Standards
Urban form standards prescribe the maximum density for residential
uses, and building intensity for nonresidential and mixed-use develop-
ments and the maximum building height (Figure II-3a). Standards of
building density for residential uses are stated as the allowable range
(i.e. minimum and maximum) of dwelling units per net acre are
further elaborated in policies at the end of the Land Use Element.
                                                                                     Figure II-3a
                                                                          Example of various densities for
                                                                           residential development on a
                                                                               similarly sized parcel.
                                                             Figure II-3a
  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                            Page II-7

                                     Standards of building intensity for nonresidential and mixed-use,
                                     commercial, and industrial development are expressed as floor-area
 In the case of mixed-use develop-
                                     ratios (FARs). The FAR is the ratio of gross floor area of a building
ments that include residential com-
  ponents, the FAR includes resi-    on a lot in relation to the area of the net lot (or parcel), exclusive of
dential building square footage, and existing or proposed streets and rights-of-way. The gross floor area of
the density range is not applicable. a building is the sum of the square feet of each floor of the building,
                                     excluding cellars and square feet in open balconies. In the case of
                                     mixed-use developments that include residential components, the
                                     FAR includes residential building square footage, and the density
                                     range is not applicable.
              Figure II-3b
   Various building configurations
represented by different Floor Area                                                                  Figure II-3b
 Ratios (FARs) of 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0.
                                     As illustrated in Figure II-3b, features such as building square
                                     footage, building height, FAR, and the percent of lot coverage are
                                     interrelated. As an example, a building with 20,000-square feet of
                                     useable space on a 40,000-net square foot parcel yields a 0.50 FAR.
                                     This could describe a variety of building scenarios including a single
                                     story building occupying half the parcel, a two story building
                                     occupying approximately one-fourth of the parcel, or a collection of
                                     buildings occupying approximately one-third of the parcel.
                                     While FAR provides for the overall development size and intensity, it
                                     does not specify the form or character of the building. Different
                                     interpretations of the same FAR can result in buildings of very
                                     different character. The urban form characteristics for each land use
                                     designation describe key physical form attributes envisioned for the
                                     designation. In addition, city regulations such as zoning, design
                                     guidelines, height limits, building setbacks, open space requirements,
                                     etc. will guide the form of buildings within a given FAR range.
  Page II-8                                   Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
2. Description of Uses
The Land Use Matrix (Figure II-6) outlines the types of allowed uses
permitted in each of the General Plan‘s land use categories. The major
categories of land use types in Escondido include residential,
commercial, office, industrial, mixed-use, public facilities, parks/open
space, and tribal lands. Corresponding zoning specifies the permitted
and conditional uses for each category as well as applicable develop-
ment standards.
3. Urban Form Characteristics
                                                                              Urban form characteristics
                                                                          described in the Land Use Matrix
Urban form characteristics describe key physical features and
                                                                           are recommended key physical
attributes envisioned for each land use designation to help developers,  features and attributes envisioned
decision makers, and the public share a common understanding of the       for each land use designation to
qualities that contribute to good design. The guidelines also assist in  help developers, decision makers,
understanding the implications of individual project design on the         and the public share a common
form and character of the community as a whole. These qualities          understanding of the qualities that
include characteristics such as the height and bulk of buildings, the         contribute to good design.
location of buildings on their parcels, the relationship of buildings to
streets, the height of buildings relative to adjacent neighborhoods, and World Commission on Environment
the location and character of parking and pedestrian facilities. Unlike           and Development (WCED)
                                                                          Aerial view of Escondido looking
the Description of Uses and Urban Form Standards described above,          west with Palomar Hospital and
Urban Form Characteristics are stated as recommendations, not as             downtown in the foreground
required standards.
  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                           Page II-9

    Residential construction in
        Downtown Escondido.
                                   E. Core Themes of the Land Use and
   Housing is a cornerstone of            Community Form Element
     downtown development, a
      key ingredient of a strong   Three core themes emerged as citizens articulated their vision for
   downtown economy and will
                                   Escondido‘s future during the General Plan‘s collaborative process of
   facilitate the implementation
    of the General Plan‟s Core     conducting public outreach and gathering community input. The
 Themes. Downtown residents        themes centered on: 1) Opportunities to Live, Work and Play; 2)
 create and expand the market      Protect, Preserve and Revitalize Neighborhoods; and 3) Conserve and
  for downtown businesses by       Sustain Resources. The Land Use and Community Form Element in-
   demanding a diverse mix of      corporates these themes as a central focus and has identified strategies
        products and services      for addressing these themes to implement the community‘s vision.
     including retail, restaurant
   and entertainment facilities,
  thus enhancing opportunities
                                   1. Opportunities to Live, Work and Play
        to live, work and play.
    Downtown and „urban core       The ability for Escondido to be a community where residents can live,
        area‟ housing take the     work and play was an important theme expressed at General Plan
       pressure off intensifying   public outreach sessions. Many residents desire to work in the
 densities in established single   community but commute elsewhere due to insufficient local employ-
    family neighborhoods, thus     ment opportunities. Land use studies revealed Escondido‘s low
   preserving the community‟s      percentage of land area devoted for employment purposes compared
     character. Downtown and       with neighboring communities. This results in an ‗out migration‘ of
     „urban core area‟ housing     many residents who leave Escondido as part of their daily commuting
  also involves a more efficient   pattern. In addition, 2010 census data revealed that Escondido‘s per
 use of the city‟s infrastructure, capita income and educational attainment lagged behind surrounding
       reducing reliance on the
                                   communities, suggesting a need for providing citizens more oppor-
  automobile which conserves
       and sustains resources.     tunities to enhance their job skills.
Page II-10                                   Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

While there are a number of recreational and entertainment venues in
the community, many citizens expressed a desire for more varied
options that would attract a wider audience and have broader social
appeal. Parents expressed a desire for activities and facilities that
would enhance their grown children‘s desire to remain in the
community. School-age students and younger adults expressed a
desire for more ‗fun things to do.‘ Promoting educational and job
training opportunities were raised in concert with the importance of
ensuring a safe and healthy community environment. A focus on
recreational amenities, and community facilities, such as libraries,
open space and parkland were viewed as opportunities for residents to
lead a more active and educated way of life.
2. Protect, Preserve, and Revitalize Neighborhoods
Throughout the public participation process it was evident that
residents take pride in their community and value Escondido‘s small-      Revitalizing Escondido Creek
town atmosphere. Essential for Escondido being a desirable place to      as 6+ mile „Urban Linear Park‟
live revolves around residents‘ satisfaction that their neighborhoods     through the entire community
are safe, livable and aesthetically pleasing. The community‘s desires     facilitates the General Plan‟s
to protect neighborhoods from crime, blight, and incompatible             Core Themes. The path links
adjacent land uses that negatively affect their quality of life were       residential neighborhoods to
identified as important priorities.                                       shopping, healthy recreation,
                                                                            education and employment
In addition, recognizing that many homes and neighborhoods are over         opportunities. The Creek‟s
75 years in age, and that Escondido is a community with historical        improvement will expand the
                                                                          community‟s opportunities for
significance, residents acknowledged that protecting and preserving
                                                                         live, work and play, and serve
local history is vital for blending the strength of the past with the    as a tool for revitalizing neigh-
promise of the future. Residents also expressed a desire to incorporate  borhoods and shopping areas.
additional features and land uses that would be unique to Escondido.        The creek path serves as a
Conversations centered on features such as gateways, distinctive land       convenient and centralized
use districts, and public places that would allow residents to gather    alternative transportation route
and socialize. Such features would set Escondido apart from other          and reduces reliance on the
communities and introduce a ―sense of arrival‖ and ―sense of place‖     automobile thus conserving and
unique to other areas and revitalize the community.                            sustaining resources.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                           Page II-11

“Sustainability is meeting the needs
of the present without compromising
 the ability of future generations to 3. Conserve and Sustain Resources
          meet their needs.”
                                      Residents acknowledge that Escondido is part of a larger regional
World Commission on Environment       environment with only finite resources available for current and
          and Development (WCED)
                                      future generations. Conserving and sustaining community resources
                                      have become an important topic in light of the challenging economic
                                      climate of the time and the obligation to plan for the future. Economic
                                      sustainability includes supporting economic growth in the city,
     Escondido‟s 5,300 acres of       expanding jobs and markets, relying on local businesses, and pro-
  permanent natural open space
                                      moting an economically thriving community.
  are a central component of the
   General Plan‟s core theme of
     conserving and sustaining        The concept of conserving and sustaining resources dovetails with
 natural resources; Daley Ranch       residents‘ desires to protect, revitalize and preserve existing neighbor-
     is the largest conservation      hoods, open space areas, and quality of life. Bolstering local rec-
     preserve accessible to the       reational, educational and occupational opportunities also allows
  public totaling over 3,000 acres    residents to drive less and spend more dollars locally, thereby pro-
 and includes over 300 plant and      moting economic sustainability as well as enhancing physical and
     animal species and diverse       social opportunities closer to home.
         habitat communities.
Page II-12                                     Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

F. Strategies to Address the Core Themes                                “Smart growth development is guided
      for Implementing the Community Vision                               by a set of principles that promote
                                                                         strong communities with a range of
Strategies for addressing the three core themes include: 1) application      opportunities for all residents.”
of smart growth principles; 2) development of new and revitalized                  Designing for Smart Growth
opportunity areas; 3) mixed-use transit oriented development; and 4)                        SANDAG publication
educational promotion. The strategies are in concert with updated
planning principles that refocus attention on existing infrastructure
investments rather than extending new and costly facilities into
undeveloped territories.
Areas have been identified in the General Plan where these strategies
will be focused to achieve the community‘s long term goals. The
strategies work together to: provide more opportunities for Escondido
residents, conserve resources, provide greater housing choices, offer
options for alternative transportation and reduce environmental
impacts, thereby creating a greater sense of community resulting in an
enhanced quality of life.
                                                                             Smart Growth developments
                                                                          like the shopkeeper units in „Via
1. Smart Growth Principles                                                Roble‟ on Escondido Boulevard
                                                                              are an effective strategy for
Escondido is largely built-out with limited vacant land available for        implementing the community
new development. Updated General Plan policies will guide citizens,            vision, expanding housing
developers, city staff, and decisions makers over the next decades to         options, fostering business,
facilitate the community‘s long-term vision. The plan‘s smart growth          reducing sprawl, conserving
principles represent a shift in focus from ‗how to develop vacant land‘     infrastructure, and revitalizing
to ‗how to reinvest in existing neighborhoods.‘                                  existing neighborhoods
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                               Page II-13

                                        Escondido‘s smart growth principles preserve and enhance single
                                        family development patterns in established neighborhoods, maintains
                                        residential densities in outlying areas to accommodate growth, and
                                        guide additional employment and residential growth toward down-
                                        town and urbanized sectors along key transportation corridors. This
             Escondido‟s                strategy ensures housing options for all residents, capitalizes on the
       Smart Growth Strategy            city‘s infrastructure investment, and provides opportunities for
                                        achieving Escondido‘s vision. Basic smart growth principles include:
Capitalize on the city‟s infrastructure
investment by:                           Fostering an attractive community with a strong sense of place,
 Preserving and enhancing single
                                           including such features as gateways, public art, landscaping and
   family development patterns in
   established neighborhoods;
                                           unique land use districts;
 Maintaining residential densities in   Strengthening and enhancing existing neighborhoods;
   outlying areas to accommodate         Preserving open space, natural beauty, and critically sensitive areas;
   growth; and,                          Incorporating ―Complete Streets‖ features to create walkable and
 Guiding additional employment and        bikeable neighborhoods;
   residential growth toward downtown    Creating a range of housing opportunities and choices;
   and urbanized sectors along key       Providing a mix of compatible land uses;
   transportation corridors.             Taking advantage of more compact, vertical, higher density and
                                           higher intensity building design;
                                         Integrating residential, employment, entertainment, shopping, and
                                           services in close proximity to reduce reliance on the automobile;
                                         Providing a variety of transportation choices;
                                         Making decisions predictable, fair and cost effective; and
                                         Encouraging community and stakeholder collaboration in de-
                                           velopment decisions.
                                        2. New and Revitalized Opportunity Areas
                                        Opportunity Areas are key locations for implementing the commu-
                                        nity‘s vision that respond to citizens‘ core theme of enhancing
                                        Escondido‘s livability. A sufficient supply of employment producing
                                        land is a critical component of a healthy and prosperous city. In order
                                        to enhance economic quality of life an adequate supply of land
                                        offering a variety of employment opportunities for residents of all
                                        skills and educational levels must be available. Also critical are
                                        redevelopment opportunities for increasing employee densities in
                                        areas where buildings and properties are underutilized.
                                        The General Plan strives to achieve these objectives by increasing its
      New employment areas that
                                        employment land base in several new areas to accommodate the types
      foster a better jobs/housing
        balance and improve the
                                        and amount of economic development and growth anticipated in the
     community‟s median income          future, while encouraging efficient and sustainable use of public
        include the area around         facilities and infrastructure. New areas include: 1) Interstate 15 at
    Interstate 15 and Felicita Road     Felicita Road, 2) North and south of the Escondido Research and
    Interchange for Corporate and       Technology Center SPA #8, and 3) Interstate 15 at El Norte Parkway
     Professional Office land uses      SPA #13.
  Page II-14                                      Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Additionally, the General Plan seeks to revitalize employment and
activity opportunities in five areas currently designated commercial or
industrial: 1) Downtown SPA #9, 2) Downtown Transit Station; 3)
Westfield Shoppingtown; 4) Highway 78 at Broadway; 5) Promenade
Retail Center and Vicinity; and 6) South Quince Street (also refer to
Section J ―General Plan Opportunity Areas‖ in this Element).
                                                                                    Figure II-4a
                                                                        A “before” and “after” example
                                                                         illustrating how smart growth
                                                                            mixed use transit oriented
                                                                        development can transform the
                                                                        area around Escondido‟s multi-
                                                                           modal transit station into a
                                                                         dynamic employment center.
3. Mixed Use Transit Oriented Development
Mixed use development refers to the blending of multi-family resi-
dential development with other compatible uses, such as commercial
and/or office in a horizontal and/or vertical arrangement (Figure II-
4a). The goal of mixed use overlay areas is to integrate employment,
retail, entertainment and community amenities within close proximity
to create vibrant urban areas and enhance Escondido‘s housing
opportunities while establishing desirable places for people to live,
work, shop, and play.
Successfully integrating residential, employment, entertainment,
shopping, and services in a mixed use overlay is effective in reducing
reliance on the automobile as residents are able to conveniently access
facilities and services. Mixed use buildings can be vertically mixed,
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                            Page II-15

                                        with commercial or office space on the first floors and housing space
                                        on upper floors. Horizontal mixed use is also desirable at some
                                        locations, where commercial uses may be adjacent to offices or
                                        residences within the same master planned development.
              Figure II-4b
A “before” and “after” example similar
  to East Valley Parkway illustrating
 how smart growth mixed use transit
    oriented development involving
 constructing residential units above
ground floor retail and/or office areas
can transform an uninviting street into
   a pedestrian-friendly community.
                                        Escondido‘s Downtown Specific Plan Area contains mixed use
                                        development standards that have been adopted for many years. This
                                        General Plan incorporates mixed use overlays in additional areas: 1)
                                        Escondido Boulevard at Felicita Avenue, 2) Centre City Parkway at
                                        Brotherton Avenue, and 3) East Valley Parkway (refer to Section J
                                        ―General Plan Opportunity Areas‖ in this Element).
                                        Mixed use overlay areas are transit oriented in nature by incorporating
                                        features such as bus stops and multi-modal connections that promote
                                        the use of alternative transportation (Figure II-4b). In addition, mixed
                                        use overlay areas are pedestrian friendly environments that incor-
                                        porate trails, pathways, bikeways, and safe crosswalks to connect
                                        neighboring uses.
 Page II-16                                      Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

4. Educational Promotion
Being economically competitive is synonymous with being edu-
cationally competitive. Studies consistently link growth of a local
economy with access to higher education. In today‘s global economy,
it is advantageous for local governments to support residents‘ ―con-
tinuous learning‖ in order to enhance employability, strengthen job
skills and generate opportunities for increasing per capita income.
While education broadens residents‘ knowledge base and achieves
personal economic stability, a highly skilled and educated community
is also viewed by employers as a desirable environment for estab-
lishing and expanding their businesses.
The General Plan strives to achieve these objectives by including
policies that promote educational access for residents and identifying
areas for attracting facilities that provide post-secondary education.
The area between Palomar College‘s satellite campus (East Valley
Parkway at Midway Drive) and Palomar Hospital‘s downtown
facility is a target area for establishing an ―educational enclave.‖ This
area will focus evaluating opportunities to attract and cluster educa-
tional institutions, technical colleges, vocational schools, and job
training facilities and foster Escondido‘s economic sustainability and
promote a more educationally competitive environment that provides         Palomar College‟s satellite
a direct path to employment.                                              East Valley Parkway campus
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                        Page II-17

            G. General Plan Land Use Designations and
                   Development Capacity
            Figure II-5 identifies the existing and projected levels of development
            associated with Escondido‘s planned distribution of land uses (Figure
            II-6). The table identifies the anticipated full implementation of the
            land use policies established by this General Plan, as well as antici-
            pated growth by 2035; the planning horizon year. Land uses and
            intensities will gradually align with the intent of the Land Use and
            Community Form Element as properties develop and redevelop over
            time. Given Escondido‘s largely built out character, and the varying
            ages and conditions of buildings, significant redevelopment activities
            may not occur until toward the end of the planning horizon year.
                                             Figure II-5
                          General Plan (GP) Development Capacity
                                                                                Open
                                                                    Industrial
                          Single   Multi-     Retail       Office              Space,
                                                                      / Other
                          Family  Family     (Square      (Square              Parks /
                                                                     (Square
                          (Units  (Units)      Feet)        Feet)               Misc.
                                                                       Feet)
                                                                               (Acres)
              2010 City
             Area in GP
                          31,107 16,477    13,001,000    4,091,000 12,389,000   9,000
           2010 County
             Area in GP
                           6,450     0           0           0           0      3,500
              2010 City
            and County    37,557 16,477    13,001,000    4,091,000 12,389,000 12,500
             Combined
            Build out of
              City Area   35,350 31,132    32,558,000 24,064,000 20,182,000 10,500
                in GP
            Build out of
           County Area     7,800     0       300,000         0           0      4,500
                in GP
           Build out City
            and County 43,150     31,132   32,858,000 24,064,000 20,182,000 15,000
             Combined
              2035 City
             Area in GP
                          32,875 24,133    17,886,000    9,628,000 15,467,000   9,500
           2035 County
             Area in GP
                           6,950     0       150,000         0           0      4,000
              2035 City
            and County    39,825 24,133    18,036,000    9,628,000 15,467,000 13,500
             Combined
            2010 – 2035
            Net Change
                           2,268   7,656    5,035,000    5,537,000  3,078,000   1,000
Page II-18             Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                         Figure II-6
                                  General Plan Land Use Designations
  Land Use Designation           Required Standards:                   General Description of                  Recommended
                                   Density and Design                             Uses                 Urban Form Characteristics
                                    Minimum Lot Size
                               Maximum Building Height
                                  (Also refer to policies)
Large Lot Single Family Residential
Rural
This designation applies to areas that are not intended to receive substantial urban services, distant from the developed valley
floor; or steep (generally over 25% in slope) or contain sensitive natural resources. Development clustering is permitted
pursuant to General Plan Residential Clustering Policies
           Rural I           Maximum densities allowed on          A rural living environment in      Large residential lots with low
                             the following slope categories:       areas of agricultural production,   building coverage
                             0-25% - 1 du/4 ac;                    rugged terrain, and/or environ-    Maintains the natural and open
                             25-35% - 1 du/8 ac; and               mentally constrained lands that     space character of the parcel
                             35%+ - 1 du/20 ac.                    are the most remote from urban
                                                                                                      Agricultural properties
                             Min lot size: 4 ac                    development. This designation
                                                                   is typified by large lot single-   Informal streets with rustic
                             Building Height: 1-2 stories
                                                                   family homes.                       character
                             Zoning: Residential Agriculture (R-A)
          Rural II           Maximum densities allowed on          A rural living environment in
                             the following slope categories:       areas of agricultural production
                             0-25% - 1 du/2 ac;                    or rugged terrain that is remote
                             25-35% - 1 du/4 ac; and               from urban development. This
                             35%+ - 1 du/20 ac;                    designation is typified by large
                             Min lot size: 2 ac                    lot single-family homes.
                             Building Height: 1-2 stories
                             Zoning: Residential Agriculture (R-A)
Estate
This designation accommodates detached single-family homes on large lots. This designation applies to areas that are on the
edge of urban development or in areas that are already characterized by an estate development pattern. Development
clustering is permitted pursuant to General Plan Residential Clustering Policies
          Estate I           Maximum densities allowed on          Large-lot, spaced single family    Large residential lots with low
                             the following slope categories:       development in areas bordering      building coverage
                             0-15% - 1 du/1 ac;                    land designated as Rural.          Units set back from the street with
                             15-25% - 1 du/2 ac;                                                       extensive on-site landscaping
                             25-35% - 1 du/4 ac; and
                                                                                                      Could include agricultural
                             35%+ - 1 du/20 ac.
                                                                                                       properties
                             Min lot size: 40,000 sf
                                                                                                      Informal streets with rustic
                             Building Height: 1-2 stories
                                                                                                       character
                             Zoning: Residential Estate (R-E)
          Estate II          Maximum densities allowed on          Spaced single family develop-      Large residential lots with low
                             the following slope categories:       ment on relatively large lots       building coverage
                             0-25% - 2 du/1 ac;                    and properties that transition     Units set back from the street with
                             25-35% - 1 du/1 ac; and               between more intensive subur-       extensive on-site landscaping
                             35%+ - 1 du/20 ac.                    ban development and Estate I
                                                                                                      Semi-formal streets
                             Min lot size: 20,000 sf               areas.
                             Building Height: 1-2 stories
                             Zoning: Residential Estate (R-E)
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                          Page II-19

                                                              Figure II-6
                                   General Plan Land Use Designations
  Land Use Designation             Required Standards:             General Description of                  Recommended
                                    Density and Design                         Uses                Urban Form Characteristics
                                     Minimum Lot Size
                                 Maximum Building Height
                                   (Also refer to policies)
Single Family Residential
Suburban
This designation applies to areas that generally surround the urbanized core of the community and accommodates single
family detached homes on relatively large lots. Development clustering is permitted pursuant to General Plan Residential
Clustering Policies
         Suburban             Maximum densities allowed on       Single family homes with a      Interconnected curvilinear street
                              the following slope categories:    traditional residential          system facilitating traffic flow
                              0-25% - 3.3 du/ac;                 neighborhood character.         Community services and neighbor-
                              25-35% - 1.5 du/ac; and                                             hood parks within walking distance
                              35%+ - 1 du/20 ac.                                                  of local residents, where feasible
                              Min lot size: 10,000 sf                                            Established street tree canopy
                              Building Height: 1-2 stories                                        providing shade and enhanced
                              Street designs support pedes-                                       neighborhood character
                              trian and bicycle use along with
                              vehicular circulation
                              Zoning: R-1-10 or higher
Urban I
This designation applies to residential areas of the main Escondido “valley floor” and accommodates single family detached
homes on smaller urban lots. Development clustering is permitted pursuant to General Plan Residential Clustering Policies
          Urban I             Maximum densities allowed:         Single family homes in a more  Highly interconnected linear street
                              5.5 du/ac;                         urban, medium-density living     system facilitating traffic flow
                              Min lot size: 6,000 sf             environment, characteristic of  Community services and neighbor-
                              Building Height: 1-3 stories       much of Escondido. Mobile        hood parks within walking distance
                                                                 homes, patio homes, and zero-    of local residents, where feasible
                              Street designs support pedes-
                                                                 lot-line developments are also
                              trian and bicycle use along with                                   Established street tree canopy
                                                                 permitted.
                              vehicular circulation                                               providing shade and enhanced
                              Zoning: R-1-9 or lower                                              neighborhood character
                                                                                                 Range of housing types and design
                                                                                                  consistent with existing forms and
                                                                                                  patterns where appropriate
                                                                                                 Streets in older neighborhoods
                                                                                                  maintain limited curb cuts with rear,
                                                                                                  alley, and side garage access
Page II-20                                                   Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                           Figure II-6
                                 General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation           Required Standards:               General Description of                   Recommended
                                  Density and Design                           Uses                Urban Form Characteristics
                                   Minimum Lot Size
                              Maximum Building Height
                                (Also refer to policies)
Medium Density Multi-Family Residential
Urban II and Urban III
These designations accommodate a wide range of housing types and generally apply to transitional areas that exist between
single family neighborhoods and higher density residential and commercial areas.
         Urban II           Maximum densities allowed:         Single family, multi-family units   Highly interconnected linear
                            12 du/ac                           and mobile homes. Development        street system facilitating traffic
                            Building Height: 1-3 stories       at the lower end of the density      flow
                                                               range would be appropriate          Community services and
                            Street designs support pedestrian
                                                               adjacent to existing single family   neighborhood parks within
                            and bicycle use along with
                                                               residential areas and charac-        walking distance of local
                            vehicular circulation
                                                               terized primarily by detached        residents, where feasible
                            Zoning R-2-12                      housing units, patio homes, and
                                                                                                   Range of housing types and
                                                               zero-lot-line projects. Higher
                                                                                                    design consistent with existing
                                                               densities are more appropriate
                                                                                                    forms and patterns, where
                                                               adjacent to parks and open
                                                                                                    appropriate
                                                               space, along transit routes and
                                                               major and secondary thorough-       Established street tree canopy
                                                               fares, and near recreational         providing shade and enhanced
                                                               activity centers, libraries, shop-   neighborhood character
                                                               ping centers, and entertainment     Streets in older neighborhoods
                                                               areas. Higher densities would        maintain limited curb cuts with
                                                               also be appropriate adjacent to      rear, alley, and side garage
                                                               existing and planned higher den-     access
                                                               sity development (e.g., mixed-use   Larger parcels may incorporate
                                                               districts) to include semidetached   multiple buildings with a
                                                               or attached units, with duplexes,    coordinated vehicular and
                                                               triplexes, and fourplexes.           pedestrian circulation plan
         Urban III          Maximum densities allowed:         Multi-family residential units,     Multi-family development
                            18 du/ac                           town homes and apartments,           includes common open space
                            Minimum densities allowed:         flats and condominiums. This         and recreational amenities
                            12.6 du/ac                         designation is appropriate in
                                                               proximity to major community
                            Building Height: 2-4 stories
                                                               facilities and employment
                            Street designs support pedestrian  opportunities, and along major
                            and bicycle use along with         thoroughfares.
                            vehicular circulation
                            Zoning: R-3-18
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                      Page II-21

                                                           Figure II-6
                                 General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation          Required Standards:               General Description of                    Recommended
                                 Density and Design                          Uses                  Urban Form Characteristics
                                  Minimum Lot Size
                              Maximum Building Height
                                (Also refer to policies)
High Density Multi-Family Residential
Urban IV and Urban V
These designations accommodate higher densities for urban multifamily housing characterized by taller structures in more
densely developed areas that provide convenient access to a wider range of facilities and services.
        Urban IV           Maximum densities allowed:         Multi-family residential units,    Highly interconnected linear street
                           24 du/ac                           town homes and apartments,          system facilitating traffic flow
                           Minimum densities allowed:         flats and condominiums. This       Community services and neighbor-
                           16.8 du/ac                         designation is appropriate          hood parks within walking distance
                                                              along major thorough-fares in       of local residents, where feasible
                           Building Height: 2-4 stories
                                                              close proximity to transit
                           Street designs support pedestrian                                     Range of housing types and design
                                                              stops, shopping centers,
                           and bicycle use along with                                             consistent with existing forms and
                                                              entertainment, community
                           vehicular circulation                                                  patterns, where appropriate
                                                              facilities and employment
                           Zoning: R-4-24                     opportunities to provide           Established street tree canopy
                                                              residents the opportunity to        providing shade and enhanced
                                                              live near work and amenities.       neighborhood character
                                                                                                 Buildings located and designed to
                                                                                                  orient to primary street frontages,
                                                                                                  with either individual entries for each
                                                                                                  unit, or a common lobby entrance to
                                                                                                  access individual units
                                                                                                 Larger parcels may incorporate
                                                                                                  multiple buildings with a coordinated
                                                                                                  vehicular and pedestrian circulation
                                                                                                  plan
         Urban V           Maximum densities allowed:         Higher density multi-family        Multi-family development includes
                           30 du/ac                           residential units, town homes       common open space and
                           Minimum densities allowed:         and apartments, flats and           recreational amenities
                           21 du/ac                           condominiums. This design-         Off-street parking is integrated into
                                                              nation is appropriate near the      the building or in separate parking
                           Building Height: 2-4 stories
                                                              downtown core, transit              structures
                           Street designs support pedestrian  stations, along major thorough-
                           and bicycle use along with         fares in close proximity to shop-  Direct access to transit may be
                           vehicular circulation              ping centers, entertainment,        incorporated into the development
                           Zoning R-5-30                      community facilities and           Streets in older neighborhoods
                                                              employment opportunities to         maintain limited curb cuts with rear,
                                                              provide residents the oppor-        alley, and side garage access
                                                              tunity to live near work and
                                                              amenities.
 Page II-22                                                Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                              Figure II-6
                                  General Plan Land Use Designations
  Land Use Designation             Required Standards:                  General Description of                Recommended
                                     Density and Design                           Uses                Urban Form Characteristics
                                      Minimum Lot Size
                                 Maximum Building Height
                                    (Also refer to policies)
Commercial
Neighborhood Commercial
This designation accommodates very small scale neighborhood-oriented limited retail and office activities designed to serve
residents in the immediate vicinity.
Neighborhood Commercial       Maximum Intensity: 0.35 FAR           Small scale limited service uses  Low scale, low intensity, low
                              Building Height: 1 story              permitted in every land use        impact design
                                                                    category including large Spe-     Signage, lighting, landscaping,
                              Maximum Lot Size: 5 ac
                                                                    cific Planning Areas (SPAs) but    businesses and hours of
                              Location: Minimum One (1) mile        may not be an appropriate land     operation compatible with the
                              from any other commercial cen-        use in many residential or         surrounding residential
                              ter or commercial zone, and           industrial areas. Businesses are   densities and intensities
                              fronting on Major or Prime            intended to serve the im-
                              Arterial roadway.                                                       Parking areas heavily
                                                                    mediate neighborhood and may
                                                                                                       landscaped to reduce radiant
                              Design: Details of location, inten-   include child care facilities.
                                                                                                       heat effects
                              sity, height, scale, circulation,
                              signage architecture, and lighting
                              to be provided upon application.
                              Appropriate landscaped buffer
                              adjacent to residential.
                              Pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
                              with convenient non-vehicular
                              access provided.
                              Dispensing motor fuel prohibited.
                              Zoning:
                              Commercial Neighborhood (C-N)
General Commercial
This designation accommodates a wide variety of retail and service activities intended to serve a broad customer base.
   General Commercial         Maximum Intensity: 0.5 FAR            A broad range of retail and       Designed to promote pedestrian
                              Building Height: 1-3 stories          service activities, including      activity characterized by “store
                                                                    local-serving commercial,          front” window displays and
                              Buildings taller than 3 stories
                                                                    community shopping/ office         extensive landscaping
                              may be appropriate for tourist-
                                                                    complexes, automobile sales       Located and designed to be com-
                              serving facilities or in mixed use
                                                                    and service, eating and drinking   patible and transition with adja-
                              overlay areas
                                                                    establishments, entertainment      cent uses in scale, bulk, height
                              Maximum Lot Size: None                facilities.
                                                                                                      Buildings designed to orient to
                              Location: Along major
                                                                                                       primary street frontages, with
                              thoroughfares and in higher
                                                                                                       individual building entries
                              intensity urban nodes.
                                                                                                      Parking areas heavily
                              Design: Details of location, scale,
                                                                                                       landscaped to reduce radiant
                              intensity, height, signage, lighting,
                                                                                                       heat effects
                              circulation, and architecture shall
                              be provided during application.                                         Internal vehicular access
                                                                                                       between sites is coordinated to
                              Zoning:                                                                  facilitate parking and minimize
                              Commercial General (C-G)                                                 curb cuts where feasible
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                        Page II-23

                                                            Figure II-6
                               General Plan Land Use Designations
  Land Use Designation           Required Standards:               General Description of                 Recommended
                                  Density and Design                          Uses               Urban Form Characteristics
                                    Minimum Lot Size
                               Maximum Building Height
                                 (Also refer to policies)
Commercial
Planned Commercial
This designation accommodates a variety of commercial activities within a self-contained comprehensively planned development.
    Planned Commercial       Maximum Intensity: 1.5 FAR          A variety of commercial        Designed to integrate multiple
                             Building Height: 1-3 stories        activities within a unified     buildings and uses to be identifiable
                                                                 planned commercial center.      as a distinct place
                             Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                 Appropriate uses may           Unified framework of pedestrian
                             Location: At city gateways,         include general and             walkways, public plazas, open
                             along major thoroughfares, at       professional offices, tourist   spaces, courtyards, and other
                             major roadway intersections         serving facilities, specialty   elements are developed
                             and in higher intensity urban       and automobile retail, and
                             nodes served by transit.                                           Designed to promote pedestrian
                                                                 similar retail/service
                                                                                                 activity characterized by “store
                             Design: Details regarding busi-     businesses.
                                                                                                 front” window displays and
                             nesses, location of all buildings,
                                                                                                 extensive landscaping
                             height, architecture and building
                                                                 Refer to Planned               Public and internal right-of-ways
                             materials, landscaping, develop-
                                                                 Commercial Section of this      developed with landscaping, street
                             ment features, scale, intensity,
                                                                 Element for details on          trees, and amenities to enhance
                             orientation for light and air, cir-
                                                                 specific properties             character and identity
                             culation and parking patterns,
                                                                 designated Planned
                             signage, lighting, land uses,                                      Site specific improvements may be
                                                                 Commercial.
                             buffers, open space, market                                         required to preserve unique
                             analysis shall be provided                                          qualities and ensure compatibility
                             during application.                                                 with surrounding areas
                             Zoning:                                                            Parking areas heavily landscaped
                             Planned Development (P-D)                                           to reduce radiant heat effects
Page II-24                                                   Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                                   Figure II-6
                                       General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation                Required Standards:                  General Description of                       Recommended
                                       Density and Design                            Uses                     Urban Form Characteristics
                                        Minimum Lot Size
                                   Maximum Building Height
                                     (Also refer to policies)
Office
General Office, Planned Office
This designation accommodates a variety of activities in an office environment and in Mixed Use Overlay areas and is intended to
prevent the proliferation of individual isolated offices.
      General Office            Maximum Intensity: 2.0 FAR            Administrative and professional        Compatible intensity with adjacent
                                Building Height: 2-6 stories          offices; business support ser-          uses to maintain the character in
                                                                      vices; financial, insurance, and        scale, bulk, and height
                                Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                      real estate services; supportive       Buildings oriented to the street
                                Location: Along major                 commercial uses such as                 frontage and designed to promote
                                thoroughfares, at roadway             restaurants.                            pedestrian interest through
                                intersections and in higher
                                                                      Medical offices and health care         architectural articulation, attractive
                                intensity urban nodes served by
                                                                      services, short-term convales-          landscaping, and similar techniques
                                transit.
                                                                      cent and long-term care                Parking located behind or within
                                Zoning:                               facilities, research labs,              buildings, or accommodated in
                                Commercial Professional(C-P)          medical supply, and similar             separate parking structures
                                Hospital Professional (H-P)           uses.
                                                                                                             Public and semi-public outdoor
                                                                                                              spaces such as plazas and court-
                                                                                                              yards are encouraged
                                                                                                             Sidewalks incorporate landscaping,
                                                                                                              street furniture, lighting, public art,
                                                                                                              and similar amenities to establish
                                                                                                              an attractive place for walking and
                                                                                                              community activity
                                                                                                             Parking areas heavily landscaped
                                                                                                              to reduce radiant heat effects
      Planned Office            Maximum Intensity: 2.0 FAR            Bio-technology, research and           Designed to integrate multiple build-
                                Building Height: 1-3 stories          development, corporate office           ings into a master planned develop-
                                                                      and related support office uses in      ment with coordinated architecture,
                                Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                      a campus-like setting. Limited          lighting, signage, landscaping, etc.
                                Location: City gateways, next to      Support retail and service uses,        and a unifying theme that is
                                freeways and interchanges,            such as restaurants, dry                identifiable as a distinct place
                                along major thoroughfares, at         cleaners, gym / fitness centers,       Buildings located and designed to
                                major roadway intersections and       markets, and office services            promote pedestrian activity along
                                in higher intensity urban nodes       (e.g., printing / copying /             their frontages
                                served by transit.                    shipping) as well as compatible
                                                                                                             Parking located behind or within
                                Design: Details of building height    public uses are also appropriate
                                                                                                              buildings, or accommodated in
                                location, architecture and land-      if integrated into larger facilities.
                                                                                                              separate parking structures
                                scaping, scale, intensity, light and  Refer to Office Land Use Policies
                                air orientation, circulation and                                             Public and semi-public outdoor
                                                                      and Target Area Land Use
                                parking patterns, signage, lighting,                                          spaces are encouraged such as
                                                                      Policies of this Land Use
                                land uses, buffers, open space,                                               plazas and courtyards
                                                                      Element for details on specific
                                market analysis shall be provided     properties designated Planned          Parking areas heavily landscaped
                                during application                    Office.                                 to reduce radiant heat effects
                                Zoning:
                                Planned Development (P-D)
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                                  Page II-25

                                                              Figure II-6
                                  General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation          Required Standards:                  General Description of                 Recommended
                                  Density and Design                           Uses                Urban Form Characteristics
                                   Minimum Lot Size
                             Maximum Building Height
                                (Also refer to policies)
Industrial
Industrial Office
This designation accommodates a variety of activities in an industrial environment adjacent to downtown near the transit station.
     Industrial Office    Maximum Intensity: 2.0 FAR             Office uses transitioning from   Generally buildings with ceiling
                          Building Height: 1-4 stories           older manufacturing uses          heights to accommodate production
                                                                 (adjacent to downtown and in a    and storage
                          Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                 more urban setting) with nearby  Develop pedestrian connections to
                          Location: Southwest of the             residential uses and convenient   nearby transit
                          Downtown Specific Planning             access to transit.
                          Area between Centre City                                                More articulation, detailing, and
                          Parkway and Redwood Street                                               fenestration on facades visible from
                          north of Sixth Avenue.                                                   major thoroughfares and freeways
                          Land Uses: Manufacturing, ware-                                         Landscaping and wall treatments
                          house / distribution, assembling,                                        incorporated to buffer adjacent
                          wholesaling, and support type                                            sensitive uses
                          uses on sites which are zoned
                          M-2 & M-1 zones. This land use
                          designation accommodates the
                          widest range of Industrial activities
                          which conform to environmental
                          laws and industry standards. It
                          will also provide for Industrial
                          Office land uses, as specified in
                          the zoning code, on properties
                          which transition from the existing
                          M-2 or M-1 zones, to the I-O zone.
                          Provisions: Properties may not
                          “up-zone” from M-1 to M-2, but
                          may “down-zone” from M-2 to
                          M-1, or from M-1 and M-2 to I-O.
                          While the I-O zone will contain
                          stricter standards than the M-1
                          and M-2 zone (i.e. no outdoor
                          storage), a wider range of
                          permitted land uses will provide
                          incentive to re-zone to I-O which
                          will allow this industrial area to
                          recycle to less intensive uses
                          without creating non-conforming
                          use restrictions on existing M-2 &
                          M-1 zoned properties.
                          Zoning:
                          Industrial Office (I-O)
                          Light Industrial (M-1)
                          General Industrial (M-2)
 Page II-26                                                   Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                             Figure II-6
                                  General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation             Required Standards:                General Description of                  Recommended
                                    Density and Design                          Uses                 Urban Form Characteristics
                                     Minimum Lot Size
                               Maximum Building Height
                                  (Also refer to policies)
Industrial
Light Industrial, General Industrial
These designations accommodate a variety of activities in an industrial environment.
     Light Industrial       Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR            Light manufacturing, ware-         Generally buildings with ceiling
                            Building Height: 1-4 stories          house, distribution, assembly,      heights to accommodate
                                                                  and wholesale uses in a more        production and storage
                            Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                  restrictive setting than the       Develop pedestrian connections
                            Location: Generally south side of     General Industrial designation.     to nearby transit
                            Highway 78, west of Centre City       Lighter industrial and office
                            Parkway and north of Escondido                                           More articulation, detailing, and
                                                                  type uses are intended as well
                            Creek.                                                                    fenestration on facades visible
                                                                  as industries that generate
                                                                                                      from major thoroughfares and
                            Land Uses: Manufacturing, ware-       moderate daytime and
                                                                                                      freeways
                            housing, distributing, assembling,    minimum nighttime noise
                            and wholesaling in a setting more     levels, and require limited or no  Landscaping and wall treatments
                            restrictive than the General          outside storage. Uses that          incorporated to buffer adjacent
                            Industrial land use designation.      provide supporting products or      sensitive uses
                            This includes sites for lighter       services for the primary
                            Industrial and office uses which      businesses are also allowed.
                            can comply with the stricter
                            development requirements of the
                            Light Industrial (M-1) and Industrial
                            Park (I-P) zones.
                            Zoning:
                            Light Industrial (M-1)
                            Industrial Park (I-P)
    General Industrial      Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR            Intense manufacturing, ware-
                            Building Height: 1-2 stories          house and distribution, assem-
                                                                  bly, and wholesale industrial
                            Maximum Lot Size: None
                                                                  opportunities and allows out-
                            Location: Generally south side of     side storage. Uses that pro-
                            Highway 78, west of Centre City       vide supporting products or
                            Parkway and north of Escondido        services for the primary
                            Creek.                                businesses are also allowed.
                            Land Uses: Manufacturing, ware-       This designation should
                            house, distribution, assembling,      generally not be located in
                            and wholesaling accommodating a       proximity to residential uses.
                            wide range of heavier industrial
                            activities which conform to envi-
                            ronmental laws and Industry
                            standards. Also included are sites
                            for companies which provide
                            supporting products or services for
                            the primary businesses of the
                            zone.
                            Zoning:
                            General Industrial (M-2)
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                      Page II-27

                                                           Figure II-6
                                  General Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation            Required Standards:             General Description of                   Recommended
                                   Density and Design                        Uses                 Urban Form Characteristics
                                    Minimum Lot Size
                               Maximum Building Height
                                 (Also refer to policies)
Mixed Use Residential Overlay
Vertical Mixed Use Overlay, Horizontal Mixed Use Overlay
These overlay designations accommodate a combination of commercial and/or office activities that include a residential
component within a self-contained comprehensively planned development in specified General Plan locations.
    Vertical Mixed Use       Minimum: 1.5 FAR                  Mixed-use structures that        Buildings located along and oriented
                             Maximum 3.0 FAR                   vertically integrate housing      toward street frontages, whose
                                                               above ground floor                cumulative mass, establishes an
                             Percentage non-residential:
                                                               commercial, office, other         “urban” or “village” character
                             Minimum: 20% FAR
                                                               pedestrian-active uses.          Buildings designed to promote
                             Maximum: 35% FAR
                                                               For mixed use structures,         pedestrian interest through
                             Location: At specified General
                                                               commercial uses charac-           architectural articulation, attractive
                             Plan locations.
                                                               terized by noise, vibration,      landscaping, and similar techniques
                             Zoning: Mixed Use Overlay (M-U)   odors, or other activities that  Parking located behind or within
                                                               would adversely impact on-        buildings, or accommodated in
                                                               site residential units are        separate parking structures
                                                               prohibited.
                                                                                                Encourage pedestrian-oriented uses
                                                               Details regarding businesses,     such as outdoor cafes in the ground
                                                               location, intensity, height,      floor of buildings
                                                               scale, circulation, signage
                                                                                                Internal and external sidewalks and
                                                               architecture, materials, and
                                                                                                 walkways improved to establish an
                                                               lighting shall be provided
                                                                                                 attractive place for walking and
                                                               during application.
                                                                                                 community activity including such
  Horizontal Mixed Use       Mixed use development with        A Mixed use development           elements as landscaping, street
                             combined exclusively residential  that horizontally distributes a   furniture, lighting, public art, and
                             and nonresidential buildings:     mix of land uses, which may       similar amenities
   Exclusively                                                 include residential, comer-
   Residential               Intensity of Exclusively                                           Develop pedestrian connections to
                             Non Residential Buildings:        cial, office, and/or buildings    nearby transit stations
                             Minimum: 0.5 FAR                  that may include vertically      Public and semi-public outdoor
               Exclusively                                     integrated land uses.
              Commercial     Maximum: 1.0 FAR                                                    spaces such as plazas and
                                                               For mixed use structures,         courtyards are encouraged
                             Density of Exclusively            commercial uses charac-
                             Residential Buildings:                                             Separate secured entrances and
                                                               terized by noise, vibration,      parking for residential and non-
                             Minimum: 30 units/acre            odors, or other activities that
                             Maximum: 80 units/acre                                              residential land uses
                                                               would adversely impact on-
                                                               site residential units are       Adequate provisions to ensure
                             Mixed-Use Buildings:              prohibited.                       compatibility with issues related to
                             Minimum: 1.5 FAR                                                    service deliveries, odors, trash, etc.
                                                               Details regarding busi-
                             Maximum 2.0 FAR                   nesses, location, intensity,
                             Percentage non-residential:       height, scale, circulation,
                             Minimum: 20% FAR                  signage architecture,
               Vertical      Maximum: 35% FAR                  materials, and lighting shall
              Mixed Use      Location: At specified General    be provided during
                             Plan locations                    application.
                             Zoning: Mixed Use Overlay (MU-O)
 Page II-28                                                Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                          Figure II-6
                               General Plan Land Use Designations
  Land Use Designation          Required Standards:               General Description of                  Recommended
                                  Density and Design                           Uses              Urban Form Characteristics
                                   Minimum Lot Size
                              Maximum Building Height
                                (Also refer to policies)
 Other Land Uses
 Specific Planning Areas.
  Specific Planning Areas Development shall comply with        Accommodates areas which          Applications should demonstrate
                          adopted Planned Development          require submittal of Planned       community benefit and furthering
                          or Specific Plan or standards        Development or Specific            the community’s interests
                          which shall be provided during       Plans prior to development as
                          application processing as            described in this General
                          prescribed in this General Plan.     Plan.
                          Refer to General Plan Map and        Refer to Specific Plan land
                          text for development application     use policies for details on
                          requirements.                        specific properties designated
                          Zoning:                              Specific Planning Area.
                          Specific Plan (S-P)
 Public Facility Overlay.
     Public Facilities    Public facility design details shall Overlay accommodates public       Public buildings designed to
                          be provided during application       facilities including government    promote pedestrian interest
                          processing                           facilities, libraries, community   through architectural articulation,
                          Zoning:                              centers, and schools.              attractive landscaping, and
                          Public Facility Overlay (PF-O)                                          similar techniques
                          applies single-use facilities,                                         Pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
                          underlying General Plan desig-                                          with convenient non-vehicular
                          nation applies if land use is                                           access provided as appropriate
                          eliminated.                                                            Parking areas heavily landscaped
                                                                                                  to reduce radiant heat effects
 Parks and Open Space.
  Parks and Open Space    Parks and open space design          Accommodates land for public      Buildings with public parks
                          details shall be provided during     recreational activity and          designed to promote pedestrian
                          application processing               habitat preservation.              interest through architectural
                          Zoning:                              Permitted uses include active      articulation, attractive
                          Open Space-Park (OS-P)               and passive parks as well as       landscaping, and similar
                                                               land to protect, maintain, and     techniques
                                                               enhance the community’s           Pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
                                                               natural resources and include      with convenient non-vehicular
                                                               detention basins and creek         access provided
                                                               corridors.
                                                                                                 Parking areas heavily landscaped
                                                                                                  to reduce radiant heat effects
 Native American Tribal Lands.
       Tribal Lands                                            Accommodates lands that are
                                                               federally recognized reserva-
                                                               tions or Indian Villages. The
                                                               city has no land use authority
                                                               over Tribal Lands.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                                                       Page II-29

                                  H. Planned Commercial Land Use Areas
                                  Planned Commercial sites allow a variety of commercial activities
                                  within a self-contained, comprehensively planned center including
                                  office and professional uses, tourist serving facilities, specialty retail,
                                  and other retail/service businesses (Figure II-7). Each Planned Com-
                                  mercial site has guiding principles that are designed to preserve
                                  unique qualities and to ensure compatibility with existing and
                                  surrounding land uses. Planned Commercial sites #4, #7, #8, #10,
 The Escondido Auto Park is a
    comprehensively planned       #12, #13, and #14 have been incorporated into larger “Target Areas”
  regional commercial land use    (described in Section J of this Element) that provide unique oppor-
  specializing in the sale, lease tunities for achieving the General Plan vision.
and maintenance of automobiles
Page II-30                                  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                      Figure II-7
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form Page II-31
           1. Highway 78 / Cloverdale Road
           Location: Southwestern corner of Cloverdale Road and Highway 78
           Size: Approximately 15 acres (Figure II-7, Area #1).
           Planned Commercial Development 1 Guiding Principles:
           The site shall be developed as a neighborhood shopping center to
           serve the surrounding planned residential development. The facility
           shall be aesthetically designed with high quality building and
           landscaping features, increased setbacks, and minimal grading
           impacts. The design shall be rural in character, compatible with the
           San Dieguito River Valley Regional Open Space Park, and shall
           include amenities that are accessible to users of the park, such as trail
           access and picnic areas. Uses shall relate directly with the needs of the
           neighborhood and the rural setting. For example, a ranch style market
           would be more appropriate than a supermarket.
           2. Iris Lane / El Norte Parkway
           Location: Northeastern corner of Iris Lane and El Norte Parkway
           Size: Approximately 23 acres (Figure II-7, Area #2).
           Planned Commercial Development 2 Guiding Principles:
           Land uses shall include a mixture of office, restaurant, and retail with
           a comprehensively planned architecture and signage plan. Heavily
           landscaped buffers and separation shall be maintained and shall
           substantially shield views of the site from surrounding residential
           development.
           3. West Valley Parkway / Ninth Avenue
           Location: Southwestern corner of W. Valley Parkway and Ninth
           Avenue
           Size: Approximately 26 acres (Figure II-7, Area #3).
           Planned Commercial Development 3 Guiding Principles:
           Traffic, circulation, and pedestrian patterns shall be coordinated with
           development in the vicinity to promote walkability. Provisions for
           adequate pedestrian access and lighting shall be maintained in the
           overall design of the site.
Page II-32          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
4. Westfield Regional Shopping Center
Location: Interstate 15 at Via Rancho Parkway
Size: Approximately 83 acres (Figure II-7, Area #4).
Planned Commercial Development 4 Guiding Principles:
Refer to Target Area „g‟ in Section J
5. La Terraza
Location: La Terraza Boulevard and West Valley Parkway
Size: Approximately 41 acres (Figure II-7, Area #5).
Planned Commercial Development 5 Guiding Principles:
Land uses shall include office, hotel, restaurant, and retail. The hotel
will be a high quality, full service hotel with supporting improve-
ments, such as room service and conference / recreational facilities.
6. Canterbury Place
Location: Canterbury Place, south of Ninth Avenue
Size: Approximately 15 acres (Figure II-7, Area #6).
Planned Commercial Development 6 Guiding Principles:
Development shall incorporate high quality, unified design elements
and superior architectural details that are sensitive to adjacent single-
family zoning to the south and east. Development plans shall incor-
porate substantial buffers to provide an attractive view from both I-15
and Ninth Avenue, as well as incorporate high quality landscaping
throughout the project which exceeds normal city requirements in
terms of size, quantity, and overall amounts. The scale of develop-
ment and nature of uses shall be limited as necessary in order to
generate no more than 3,690 vehicle trips per day based upon
standards accepted by the City Engineer.
Development on the eastern and southern portions of the site shall be
restricted to office uses and shall prevent overviewing of adjacent
residential properties, limit noise and lighting impacts, and shall be
heavily screened through a combination of mounding, walls, and
landscaping. Retail uses should be freeway oriented and be integrated
with office uses rather than located in large single tenant, freestanding
buildings. Any future restaurant uses shall be full service rather than a
fast-food or drive-through variety.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-33

           7. Promenade Shopping Center
           Location: West side of Interstate 15 at Via Rancho Parkway
           Size: Approximately 32 acres (Figure II-7, Area #7).
           Planned Commercial Development 7 Guiding Principles:
           Refer to Target Area „i‟ in Section J
           8. Del Dios Middle School
           Location: West side of Auto Park Way North of Ninth Avenue
           Size: Approximately 15 acres (Figure II-7, Area #8).
           Planned Commercial Development 8 Guiding Principles:
           Refer to Target Area „i‟ in Section J
           9. Escondido Auto Park
           Location: Auto Park Way between Valley Parkway / Andreason Dr.
           Size: Approximately 85 acres (Figure II-7, Area #9).
           General Plan Designation: Planned Commercial
           Planned Commercial Development 9 Guiding Principles:
           Land uses shall include auto dealerships, other automotive / com-
           mercial related uses and a variety of commercial and office facilities.
           The auto dealers and auto related uses shall be located west of
           Escondido Creek with general commercial uses located on the Valley
           Parkway frontage and at the entrance to the auto dealerships west of
           the creek. Land uses and design features will be reviewed by the city
           for Master Plan consistency.
Page II-34          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

10. Auto Park Way / Tanglewood Drive
Location: South side of Auto Park Way at Tanglewood Drive
Size: Approximately 8 acres (Figure II-7, Area #10).
General Plan Designation: Planned Commercial
Planned Commercial Development 10 Guiding Principles:
Refer to Target Area „i‟ in Section J
11. Montiel Road
Location: South side of Montiel Road, north of Highway 78
Size: Approximately 15 acres (Figure II-7, Area #11).
General Plan Designation: Planned Commercial
Planned Commercial Development 11 Guiding Principles:
Land uses shall include limited light manufacturing and commercial
establishments. Large landscaped setbacks shall be maintained to
ensure compatibility with surrounding areas.
12. Mission Avenue / Quince Street
Location: Northwestern corner of Mission Avenue and Quince Street
Size: Approximately 17.8 acres (Figure II-7, Area #12).
Planned Commercial Development 12 Guiding Principles:
Refer to Target Area „a‟ in Section J
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                Page II-35

           13. Brotherton Road
           Location: Southern side of Brotherton Road, east of Escondido
           Boulevard
           Size: Approximately 1.8 acres (Figure II-7, Area #13).
           General Plan Designation: Planned Commercial
           Planned Commercial Development 13 Guiding Principles:
           Refer to Target Area „f‟ in Section J
           14. 13th Avenue / Pine Street
           Location: Block bounded by 12th, 13th Avenues, Pine and Quince
           Streets
           Size: Approximately 2.75 acres (Figure II-7, Area #14).
           General Plan Designation: Planned Commercial
           Planned Commercial Development 14 Guiding Principles:
           Refer to Target Area „c‟ in Section J
           15. Washington Avenue / Quince Street
           Location: Northwestern corner of Washington Avenue and Quince
           Street bisected by Reidy Creek
           Size: Approximately 15 acres (Figure II-7, Area #15).
           Planned Commercial Development 15 Guiding Principles:
           Refer to Target Area „a‟ in Section J
Page II-36           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

I. Specific Planning Areas
A Specific Planning Area (SPA) is a land use category defined in the
General Plan that is applied in unique situations where comprehensive
planning for an area is important to achieve a desired vision. Specific
Plans are authorized by State Government Code Section 65450.
Required components of Specific Plans include a separately approved
document and map that comprehensively prescribe the distribution,
location, extent and intensity of major components of development,
utilities, transportation, and facilities associated with the SPA.
Standards and criteria describing the process for approving private
and public development projects within the SPA are also included.
This Element identifies Specific Planning Areas within Escondido‘s
General Plan and provides a narrative for the SPA‘s character of
development. Certain SPAs have not undergone processing for a
Specific Plan document as prescribed above. Policies, standards, and
guidelines for these particular SPAs may be refined at the time of
Specific Plan adoption. These refinements shall not entail changes to
the basic land uses or the character of development envisioned in the
SPA narrative.
Specific Planning Areas #8, #9, and #13 are identified as ―Opportu-
nity Areas‖ where the city will focus infrastructure improvements to        Rancho San Pasqual
promote development (and redevelopment), enhance job growth,            (Specific Planning Area #3)
increase housing options, and revitalize the community (also refer to        is a Master Planned
                                                                        Community that incorporated
Section J of this Element).
                                                                           clustering to preserve
                                                                          hillsides and incorporate
                                                                        public and private amenities
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                        Page II-37

           Note: Areas circled in yellow refer
           to land use changes subject to
           voter approval. Current General
           Plan land use designations will
           apply if voters deny proposed
           Specific Plan land use changes.
                                                          Figure II-8
Page II-38 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
                                                              Figure II-9
1. Emerald Heights (Palos Vista) SPA #1
Location: In the northwestern portion of the planning area, at the
terminus of Woodland Parkway, north of El Norte Parkway.
Size: Approximately 980 gross acres (Figure II-9).
Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is developed with 692 single
family homes accessed from Woodland Parkway. Thirty-nine (39)
agricultural estate lots have been graded in the northern portion with
access from Mesa Rock Road with a portion of the units completed.
Adopted Plan Details: The Palos Vista Specific Plan establishes
development standards and guidelines for this SPA. The project is a
planned community with a mixture of residential land use densities
and large open space areas in three Neighborhood Planning Areas:
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-39
            Neighborhood 1 contains approximately 416.3 acres, is built out
              with 692 units, community center, tennis courts, sports courts,
              swimming pool and picnic areas with approximately 70 percent of
              the neighborhood dedicated as permanent open space. The
              maximum height of any residential unit is 30 feet and the
              maximum size of any residential unit is 3,000 square feet. The
              maximum heights of recreational buildings are limited to 50 feet,
              and the maximum size of any such individual building is 10,000
              square feet.
            Neighborhood 2 involves 63.5 acres of land dedicated as open
              space with no additional development potential.
            Neighborhood 3 involves approximately 500 acres with 39 agri-
              cultural estate lots ranging from 1.7 to 88 acres. The maximum
              height of any residential unit is 35 feet.
           SPA 1 Guiding Principles:
           A variety of design features have been incorporated to establish a
           strong sense of community identity. Guidelines are established in the
           Specific Plan for project entries, signs and lighting. Grading is limited
           to that necessary for construction of the infrastructure, circulation
           system and building sites. Major canyon slopes and floors remain in
           their native state with a total of approximately 70 percent of the
           project preserved in its natural state. Development adheres to the
           requirements of the City of Escondido‘s grading ordinance with
           exceptions enlisted within the text of the specific plan.
           Architectural guidelines intended to provide a consistent level of
           design throughout the community include a Spanish-Mediterranean
           style with variation in the roofs, massing, color, and detail to ensure
           variety throughout the project. Landscaping, irrigation and main-
           tenance details for the site have been included within the Specific
           Plan for appropriate plant and tree species, for landscaping of street,
           project entries, slopes, ground cover and for screening.
Page II-40          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                               Figure II-10
2. Sager Ranch (Daley Ranch) SPA #2
Location: In the northeastern portion of the planning area, primarily
accessed from Valley Center Road.
Size: Approximately 150 gross acres (Figure II-10).
Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is undeveloped.
Adopted Plan Details: None
SPA 2 Guiding Principles:
Based on several varying factors, including those enumerated in Item
C below, the ultimate density of the project may range from Rural I
(one unit per 4, 8 and 20 acres) to Estate I (one unit per 1, 2, 4 and 20
acres). Development of the property may also include a rural resort /
equestrian facility. The specific use(s), density and/or intensity of
development shall be specified in the Sager Ranch Specific Plan
which shall be supported by site specific technical studies, regarding
public services, utilities and traffic, and environmental review to
determine the appropriate use, density and intensity.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                         Page II-41
           Should such technical studies demonstrate that the factors enumerated
           in Item 3 below will be satisfied, the project may include residential
           densities in excess of those delineated above up to a maximum of 100
           units and/or non-residential use(s) which are compatible with sur-
           rounding uses, including the Daley Ranch.
           In addition to meeting the specific plan requirements of the State
           Government Code, Sager Ranch shall be developed under the fol-
           lowing conditions:
           A. Residential/Rural-Equestrian Resort Facility:
               1. The design of all development shall be subject to consistently
                   applied architectural review to avoid adverse impacts.
               2. Trail connections from Sager Ranch into Daley Ranch shall
                   be coordinated with the City‘s Master Plan of Trails and
                   located to the satisfaction of the City to avoid creating new
                   trails within Daley Ranch.
           B. Conservation:
               1. Adequate measures shall be implemented to ensure against
                   contamination of Lake Dixon and the Lake Dixon drainage
                   areas and to protect the same from the impacts of runoff and
                   waste water.
               2. Adequate measures shall be developed to minimize grading
                   requirements and avoid development on steep slopes and
                   ridge lines.
           C. Public Services:
               1. Appropriate levels of public services and utilities shall be
                   provided that shall be a factor in determining the ultimate
                   density for the project:
                   a) Vehicular routes to and from the Specific Planning Area
                        onto the adjacent road network;
                   b) Sewage facilities and infrastructure;
                   c) Water facilities and infrastructure for potable and
                        irrigation uses;
                   d) Storm water and drainage facilities and infrastructure;
                   e) Public schools;
                   f) Fire and police protection;
                   g) Parks and recreation areas; and
                   h) Any other public facilities and services reasonably
                        necessary to assist applicable public agencies in fulfilling
                        their respective obligations to provide service to residents
                        within the Specific Planning Area.
Page II-42          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                           Figure II-11
3. Rancho San Pasqual (Eagle Crest) SPA #3
Location: In the eastern portion of the planning area, accessed from
Cloverdale Road and Rockwood Road.
Size: Approximately 872 gross acres (Figure II-11).
Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is developed with 580 single
family homes.
Adopted Plan Details: The Eagle Crest Specific Plan establishes
development standards and guidelines for this SPA. The project is a
planned community with a mixture of residential land use densities, a
golf course and club house. A 32-acre public community park located
on the south side of Rockwood Road with hiking trails and a staging
area are included as features of the Specific Plan.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-43
           SPA 3 Guiding Principles:
           Single-family residential units are integrated into a cohesive
           community structure that addresses compatibility with existing and
           planned surrounding land uses; planning objectives of the city;
           prevailing and forecasted marketing trends; topographic and other
           important natural features. The Specific Plan incorporates a sensitive
           grading design, preservation of skyline ridges, significant natural
           resources and visually prominent hillside areas with residential and
           recreational uses.
           The open space system provides an implementing mechanism to
           protect important natural resources, major ridgelines and hillside areas
           in their natural state through the homeowners‘ association as
           approved by the Community Development Director. Provisions for
           open space transition areas, recreation corridors into adjacent
           properties and recreation uses for the community are also included.
           The open space plan is comprised of conservation viewshed and
           scenic areas, golf course, community facilities and major roadways.
           The circulation system for the Specific Plan includes a private gated
           roadway designed to city standards, based upon a loop concept that
           takes access from Cloverdale Road and Rockwood Road. The system
           connects directly to all residential neighborhoods within the project
           through private streets. Regional access to the Specific Plan is
           provided by San Pasqual Valley Road. Municipal utilities and
           services (water, sewer, police, and fire) are provided to the site.
Page II-44          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                              Figure II-12
4. Valley View SPA #4
Location: In the eastern portion of the planning area, accessed from
Rockwood Road.
Size: Approximately 1,590 gross acres (Figure II-12).
Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is partially developed.
Adopted Plan Details: The Rancho Vista Monte Specific Plan
establishes development standards and guidelines for a portion of this
SPA. The project includes a planned community on 133 acres
involving 80 single family units with 81 acres of the site preserved as
open space. Remaining portions of the SPA do not have an approved
Specific Plan.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                        Page II-45
           SPA 4 Guiding Principles:
           The SPA envisions an upscale, large lot single-family residential
           community, organized around a comprehensively planned open space
           system. The development may include a golf course and luxury resort
           hotel with extensive amenities in exchange for residential units
           determined to have the same impact. The aesthetic and rural character
           of the area will be maintained in accordance with strict site planning,
           architectural, and landscaping standards. The luxury resort, if
           proposed, shall fully mitigate all fiscal, environmental, and public
           facility impacts to the satisfaction of the city.
           Development as described above shall not be permitted in this area
           unless a Specific Plan is adopted by the City Council, pursuant to
           requirements of the State Government Code. A property owner
           within the SPA may elect to develop his/her property prior to
           adoption of a Specific Plan through a development application to
           the County. The development permitted should be of a low density
           so as not to preclude the desired land use pattern described above.
           The Specific Plan shall address the following issues:
           A. Land Use:
               1. The maximum theoretical yield of any Specific Plan within
                    the SPA shall be determined by applying the slope density
                    formula of the Rural II designation. Increased yield may be
                    granted by the City Council through approval of a develop-
                    ment agreement which will result in on-site and/or off-site
                    community benefits above and beyond the impacts of the
                    project(s). This potential increased yield shall not result in a
                    total of more than 800 dwelling units for the entire SPA.
               2. No development shall be permitted on slopes greater than
                    35 percent. Lands in this area shall be preserved as open
                    space.
               3. All residential development shall be detached, single-
                    family units. The minimum lot size shall be 1 acre, unless
                    smaller lots are approved only in conjunction with a
                    development agreement.
               4. Recreation facilities to serve the needs of the residential
                    community shall be provided in conveniently located sites.
Page II-46           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
B. Traffic Circulation:
   The Specific Plan shall comprehensively analyze the traffic and
   emergency access demands placed on Circulation Plan
   roadways, recognizing the impacts to adjacent developments.
   A circulation system shall be implemented that will provide
   safe access for residents within the SPA and maintain a level of
   service standard of ―C‖ on roadways beyond the SPA to the
   satisfaction of the city. The improvement of Rockwood Road
   shall be closely coordinated with development.
C. Public Facilities:
   The Specific Plan shall include a comprehensive analysis of
   public service and utility requirements and establish appro-
   priate financing mechanisms and phasing programs to meet
   such requirements to the satisfaction of the city.
E. Design Considerations:
   1. The Specific Plan shall contain a system of open spaces,
       including recreation areas, trails, and permanent open space
       areas and appropriate mechanisms to develop and maintain
       the open space system.
   2. The Specific Plan shall contain development standards and
       guidelines to minimize grading requirements and to pro-
       hibit development on steep slopes and skyline ridges.
   3. The Specific Plan shall include landscaping guidelines that
       maximize the use of native vegetation.
   4. Development and open space areas shall be coordinated
       with the San Dieguito River Valley Regional Open Space
       Park and appropriate regional open space planning efforts.
E. Development of Areas within the Specific Planning Area, but
   Without an Adopted Specific Plan:
   The ―maximum theoretical density‖ of any development within
   the Valley View Specific Planning Area but without an adop-
   ted specific plan shall be determined by applying the slope
   density formulas of the Rural I category for areas over 25
   percent slope, and Rural II for areas under 25 percent slope.
   Said development shall satisfy all public facility impacts and
   may require additional technical studies to determine specific
   mitigation measures.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                  Page II-47

                             PA 5
                                                             PA 2
                                      PA 1
                                                             PA 1
                                  PA 3 PA 1
                                                          PA 4
                                                                      Figure II-13
           5. Northeast Gateway SPA #5
           Location: In the northeastern portion of the planning area, accessed
           from East Valley Parkway.
           Size: Approximately 418 gross acres (Figure II-13).
           Current Status: The Specific Plan is partially developed and divided
           into five (5) Planning Areas with individually approved projects in
           portions of the SPA.
           Adopted Plan Details: The Northeast Gateway Specific Plan
           establishes lot sizes, development standards and guidelines for the
           entire area allowing a maximum of 517 dwelling units that may be
           transferred throughout the site subject to city approval.
Page II-48          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
SPA 5 Guiding Principles:
The SPA envisions an upscale, large lot single-family residential
development integrated with parks, trails and open space, and Ryan
Community Park serving as a focal point. Alignment for hiking trails
within the SPA shall conform to the City‘s Master Plan of Trails.
Special emphasis shall be placed on criteria assuring high-quality
architectural design for the residences, preservation of all slopes over
25% as open space, and sensitivity to views along Valley Parkway
and other public streets. Nonresidential uses within the SPA may
develop under a Conditional Use Permit without the benefit of a
specific plan provided such uses establish compatibility with
surrounding uses. Details regarding each Planning Area (PA) include:
PA 1: A total of 340 units have been approved for this area.
PA 2: The design of the residences and parkway design shall be
        compatible with Planning Area 1. The development in this
        area will be at a lower density than Planning Area 1.
PA 3: A total of 30 units have been approved for this area.
PA 4: Includes Ryan Community Park, a public high school and
        residential land uses (adjacent to the southeastern corner of
        Hidden Trails Drive and Valley Parkway). The minimum lot
        size shall be one acre.
PA 5: This area is primarily be devoted to open space, recreational
        or other similar uses determined appropriate by the City.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-49

                                                                         Figure II-14
           6. Lomas Del Lago SPA #6
           Location: Two distinct areas located on the west side of Interstate 15
           (on both sides of Via Ranch Parkway) and at the southeastern corner
           of Bear Valley Parkway and San Pasqual Road.
           Size: Approximately 300 total gross acres (Figure II-14).
           Current Status: The Specific Plan is built-out.
           Adopted Plan Details: The Lomas Del Lago Specific Plan estab-
           lishes lot sizes, development standards and guidelines for the SPA.
           The project contains 256 single family units and an 18-hole municipal
           golf course on the east side of interstate 15. A total of 178 single
           family units are located on the west side of Interstate 15.
           SPA 6 Guiding Principles:
           The SPA involves an upscale, gated community with single family
           homes on a variety of lot sizes. Private gated streets serve on-site
           streets on both sides of Interstate 15. The municipal 18-hole golf
           course provides the community with a recreational facility while also
           preserving the 130 acre area as permanent open space. Municipal
           utilities and services (water, sewer, police, and fire) are provided to
           the site.
Page II-50           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
7. Bernardo Mountain SPA #7 (Deleted)
Location: On the northern shore of Lake Hodges, west of Interstate
15 and accessed from Via Rancho Parkway.
Size: Approximately 317 gross acres.
Current Status: The Specific Plan is vacant.
Adopted Plan Details: None
SPA 7 Guiding Principles:
The SPA formerly had development opportunity but was sub-
sequently purchased by the San Dieguito River Park Joint Powers
Authority as open space and integrated into the park system. No
commercial or residential development is anticipated for the SPA and
it is identified as ―Open Space / Parks‖ on the General Plan Land Use
Map.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                   Page II-51

                                                                      Figure II-15
           8. Escondido Research Technology Center
                (Harmony Grove) SPA #8
           Location: On the western side of the Planning Area along Citracado
           Parkway between Auto Park Way and Avenida del Diablo.
           Size: Approximately 476 gross acres (Figure II-15).
           Current Status: The Specific Plan is partially developed.
           Adopted Plan Details: The Escondido Research Technology Center
           (ERTC) Specific Plan, and The Harmony Grove Industrial Park
           Specific Plan establish development standards and guidelines for 186
           acres and 15 acres respectively. Both projects include employment
           land uses on lots ranging from approximately 1-40 acres. The
           remaining properties within the SPA require Specific Plan approval to
           establish development standards and guidelines.
Page II-52          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
SPA 8 Guiding Principles:
The project envisions a high quality business park, encouraging clean
research and development, medical office and Industrial Park uses to
expand Escondido‘s employment base, increase median incomes and
improve the community‘s jobs/housing balance. Specific Plan(s) shall
include attractive design standards, landscape features, integrated
recreation, and compatible land uses. General guidance for these
development standards may be similar to and derived from the ERTC
and Harmony Grove Specific Plans.
Increased building heights and intensities shall be focused along
Citracado Parkway and in areas more distanced from residential uses
to ensure compatibility. Primary access to non-residential areas within
the Specific Plan Area south of Andreason Street shall be from
Citracado Parkway and Lariat Drive. Vehicular access to nonresi-
dential land uses from Harmony Grove Road west of Citracado
Parkway shall be prohibited. Attention shall be given to buffer the
semi-rural residential areas along ―edges‖ near Harmony Grove
Road (west of Citracado Parkway), Kauana Loa Drive and in the
Eden Valley area by incorporating land uses, building heights,
architectural materials, building orientations, setbacks, colors,
screening, lighting and signage that are harmonious with adjacent
lower intensity land uses.
The Specific Plan(s) shall include programs addressing legal non-
conforming residential uses that ensure their eventual integration into
future planned business park operations while allowing their
continued operation prior to transitioning to non-residential uses.
Criteria and standards for proposed grading, multimodal trans-
portation, and utility extensions shall be included to avoid adverse
impacts and allow integration of adjacent SPA properties.
The drainage areas running north and south through the center of this
Specific Planning Area, as well as Escondido Creek, represent a
desirable visual amenity. The Specific Plan shall include provisions
for the enhancement of riparian areas and for the incorporation of the
Escondido Creek Trail into the ultimate development plans while
minimizing impacts to these resources.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-53

                                                                      Figure II-16
           9. Downtown SPA #9
           Location: Central Escondido generally located east of Interstate 15,
           north of 6th Avenue, south of Mission Avenue and west of Fig Street
           Size: Approximately 475 gross acres (Figure II-16).
           Current Status: The Specific Plan is divided into seven (7) Districts.
           The area includes a historic walkable retail and service core around
           Grand Avenue with suburban-style shopping centers on the western
           and northern sides. A historic residential neighborhood borders the
           downtown on the south with office and retail to the east.
           Adopted Plan Details: The Downtown Escondido Specific Plan
           establishes development standards and guidelines for the SPA.
           Projects are approved based on their conformance with Specific Plan
           standards, guidelines, and principles allowing up to 5,275 dwelling
           units.
Page II-54          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
SPA 9 Guiding Principles:
1) Downtown‘s vision embraces a dynamic, attractive, economically
    vital city center providing social, cultural, economic, and residen-
    tial focus while respecting its history.
2) The environment shall focus on pedestrian orientation to attract
    and accommodate local and non-local visitors to experience an
    atmosphere that is entertaining and vibrant with activity occurring
    through the day, evening and weekend hours.
3) The Specific Plan policies shall foster increased employment
    densities and encourage the attraction of businesses with salaries
    that raise the city‘s median income and improve the jobs / housing
    balance. The Specific Plan also promotes:
    a) Prioritizing infrastructure improvements to accommodate
         growth.
    b) Targeting residential development around Grape Day Park.
    c) Expanding Grape Day Park to Washington Avenue to foster
         additional recreation opportunities and facilitate more con-
         venient access from northern areas.
    d) Expanding the ―Grand Avenue‖ pedestrian environment
         throughout downtown by encouraging vertical mixed use
         developments.
    e) Strengthening the Escondido Creek path connection with
         downtown.
    f) Providing convenient transit access, innovative housing
         options and pedestrian-oriented design.
    g) Linking downtown to the development of future regional
         attraction(s) within Target Area #1 by providing attractive and
         safe pedestrian access.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-55

           10. SPA #10 (Deleted)
            This SPA was deleted from the General Plan pursuant to General Plan
            Amendment 95-02 / Resolution #96-32
           11. Montreaux SPA #11 (Deleted)
            The SPA formerly had development opportunity but was subse-
            quently purchased by the County of San Diego as open space and
            integrated into the regional open space system. No commercial or
            residential development is anticipated for the SPA and it is identified
            as ―Open Space / Parks‖ on the General Plan Land Use Map.
Page II-56           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                            Figure II-17
12. Hidden Trails (East Grove) SPA #12
 Location: In the eastern portion of the planning area, accessed from
 Hidden Trails Road.
 Size: Approximately 500 gross acres (Figure II-17).
 Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is developed with 291 single
 family homes (completed) and up to six (6) agricultural home sites
 that are partially built out (297 total units).
 Adopted Plan Details: The East Grove Specific Plan establishes
 development standards and guidelines for this SPA. The project is a
 planned community with a mixture of residential land use densities
 clustered on the more level portions of the site and surrounded by
 steeper open space and agricultural areas.
  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-57
           SPA 12 Guiding Principles:
           The Hidden Trails Specific Plan integrates residential neighborhoods
           into a cohesive community structure and stresses the preservation of
           skyline ridges and significant natural resources by incorporating these
           features with recreational trails while allowing ongoing viable
           agriculture uses. Open space and circulation linkages provide separ-
           ation and connectivity between each residential neighborhood, as well
           as providing access to surrounding areas. The project includes strict
           provisions for the protection and preservation of important biological
           habitat.
           The Plan‘s circulation system includes public streets designed to city
           standards, with two primary access points; Hidden Trails Road on the
           north, and Reed Road on the south. All streets are consistent with the
           Circulation Element and city design standards. In addition, the
           Specific Plan includes 3+ miles of public recreational trails along the
           Cloverdale and Old Guejito Grade Road alignment as detailed in the
           Specific Plan.
Page II-58          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                          Figure II-18
13. Imperial Oakes Corporate Center SPA #13
Location: In the northern portion of the planning area, bounded by
Interstate 15 on the west, Country Club Lane on the north, El Norte
Parkway on the south, Iris Lane and Centre City Parkway on the east.
Size: Approximately 163 gross acres (Figure II-18).
Current Status: The Specific Plan Area is developed with visitor
service and general retail uses, church, office, Rod McLeod Com-
munity Park, single family residential and vacant land. The site is
bisected by SDGE overhead utility lines and there is limited access to
the interior.
Adopted Plan Details: None
SPA 13 Guiding Principles:
1) The Specific Plan shall establish provisions for a comprehen-
    sively planned development focused on high paying, high
    employee density employment opportunities.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                    Page II-59
           2) The Plan shall include Smart Growth principles, and provide
              details regarding the appropriate access points, unifying design
              themes, attractive development standards and guidelines, land
              uses, and the prioritization of infrastructure improvements to
              accommodate growth. In addition, opportunities for a public trail
              system or other public recreational amenity that will link to Rod
              McLeod Community Park shall be integrated into the plan.
           3) Increased building heights and intensities shall be focused along
              Interstate 15 and in areas more distanced from the residential uses
              area to ensure compatibility. Employment uses shall integrate
              specific features to ensure compatibility with semi-rural the
              residential areas accessed from South Iris Lane by incorporating
              appropriate lower intensity land uses, building materials, heights,
              separation, orientation, colors, heights, screening, lighting and
              signage. Maximum densities in the residential area of the Specific
              Plan (identified in the map) shall be consistent with the Urban I
              single family land use designation.
           4) The Specific Plan(s) shall include programs addressing legal non-
              conforming residential uses that ensure their eventual integration
              into future planned business park operations while allowing their
              continued operation prior to transitioning to non-residential uses.
              Criteria and standards for proposed grading, circulation, and
              utility extensions shall be included to avoid adverse impacts and
              allow integration of adjacent SPA properties.
Page II-60          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
J. General Plan Opportunity Areas
General Plan Opportunity Areas (Target Areas and Specific Planning
Areas) identify where land use changes are anticipated and en-
couraged to implement core themes of: a) opportunities to live, work,
and play; b) protect, preserve and revitalize neighborhoods; and c)
conserve and sustain resources (Figure II-19). Opportunity Areas
incorporate smart growth principles that promote compact, walkable
development pat-terns in close proximity to transit and strong multi-
modal connections. In these areas the city will focus infrastructure
improvements to promote development (and redevelopment), en-
hance job growth, increase housing options, and revitalize the com-
munity.
1. Specific Planning Areas
Refer to Section “I” for Specific Plan Opportunity Areas:
    1. Escondido Research and Technology Center SPA #8
    2. Downtown Escondido SPA #9
    3. Imperial Oakes Corporate Center SPA #13
2. Target Areas
Target Areas include “Guiding Principles” for achieving the build-out
vision. Underlying zoning will define land uses in concert with an
“Area Plan” overlay to help guide development:
    a.  Downtown Transit Station
    b.  Highway 78 at Broadway
    c.  South Quince Street
    d.  S. Escondido Boulevard / Centre City Parkway
    e.  S. Escondido Boulevard / Felicita Avenue
    f.  Centre City Parkway / Brotherton Road
    g.  Westfield Regional Shopping Center                               Aerial view of Downtown
    h.  East Valley Parkway                                             Escondido and East Valley
    i.  Promenade Retail Center and Vicinity                          Parkway which are identified as
    j.  Felicita Corporate Office Center                              General Plan Opportunity Areas
    k.  Nordahl Road Transit Station
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                      Page II-61

                                                          Figure II-19
Page II-62 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
                                                           Figure II-20
a. Downtown Transit Station Target Area
Location: Southeast of Interstate 15 and Highway 78
Size: 296 acres (Figure II-20).
General Plan Designation: General Commercial (68 acres) Planned
Commercial (14 acres) General Industrial (148 acres); Light Industrial
(66 acres)
Current Status: Developed with low intensity general and auto-
related and home improvement retail, restaurants, manufacturing,
commercial / industrial services, building / landscaping / irrigation
supply, concrete / asphalt production.
Target Area 1 Guiding Principles:
1) Establish the area north of the transit station and east of Reidy
    Creek and Rock Springs Road for locating a regional attraction
    involving entertainment, employment, commercial and residential
    uses incorporating unified development standards and design
    guidelines that also provide strong pedestrian connections to
    downtown.
2) Consider opportunities and incentives for increasing employment
    densities and attracting businesses with salaries that raise the
    city‘s median income and improving the jobs/housing balance.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-63

           3) Allow existing construction material manufacturing, trash trans-
                fer, and agricultural supply land uses west of Reidy Creek to
                continue operating and prohibit similar new uses.
           Guiding Principles for Mission Avenue / Quince Street
           (Planned Commercial #12):
           Land use shall include mid- to big-box retailers or other uses that
           could anchor revitalization efforts in the area. Design standards shall
           maintain a common architectural theme with colors, materials and
           landscaping that unifies the development.
           Guiding Principles for Washington Avenue / Quince Street
           (Planned Commercial #15):
           The site may continue to operate as an outdoor swap meet in accor-
           dance with the previously approved Conditional Use Permits for the
           use until such time the site is redeveloped, and also may be used or
           developed in ways consistent with existing zoning designations.
           Development of any parcel that requires a zone change or requests
           city participation in the nature of fee reductions, off-site improve-
           ments, or tax sharing shall require a Planned Development approval.
           The site may be developed with a mix of commercial, office, retail,
           restaurant, and light industrial uses that support revitalization efforts
           throughout the area and take advantage of the Escondido Transit
           Center and SPRINTER Light Rail located two blocks to the south
           along Quince Street. New development should encourage consoli-
           dation of properties and incorporate “smart growth” design principles.
           The development also may include crossing or covering of the
           existing flood control channel. Enhancement along the channel (such
           as decorative fencing, landscaping, pedestrian-oriented features/
           amenities, etc.) also should be incorporated into future projects where
           appropriate. Traffic circulation and pedestrian patterns shall be
           coordinated when future development of the site is proposed to
           provide integrated access points and to ensure appropriate vehicular
           and pedestrian access between the individual parcels and adjacent
           streets.
           In order to maintain appropriate levels-of-service on the surrounding
           street system and minimize potential air-quality impacts, the scale of
           development and nature of the uses shall be limited as necessary in
           order to generate no more than a cumulative total of 12,160 vehicle
           trips per day. Specific site and technical studies may be required, to
           address and/or mitigate any project specific impacts related to
           traffic/circulation, utilities, air quality, noise and hazardous materials
           associated with future development of the site, and as identified in the
           Mitigated Negative Declaration.
Page II-64           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                            Figure II-21
b. Highway 78 / Broadway Target Area
Location: Terminus of Highway 78, north of downtown, east of
Centre City Parkway, west of Juniper Street
Size: 122 acres (Figure II-21).
General Plan Designation: General Commercial (148 acres)
Current Status: Low intensity general and auto-related retail,
restaurants, office and commercial services and supply
Target Area 2 Guiding Principles:
1) Evaluate opportunities to enhance vehicular entrance to the
    community along Highway 78 and consider a gateway element to
    the city along Lincoln Avenue.
2) Promote higher intensities along Broadway and consider
    establishing a unifying architectural and landscaping theme as a
    means to improve the overall image and serve as an entry into
    downtown.
3) Consider opportunities and incentives for increasing employment
    densities and attracting businesses with salaries that raise the
    city‘s median income and improving the jobs/housing balance.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-65

                                                                           Figure II-22
           c. South Quince Street Target Area
           Location: South of downtown north of 15th Avenue along both sides
               of Quince Street.
           Size: 104 acres (Figure II-22).
           General Plan Designations: Urban I (20 acres); Urban II (25 acres);
               Planned Commercial (5 acres); General Commercial (15 acres);
               Industrial Office (39 acres)
           Current Status: Mid-range density multi-family, low intensity
               general retail, office restaurants, small scale industrial and manu-
               facturing services.
           Target Area 3 Guiding Principles:
           1) Establish an Area Plan that incorporates smart growth principles,
               promotes increased density and intensity near the transit center,
               encourages façade improvements, property revitalization and
               integrates public/private recreational space.
           2) Consider opportunities and incentives for increasing employment
               densities and attracting businesses with salaries that raise the
               city‘s median income and improving the jobs/housing balance.
Page II-66          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

3) Incorporate provisions for a commercial and office mixed-use
    overlay in the residential portions of the Area Plan to allow
    compatible non-residential land uses with the neighborhood.
Guiding Principles for 13th Avenue / Pine Street
(Planned Commercial #14):
Land uses shall include retail uses that are compatible with adjacent
residential neighborhood. Development standards shall include
decorative masonry walls to screen trash enclosures and loading areas
of commercial uses. Reciprocal access for the entire project shall be
provided through the existing commercial parking lot to the satis-
faction of the Planning Department. All buildings and lighting shall
be unified in design, single story and orient away from residential
uses on Quince Street and 12th Avenue. Delivery schedules for the
commercial uses shall be structured so as not to occur during with late
night or early morning hours, and delivery areas shall be oriented
away from residential areas.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-67
                                                                     Figure II-23
           d. S. Escondido Blvd/Centre City Pkwy Target Area
           A Land Use Area Plan will be maintained for the residential area
           between Fifth and Sixteenth Avenues, Centre City Parkway and
           Escondido Boulevard (Figure II-23). The neighborhood is predo-
           minately characterized by older single and multifamily housing stock.
           The area plan shall address the following objectives:
           a. Promote a wide range of housing opportunities.
           b. Provide adequate infrastructure.
           c. Establish development standards and design guidelines to ensure
              quality architecture and landscaping, adequate off-street parking,
              on-site open space, and recreation areas.
           d. Include strategies for the development of neighborhood parks
              within the area.
           e. Create standards to facilitate the establishment of child care
              homes and centers.
           f. Establish a density range where maximum densities can only be
              attained through lot consolidation and consistency with the above
              goals.
           (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Page II-68          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
                                                               Figure II-24
e. S. Escondido Blvd / Felicita Avenue Target Area
Location: 15th Avenue, Escondido Boulevard, Centre City Parkway
Size: 167 acres (Figure II-24).
General Plan Designations: Urban III (29 acres); Urban IV (12
acres); General Commercial (126 acres); Mixed Use Overlay
(minimum 30 units per acre)
Current Status: Multi-family, low intensity suburban shopping,
general retail, office, restaurants, and small scale services.
Adopted Plans: S. Escondido Boulevard Commercial Area Plan
Target Area 5 Guiding Principles:
1) Update the existing Area Plan for the Target Area to include
    smart growth principles; strong connections to transit and inte-
    gration of public/private recreational space, and criteria for
    considering exclusively residential development along Escon-
    dido Boulevard.
2) Establish a mixed use overlay with increased density and intensity
    in close proximity to transit and services. Ensure compatibility
    with adjacent lower density residential with appropriate building
    heights, intensities, and buffers.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                         Page II-69
                                                                           Figure II-25
           f. Centre City Parkway/Brotherton Road Target Area
           Location: In the vicinity of Brotherton Road and Citracado Parkway
           on both sides of Centre City Parkway.
           Size: 55 acres (Figure II-25).
           General Plan Designations: Urban III (7 acres); General Commer-
           cial (48 acres); Planned Commercial (1.8 acres) Mixed Use Overlay
           (minimum 30 units per acre)
           Current Status: Mid-range density mixed use, low intensity subur-
           ban shopping, general retail, office, and small scale services.
           Adopted Plans: S. Escondido Boulevard Commercial Area Plan
           Target Area 6 Guiding Principles
           1) Update the existing Area Plan for the Target Area to include
               smart growth principles; a gateway element for the city, aesthetic
               enhancements along Centre City Parkway, strong connections to
               transit, integration of public/private recreational space, criteria for
               considering exclusively residential development along Escon-
               dido Boulevard, and features to ensure pedestrian safety.
Page II-70          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
2) Establish a mixed use overlay with increased density and intensity
     in close proximity to transit and services. Ensure compatibility
     with adjacent lower density residential with appropriate building
     heights, intensities, and buffers.
Guiding Principles for Brotherton Road
(Planned Commercial #13):
Land uses planned for this site shall be limited to mini-storage units
or other uses compatible with adjacent residential properties subject to
the provisions set forth in the Zoning Code. Development standards
shall include a 6-foot-high block wall, in combination with a mini-
mum 20-foot-wide heavily landscaped buffer utilizing mature non-
deciduous trees and shrubs with dense foliage to be incorporated
along the property abutting residentially zoned property to create a
visual buffer upon installation. All structures shall provide roof
coverings, similar to and compatible with surrounding residential
development. Site studies, to the satisfaction of the Planning Depart-
ment may also be required to ensure surrounding residential proper-
ties are not impacted.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-71
                                                                         Figure II-26
           g. Westfield’s Regional Shopping Center
           Location: Interstate 15 and Via Rancho Parkway interchange
           Size: 77 acres (Figure II-26).
           General Plan Designations: Planned Commercial #4
           Current Status: Multistory regional shopping center with several
           anchor tenants, smaller in-line shops and free-standing up-scale
           dining establishments. Site is owned by the city under long-term lease
           contract to a private developer.
           Target Area 7 Guiding Principles:
           1) Continue to coordinate future shopping center expansion efforts
               that attract a regional customer base and support city revenues.
           2) Consider opportunities and incentives that increase employment
               densities and attract businesses including office, theater, hotel,
               entertainment and visitor serving uses that complement existing
               retail and offer salaries that raise the city‘s median income and
               improve the jobs/housing balance.
           3) Promote transit access and connection for the site and consider
               opportunities for amending parking requirements as transit use to
               and from the site increases.
Page II-72           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                            Figure II-27
h. East Valley Parkway Target Area
Location: Generally between Escondido Creek and Grand Avenue,
    between Palomar Hospital and Midway Drive.
Size: 331 acres (Figure II-27).
General Plan Designations: Office (70 acres); General Commercial
    (261 acres), Mixed Use Overlay (minimum 30 units per acre).
Current Status: Low intensity general retail, office, restaurants, and
    small-scale service businesses.
Adopted Plans: East Valley Parkway Area Plan
Target Area 8 Guiding Principles:
1) Update the Area Plan for the Target Area to include smart growth
    principles as well as improved vehicular access and enhanced
    aesthetics from Highway 78 along Lincoln Avenue and Ash
    Street. Strengthen Escondido Creek path connections, and better
    integrate public / private recreational spaces.
2) Promote opportunities and incentives for attracting job training
    and technical/vocational schools and educational institutions that
    enhance employment opportunity for residents.
3) Establish a mixed use overlay between Palomar Hospital and Ash
    Street to focus residential growth with increased building heights
    and intensities, distanced from lower density residential and
    appropriate buffers to ensure compatibility.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-73
                                                                        Figure II-28
           i. Promenade Retail Center and Vicinity Target Area
           Location: Interstate 15, Auto Park Way and Valley Parkway
           Size: 106 acres (Figure II-28).
           General Plan Designations: Planned Commercial, Urban IV (Multi-
           family, up to 24 units per acre)
           Current Status: Retail shopping center with several anchor tenants,
           smaller in-line shops, auto dealership, middle school, apartments.
           Target Area 9 Guiding Principles:
           1) Work with the school district to coordinate any transition to retail
               use. Establish high quality, unified architectural design features
               for new development with particular attention to visibility from
               Interstate 15 and southern residential areas.
           2) Consider opportunities and incentives for increasing employment
               densities and attracting businesses including offices, theaters,
               hotels, entertainment and visitor serving uses that complement
               existing retail and offer salaries that raise the city‘s median
               income and improving the jobs/housing balance.
           3) Commercial uses shall include automobile sales and compatible
               uses. Single family residential uses near I-15 shall transition to
               commercial through separate development applications.
           4) Mixed-use development shall be permitted south of Ninth Avenue
               and shall orient toward Ninth Avenue and Del Dios Highway.
Page II-74          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

                                                               Figure II-29
j. Felicita Corporate Office Target Area
Location: Interstate 15 and Felicita Road Interchange area.
Size: 87 acres (Figure II-29).
General Plan Designations: Planned Office
Current Status: Low intensity medical offices, single family units,
    churches, agriculture, vacant.
Target Area 10 Principles:
1) Promote opportunities and incentives for increasing employment
    densities and attracting businesses with salaries that raise the
    city‘s median income and improving the jobs/housing balance.
2) Land uses shall be consistent with the Planned Office designation
    with a focus on attracting high paying, high employee density
    employment opportunities.
3) Development shall include high quality, unified design elements
    that provide for superior architecture and features such as building
    height, mass, colors, materials, signage, landscaping, lighting,
    parking and circulation that are sensitive to adjacent single-family
    zoning. Increased building heights and intensities shall be located
    closer to the freeway in areas that are more distanced from lower
    density residential with compatible buffers provided.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                         Page II-75

                                                                          Figure II-30
           k. Nordahl Road Transit Station Target Area
           Location: On the western side of the Planning Area along Auto Park
           Way south of Nordahl Road and Mission Avenue.
           Size: Approximately 170 gross acres (Figure II-30).
           General Plan Designations: Specific Planning Area #8, Light Indus-
           trial, General Industrial
           Current Status: The area is partially developed.
           Target Area 11 Guiding Principles:
           1) Promote opportunities and incentives that increase employment
                densities and attract businesses with salaries that raise the city‘s
                median income and improve the jobs/housing balance.
           2) Establish an Area Plan that incorporates flexible land uses
                adjacent to the transit station, and along Auto Park Way, to
                include office, medical, convalescent, and support services.
                Similar provisions shall be included in the Specific Plan text
                associated with SPA #8.
Page II-76           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

     3) Development shall include high quality, unified design
        elements that incorporates superior architecture and
        features such as building height, mass, colors, materials,
        signage, landscaping, lighting, parking and circulation.
     4) Development adjacent to single-family zoning located to
        the southwest shall be of compatible height and scale with
        buffers included that enhance the transition of land uses.
     5) Increased building heights and intensities are appropriate
        closer to the Nordahl Transit Station and along Auto Park
        Way that are distanced from lower density residential areas
        to ensure compatibility.
     6) Opportunities for a passenger shuttle service between the
        Nordahl Transit Station and Palomar Hospital shall be
        encouraged.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                  Page II-77
                                  K. Special Application Measures
                                  The General Plan establishes the rationale, goals, objectives, and
                                  policies for future actions within the community. However, because
                                  areas of the community differ in characteristics such as topography,
                                  development potential, and intensity, special application measures
                                  provide a means to carry out certain objectives of the General Plan to
                                  benefit the community. These measures include: residential lot
                                  clustering, development agreements, annexations, and General Plan
                                  Amendments.
                                  1. Residential Lot Clustering
                                  Residential Lot Clustering (clustering) is a useful development tool
                                  for protecting sensitive resources, avoiding hazardous areas, and/or
                                  preserving the natural appearance of hillsides. Clustering involves
                                  assessing the natural characteristics of a site and grouping the
                                  buildings or lots through an on-site transfer of density rather than
                                  distributing them evenly throughout the project as in a conventional
                                  subdivision. Not only do cluster developments help preserve open
  A residential development in    space, they also tend to minimize the visual impacts associated with
 northern Escondido that utilized development, reduce the cost of building and maintaining public
   clustering to preserve large   roads, and decrease grading in environmentally sensitive areas.
       open space buffers
Page II-78                                  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
The maximum development yield (that is, the number of dwelling
units) that can be built as part of a clustered development project shall
be derived by applying the maximum permissible density in each
applicable residential land use category, subject to applicable slope
density categories and adjusted for natural floodways as prescribed in
the General Plan policies. The number of dwelling units actually
permitted in a cluster development may be less following application
of the policies that shall govern cluster development projects.
2. Development Agreements
California Planning law authorizes cities and developers to enter into
a contract in which mutually benefitting concessions and assurances
governing a property are negotiated and approved. For the developer,
a development agreement grants vested rights for a period of time that
guarantees a project‘s approval even if future changes to local plan-
ning or zoning laws might otherwise restrict or prohibit development
of that project. In exchange, the city is assured certain public benefits
by the developer that could include construction of improvements,
public facilities and/or services, fees, or other commitments that the
city ordinarily cannot require of the developer. Development agree-
ments are individually approved by the City Council with terms
unique to project and situation pertaining to the development.
3. Annexations
Approximately one-half of Escondido‘s Planning Area involves
territory that is located outside the city‘s municipal boundaries and
governed by San Diego County (Figure II-30). Transitioning these
properties into the city requires annexation through the Local Agency
Formation Commission (LAFCO) and property owner involvement.
Annexation policies are intended to ensure that the city‘s boundary
expansions occur in a manner that are consistent with the General
Plan‘s vision and meet Escondido‘s long term goals.
4. General Plan Review and Amendment
The General Plan reflects a 20+ year time horizon to allow for the
systematic implementation of desired land use patterns, mobility
network, and facility installation. Periodic review of the General
Plan is an important facet in its implementation to allow for adjust-
ments in response to changing conditions, both internal and exter-
nal, the availability of more recent planning data, and shifts in
community values.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-79

           Changing conditions may result in General Plan Amendment requests
           which should be carefully considered. In conformance with Section
           65358(b) of the State Government Code each mandatory element of
           the General Plan may be amended up to four times per year. Each
           amendment may include multiple changes to the General Plan. The
           General Plan policies regarding amendments are intended to ensure
           greater predictability for both the development community and the
           public and include local requirements requiring a public vote for
           certain types of land use amendments.
Page II-80           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
L. Unincorporated Neighborhoods in the
     Planning Area
Surrounding Escondido‟s corporate boundaries are several unincor-
porated neighborhoods within the General Plan and Sphere of Influ-
ence (Figure II-31). It is anticipated that requests for annexing
unincorporated properties in these areas will be considered during the
planning horizon of the General Plan. Annexation involves an evalu-
ation and determination of facilities and services that will be provided
in the territory proposed for incorporation to the city, as well as
financing mechanisms to fund the necessary facility infrastructure.
The following information analyzes facilities and services as well as
financing opportunities within unincorporated neighborhoods sur-         The unincorporated areas of
rounding the city of Escondido.                                            Eden Valley and Harmony
                                                                          Grove have adopted a rural
                                                                         lifestyle with equestrian uses
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                         Page II-81

                                                          Figure II-31
Page II-82 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
1. Eden Valley and Harmony Grove Neighborhoods
Location / General Description: The Eden Valley and Harmony
Grove neighborhoods are located in a rural valley along the western
portion of Escondido, generally bounded by Hill Valley Road to the
north, Escondido‟s General Plan boundary to the west, Escondido
Creek Conservancy natural open space to the south, and Country
Club Road, Kauana Loa Drive and portions of Harmony Grove Road
to the east. The area generally north of Mount Whitney Road forms
the boundary between the Eden Valley and Harmony Grove neigh-
borhoods. The area includes single family residential on one-acre and
larger lots, a concrete pipe manufacturing company, agricultural uses,
a historic spiritualist retreat center, and vacant property.
The Harmony Grove neighborhood is included in the County‟s
adopted Elfin Forest and Harmony Grove San Dieguito Community
Plan; a policy document created to address the issues, characteristics
and vision of the two communities. Future development within
Harmony Grove includes a 468-acre Specific Plan approved by the
County that will involve a mixed-use rural residential village
consisting of commercial uses, a fire station, open space, equestrian
facilities and up to 742 units.
Approximate Acreage: 1,000 acres
Water Service: Rincon Water District supplies potable water to these
neighborhoods as part of its service area (refer to Infrastructure and
Mobility Element, Figure III-12) The District receives imported water
from Northern California and the Colorado River via the Metropolitan
Water District of Southern California (MWD) and the San Diego
County Water Authority (SDCWA).
Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
the Eden Valley and Harmony Grove neighborhoods. Properties are
developed with private septic systems to individually treat wastewater
generated on-site. The future Harmony Grove Village project will
involve construction of an on-site package sewer treatment facility to
serve the development.
Drainage: No storm drain system serves the Eden Valley and
Harmony Grove neighborhoods. Drainage through the area naturally
flows in a southerly direction through the Eden Valley neighborhood
into the Harmony Grove neighborhood and drains into Escondido
Creek, which flows west-ward to San Elijo Lagoon and the Pacific
Ocean. The future Harmony Grove Village project will involve a
master planned storm drain system to serve the development.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                    Page II-83

                           Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
                           generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
                           areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
                           San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
                           primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
                           Fire Protection: The Eden Valley neighborhood is served by the San
                           Marcos Fire Protection District, a community facilities district that
                           serves the city of San Marcos and several other outlying unincor-
                           porated communities. The closest fire station is located on Woodland
                           Parkway in San Marcos. Harmony Grove is served by the Elfin Forest
                           /Harmony Grove Fire Department which maintains a fire station on
                           Elfin Forest Road. Both fire protection agencies maintain mutual aid
                           agreements with neighboring jurisdictions, including Escondido.
                           Refer to the Community Protection Element, Figure VI-3 for service
                           boundaries.
                           Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
                           in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
                           facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
                           Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
                           The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
                           infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
                           improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
                           Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
                           benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
                           munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
                           2. Felicita Park and Lake Hodges Neighborhoods
                           Location / General Description: The Felicita Park and Lake Hodges
                           neighborhoods are located in the southern portion of Escondido,
                           generally bounded by Interstate 15 and Centre City Parkway on the
                           north and east, West Valley Parkway and Del Dios Highway on the
                           west, and Lake Hodges on the south. The area generally north of Via
                           Rancho Parkway forms the boundary between the Felicita Park and
                           Lake Hodges neighborhoods. The area includes Felicita County Park,
                           single family residential on one-half acre and larger lots, agricultural
                           uses, and vacant property.
                           Approximate Acreage: 1,500 acres
                           Water Service: Two water agencies supply potable water to these
                           neighborhoods. Portions of the Lake Hodges Neighborhood adjacent
                           to Via Rancho Parkway are not within any water service boundary
  View of Lake Hodges from
   Escondido looking south (refer to Infrastructure and Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
Page II-84                           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Rincon Water District provides water service to areas south of Via
Rancho Parkway as well as in the immediate vicinity of Felicita
County Park. The city of Escondido provides water service to areas
adjacent to Interstate 15. Rincon Water District and Escondido re-
ceive imported water from Northern California and the Colorado
River via the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
(MWD) and the San Diego County Water Authority (SDCWA). In
addition, Escondido receives approximately 15% of its water from
local sources.
Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
the Felicita Park and Lake Hodges neighborhoods. Properties are
developed with private septic systems to individually treat wastewater
generated on-site.
Drainage: No storm drain system serves the Felicita Park and Lake
Hodges neighborhoods. Drainage through the area naturally flows in
a southerly direction and drains into Lake Hodges, which flows into
the San Dieguito River and the Pacific Ocean.
Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
Fire Protection: The Felicita Park and Lake Hodges neighborhoods
are within the Rincon Fire District, which is staffed by the city of
Escondido Fire Department through a contractual arrangement. The
closest fire station is located on Felicita Road in Escondido. The
Escondido Fire Department maintains mutual aid agreements with
neighboring jurisdictions. Refer to the Community Protection
Element, Figure VI-3 for service boundaries.
Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                    Page II-85

           3. Citrus Valley Neighborhood
           Location / General Description: The Citrus Valley neighborhood is
           located in the southeastern portion of Escondido, generally bounded
           by Escondido‟s corporate boundaries on the north, east and west, and
           the city of San Diego‟s San Pasqual Valley on the south. The area
           includes single family residential on one-half acre and larger lots,
           agricultural uses, and vacant property.
           Approximate Acreage: 3,000 acres
           Water Service: Two water agencies supply potable water to this area.
           Portions of the Citrus Valley neighborhood adjacent to San Pasqual
           Valley Road are not within any water service boundary (refer to
           Infrastructure and Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
           Rincon Water District provides water service to the southern portion
           of the neighborhood comprising approximately 15% of the territory.
           The city of Escondido provides water service to the remaining area.
           Rincon Water District and Escondido receive imported water from
           Northern California and the Colorado River via the Metropolitan
           Water District of Southern California (MWD) and the San Diego
           County Water Authority (SDCWA). In addition, Escondido receives
           approximately 15% of its water from local sources.
           Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
           the Citrus Valley neighborhood. Properties are developed with private
           septic systems to individually treat wastewater generated on-site.
           Drainage: No storm drain system serves the Citrus Valley neigh-
           borhood. Drainage through the area naturally flows in a southerly
           direction and drains into Lake Hodges, which flows into the San
           Dieguito River and the Pacific Ocean.
           Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
           generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
           areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
           San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
           primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
           Fire Protection: The Citrus Valley neighborhood is within the
           Rincon Fire District, which is staffed by the city of Escondido Fire
           Department through a contractual arrangement. The closest fire
           stations are located on Bear Valley Parkway and Midway Drive in
           Escondido. The Escondido Fire Department maintains mutual aid
           agreements with neighboring jurisdictions. Refer to the Community
           Protection Element, Figure VI-3 for service boundaries.
Page II-86          Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
4. Lake Wohlford Neighborhood
Location / General Description: The Lake Wohlford neighborhood
is located in the eastern portion of Escondido, generally bounded by
the city‟s corporate boundaries on the west, the unincorporated
community of Valley Center to the north, the city of San Diego‟s San
Pasqual Valley to the south, and unincorporated territory to the east.
The area includes Lake Wohlford which serves as one of Escondido‟s
principal water storage facilities and recreational areas. Additional
land uses include the San Pasqual Indian Reservation, a small private
airstrip, rock quarry, a mobile home park, single family residential on
one acre and larger lots, agricultural uses, and vacant property.
Approximate Acreage: 6,500 acres
Water Service: Three water agencies supply potable water to ap-
proximately 2,500 acres within the neighborhood. Approximately
4,000 acres of the neighborhood are outside the Metropolitan Water
District boundaries and not within any water service boundary (refer
to Infrastructure and Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
Valley Center Municipal Water District provides water service to the
northern and eastern portion of the neighborhood comprising
approximately 40% of the territory. The city of Escondido provides
water service to less than 150 acres the neighborhood near Valley
Center Road and Lake Wohlford Road. Valley Center Municipal
Water District and Escondido receive imported water from Northern
California and the Colorado River via the Metropolitan Water District
of Southern California (MWD) and the San Diego County Water
Authority (SDCWA). In addition, Escondido receives approximately
15% of its water from local sources.
Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
the Lake Wohlford neighborhood. Properties have private septic
                                                                        View of Lake Wohlford
systems that individually treat wastewater generated on-site.
                                                                             looking east
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                    Page II-87

           Drainage: No storm drain system serves the Lake Wohlford neigh-
           borhood. Drainage for the southern 40% of the neighborhood
           naturally flows in a southerly direction and drains into Lake Hodges,
           which flows into the San Dieguito River and the Pacific Ocean. The
           northern portion of the neighborhood drains into Escondido Creek,
           which flows westward to San Elijo Lagoon and the Pacific Ocean.
           Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
           generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
           areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
           San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
           primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
           Fire Protection: The Lake Wohlford neighborhood is within the
           Valley Center Fire Protection District. The closest fire station is
           located on North lake Wohlford Road. The Valley Center Fire
           Protection District maintains mutual aid agreements with neighboring
           jurisdictions. Refer to the Community Protection Element, Figure VI-
           3 for service boundaries.
           Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
           in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
           facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
           Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
           The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
           infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
           improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
           Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
           benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
           munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
           5. North Broadway and Jesmond Dene Neighborhoods
           Location / General Description: The North Broadway and Jesmond
           Dene neighborhoods are located in the northern portion of Escondido,
           generally bounded by Interstate 15 on the west, the unincorporated
           community of Hidden Meadows on the north, Daley Ranch on the
           east and the city‟s corporate boundaries on the south. The area
           includes single family residential on one-half acre and larger lots,
           agricultural uses, commercial nurseries, and vacant property.
           Approximate Acreage: 4,500 acres
           Water Service: Four water agencies supply potable water to these
           neighborhoods; Valley Center Municipal Water District, Rincon
           Water District, Vallecitos Water District, and the city of Escondido.
Page II-88           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Valley Center Municipal Water District provides water service to the
northern portion of the neighborhood comprising approximately 75%
of the territory. Vallecitos Water District provides water service to the
portion of the neighborhood along Interstate 15. Rincon Water
District provides water service in the southwest portion of the
neighborhood and the city of Escondido serves the extreme southeast
portion of the neighborhood.
Both districts receive imported water from Northern California and
the Colorado River via the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California (MWD) and the San Diego County Water Authority
(SDCWA). In addition, Escondido receives approximately 15% of its
water from local sources (refer to Infra-structure and Mobility
Element, Figure III-12).
Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
the North Broadway and Jesmond Dene neighborhoods. Properties
are developed with private septic systems to individually treat waste-
water generated on-site.
Drainage: No storm drain system serves the North Broadway and
Jesmond Dene neighborhoods. Drainage in the North Broadway area
flows into Reidy Creek in a southerly direction that ultimately drains
into Escondido Creek. Drainage in the Jesmond Dene neighborhood
flows in a southerly direction that drains into Reidy Creek.
Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
Fire Protection: The North Broadway and Jesmond Dene neighbor-
hoods are within the Deer Springs, San Marcos, and Rincon Fire
Protection Districts. The Deer Springs Fire Protection District serves
approximately 90% of the neighborhoods and maintains a fire station
on Deer Springs Road near the Interstate 15 interchange. The San
Marcos Fire Department serves the southeastern portion and main-
tains fire stations in San Marcos.
The southeastern portion of the North Broadway neighborhood is
served by the Rincon Fire Protection District, which is staffed by the
city of Escondido Fire Department through a contractual arrangement.
The closest fire station is located on Felicita Road in Escondido. All
Fire Departments maintain mutual aid agreements with neighboring
jurisdictions. Refer to the Com-munity Protection Element, Figure
VI-3 for service boundaries.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-89

           Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
           in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
           facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
           Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
           The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
           infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
           improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
           Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
           benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
           munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
           6. Rock Springs Road Neighborhood
           Location / General Description: The Rock Springs Road neighbor-
           hood is located in the western portion of Escondido, generally
           bounded by Interstate 15 on the east, Montiel Road on the south, El
           Norte Parkway on the north, and the city of San Marcos on the west.
           The area includes single family residential on one-quarter acre and
           larger lots, agricultural uses, and vacant property.
           Approximate Acreage: 300 acres
           Water Service: Two water districts supply potable water to these
           neighborhoods; Vallecitos Water District and Vista Irrigation District.
           Vista Irrigation District provides water service to approximately one-
           half of the Rock Springs neighborhood. Vallecitos Water District
           provides water service to the remaining portion of the neighborhood
           (refer to Infrastructure and Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
           Both districts receive imported water from Northern California and
           the Colorado River via the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
           California (MWD) and the San Diego County Water Authority
           (SDCWA). In addition, Vista Irrigation District receives between 30 –
           80% of its water from local sources (refer to Infrastructure and
           Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
           Wastewater Service: Vallecitos Water District provides wastewater
           treatment service to properties within its service area. Vista Irrigation
           District does not provide wastewater treatment services. Properties
           without wastewater service are developed with private septic systems
           to individually treat waste-water generated on-site.
           Drainage: Developed properties in the Rock Springs Neighborhood
           are served by a combination of storm drains in suburban tracts and
           open culverts in more rural / underdeveloped areas.
Page II-90           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Drainage in the Rock Springs neighborhood flows westward into San
Marcos Creek that ultimately drains into Batiquitos Lagoon and the
Pacific Ocean.
Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
Fire Protection: The neighborhood is served by the San Marcos Fire
Protection District, a community facilities district that serves the city
of San Marcos and several other outlying unincorporated commu-
nities. The closest fire station is located on Woodland Parkway in San
Marcos. The district maintains a mutual aid agreement with neigh-
boring jurisdictions, including Escondido. Refer to the Community
Protection Element, Figure VI-3 for service boundaries.
Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
7. Lehner Valley County Island Neighborhood
Location / General Description: The Lehner Valley county island
neighbor-hood are located in the northern portion of the city of
Escondido, generally bounded by Broadway on the west, Rincon
Avenue on the north, Sheridan Avenue on the south, and Conway
Drive on the east. The area includes single family residential on one-
half acre and larger lots, agricultural uses, and vacant property.
Approximate Acreage: 100 acres
Water Service: The area is served by the city of Escondido water
system (refer to Infrastructure and Mobility Element, Figure III-12).
Escondido receives imported water from Northern California and the
Colorado River via the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California (MWD) and the San Diego County Water Authority
(SDCWA). In addition, the city receives approximately 15% of its
water from local sources.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-91

           Wastewater Service: There are no wastewater service providers in
           the Lehner Valley neighborhood. Properties are developed with
           private septic systems to individually treat wastewater generated on-
           site.
           Drainage: No storm drain system serves Lehner Valley neighbor-
           hood. Drainage in the area flows into Reidy Creek in a westerly
           direction that ultimately drains into Escondido Creek.
           Safety: The San Diego County Sheriff's Department provides
           generalized patrol and investigative services in the unincorporated
           areas of Escondido‘s General Plan. The nearest stations are located in
           San Marcos and Vista. The California Highway Patrol has the
           primary jurisdiction for traffic services in unincorporated areas.
           Fire Protection: The Lehner Valley neighborhood is within the
           Rincon Fire District, which is staffed by the city of Escondido Fire
           Department through a contractual arrangement. The closest fire
           stations are located on Ash Street and Nutmeg Street in Escondido.
           The Escondido Fire Department maintains mutual aid agreements
           with neighboring jurisdictions. Refer to the Community Protection
           Element, Figure VI-3 for service boundaries.
           Deficiency Improvement Financing Analysis: Annexing properties
           in this area would result in a reorganization of agencies that provide
           facilities and services based on direction from the Local Agency
           Formation Commission and negotiations with responsible agencies.
           The annexation process includes an evaluation of facility, service and
           infrastructure deficiencies to determine the type and amount of
           improvements that may be required in order to annex to the city.
           Options for financing improvements that correct deficiencies include
           benefit assessment districts, Capital Improvement Programs, Com-
           munity Facilities Districts and / or other payment mechanisms.
Page II-92           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

M. Land Use and Community Form Goals
     and Policies
A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and
Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to land use and
community form provided below are intended to guide development
to meet present and future needs, achieve a vibrant community, and
enhance the character of Escondido.
1. Community Character
GOAL 1: A community composed of distinct residential neigh-
              borhoods, business districts, and employment centers,
              whose urban form reflects the natural environmental
              setting.
Community Character Policy 1.1
New development should serve to reinforce the city‘s present
development pattern of higher-intensity development within the
downtown area and lower-intensity development in outlying areas. As
a guide toward accomplishing this objective, new development
projects shall be at an appropriate density or clustered intensity based
upon their compatibility with the majority of the existing surrounding
land uses. This policy shall limit density transfers from constrained
portions of a property as defined in the land use and open space goals.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Community Character Policy 1.2
The boundaries of the Land Use categories depicted on the General
Plan are not precise. However, the categories are generally intended
to avoid intensification of existing land use or zoning designations
where land use compatibility and the objectives of the General Plan
are at issue.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Community Character Policy 1.3
Focus development into areas where land use changes achieve the
community‟s long term goals. Facilitate development that is
consistent with the build out vision for each area through incentive
programs and efficient administrative and discretionary approval
processes for plot plans, Planned Developments, Area Plans, Specific
Plans, and Zoning Overlays.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                      Page II-93

                               Community Character Policy 1.4
                               Consider the appropriateness of alternative methodologies to define
                               project objectives, determine thresholds of significance, and assess
                               the environmental impacts of projects that further Escondido‟s smart
                               growth objectives for downtown infill, mixed-use, pedestrian-
                               oriented, and transit-oriented development, consistent with the
                               requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
                               Community Character Policy 1.5
                               The city should maintain its single-family residential development
                               pattern, except in locations such as the downtown, along major
                               transportation corridors, and around commercial and public activity
                               centers, where higher densities are more appropriate.
                               (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                               Community Character Policy 1.6
                               Residential Categories are established for purposes of providing the
                               city with a range of building intensities to address various site
                               constraints and opportunities. Proposed development shall not exceed
                               the densities shown on the Land Use Plan and outlined in Figure II-6.
                               (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval).
                               Community Character Policy 1.7
                               Incorporate iconic signage, artwork, landscaping and/or architecture
                               characterized as uniquely Escondido at gateway locations to define a
                               sense of entry and strengthen community identity.
                               Community Character Policy 1.8
                               Require development projects to locate and design buildings,
                               construct energy and water efficient infrastructure, reduce greenhouse
                               gas emissions, enhance community livability and economic vitality,
                               and implement other practices contributing to sustainable resources.
                               Community Character Policy 1.9
                               Promote development in downtown, at transit stations, and other key
                               districts to accommodate a mix of land uses and configure uses to
                               promote walkabilty, bicycling, and transit uses, reducing the need for
                               the automobile.
                               Community Character Policy 1.10
                               Reduce light pollution and preserve views of the night sky through
                               the design and sighting of light fixtures to minimize light spill-over
                               onto adjacent properties.
   Iconic art sculptures, such
      as the “New Leaf” on     Community Character Policy 1.11
     Center City parkway at
                               Encourage new development to minimize the creation of incom-
      Felicita Avenue instill
      community character      patible glare through development design features (e.g., minimizing
                               use of certain types of exterior building materials).
Page II-94                               Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Community Character Policy 1.12
No development shall be permitted on slopes greater than 35% or in
natural 100-year floodways. If approved by the city and other
appropriate local, state and federal agencies, an environmental
channel may be considered within the floodway. Adequate land-
scaping, revegetation, flood control measures and usable open space
beyond the embankments of the environmental channel shall be
provided as determined by the city.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Community Character Policy 1.13
Subject to city approval, parcels legally created prior to the adoption
of this General Plan and wholly with-in constrained lands as defined
in Community Character Policy 1.12 may be eligible for the develop-
ment of a single dwelling unit, providing the property meets mini-
mum lot size for the zoning and land use designations.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Community Character Policy 1.14
Recognize Community Plans approved by the Board of Supervisors
within Escondido‟s General Planning Area and coordinate land use
and design guidelines to minimize impacts in areas where city/county
lands transition. Collaborate with annexing property owners to retain
desired components of their Community Plans by considering
appropriate zoning overlay designations in the event of annexation.
Community Character Policy 1.15
Notify and coordinate with surrounding property owners and resident
groups when conducting land use studies affecting residents of
unincorporated communities to include property owners, resident
groups, homeowner‟s associations, and / or planning advisory groups
that make their presence known to the city. Utilize neighborhood
meetings to notify interested parties to gather information and solicit
input for recommendation to various decision-makers.
Community Character Policy 1.16
Support the formation of Homeowners‟ Associations to maintain
private streets, common open space areas, and landscaping within and
adjacent to such developments, and facilitate annexation into the
city‟s Landscape Maintenance District (or an acceptable alternative)
for maintenance of similar landscaping improvements where no
Homeowners‟ Association is established.
2. Land Use Zoning
GOAL 2: Regulations that clearly and effectively implement land
             use development goals and objectives.
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-95

           Land Use Zoning Policy 2.1
           Update and revise city ordinances to reflect the goals, objectives and
           policies in the adopted General Plan.
           Land Use Zoning Policy 2.2
           Apply zoning overlays to implement specific standards, regulations
           and guidelines that further advance General Plan policies and city
           programs for development within Land Use Area Plans and Specific
           Plans.
           Land Use Zoning Policy 2.3
           Establish new zoning categories in areas where the city‟s existing
           zoning will not adequately implement the goals and objectives of the
           General Plan based on the designations identified in Figure II-32:
                                          Figure II-32
            General Plan Land Use                       Zoning Category
                      Rural I, Rural II               Residential Agriculture (R-A)
                                                     Planned Development (PD-R)
                                                        Residential Estate (R-E)
                     Estate I, Estate II
                                                     Planned Development (PD-R)
                                                   Single-Family Residential (R-1)
                    Suburban, Urban I               Mobilehome Residential (R-T)
                                                    Planned Development (PD-R)
                                                    Light Multiple Residential (R-2)
                         Urban II
                                                     Mobilehome Residential (R-T)
                         Urban III                 Medium Multiple Residential (R-3)
                         Urban IV                    High Multiple Residential (R-4)
                         Urban V                 Very High Multiple Residential (R-5)
                                                    Commercial Professional (C-P)
                          Office
                                                       Hospital Professional (H-P)
                      Planned Office             Planned Development Office (PD-O)
                   General Commercial                  Commercial General (C-G)
               Neighborhood Commercial             Commercial Neighborhood (C-N)
                   Planned Commercial                Planned Development (PD-C)
                                                         Light Industrial (M-1)
                      Light Industrial
                                                          Industrial Park (I-P)
                                                         Light Industrial (M-1)
                    General Industrial
                                                        General Industrial (M-2)
                                                         Industrial Office (I-O)
                     Industrial Office                   Light Industrial (M-1)
                                                        General Industrial (M-2)
                   Open Space / Parks                           Public (P)
                 Specific Planning Area                    Specific Plan (SP)
                  Public Facility Overlay                        Various
                    Mixed Use Overlay                            Various
                   Tribal Land Overlay                           Various
Page II-96           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Land Use Zoning Policy 2.4
Consider locational and operational characteristics of existing and
proposed land uses, as well as the surrounding zoning patterns, when
establishing zoning and overlay designations to ensure compatibility                   Figure II-33
and appropriateness.                                                          RESIDENTIAL YEILD
                                                                                      EXAMPLE
Land Use Zoning Policy 2.5
Maintain clear and precise definitions of constrained lands and
methodologies for calculating residential project densities and
allowable density transfers to account for slopes, natural floodways,
and environmentally sensitive areas (Figure II-33).
3. Residential Development
GOAL 3: Neighborhoods that provide a variety of housing types,
             densities, and design, and a mix of uses and services      Suburban Land Use Designation
             that support resident needs.                                           (105 acre site)
                                                                         (Minimum Lot Size 10,000 SF)
Residential Development Policy 3.1
Residential Density is defined as the maximum number of dwelling            0-25% @ 3.3 du/ac. (50 ac) = 165 du
units permitted per acre, including streets within the development,
                                                                           25-35% @ 1.5 du/ac. (40 ac) = 60 du
excluding all ultimate circulation element street rights-of-way,
adjustments for floodways as defined by the Federal Emergency              35%+ @ 1 du/20 ac. (10 ac) =     1 du
Management Agency (FEMA—see Flooding Map) or the City, slope
                                                                           Circulation Element     (5 ac) = N/A
categories, and other environmental factors as designated in each land     Street Dedication          __________
use category and/or open space/ conservation element. Building            Total Site Area         105 ac = 226 du
intensity is based upon the number of dwellings per acre permissible
in each category subject to constraints and opportunities provided by       Potential Yield = 226 du
all General Plan policies. Limited nonresidential development, such
as churches or schools, may occur in residential categories subject to    Maximum Allowable Density:
state and local ordinances.
                                                                       Max. Permitted DU 226 du = 2.26 du/ac
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                                                         Area for Yield      100 ac
Residential Development Policy 3.2                                      Notes:
Permit limited non-residential development, such as churches or
schools, on properties designated by residential use classifications   1) Development shall be transferred
                                                                          off 35%+ slope (or sensitive
subject to state and local ordinances.
                                                                          habitat) areas.
                                                                       2) Circulation Element Streets right-of-
Residential Development Policy 3.3                                        way dedication areas are not
The residential land use designation indicates MAXIMUM develop-           included in yield calculations.
ment yields. To meet General Plan Goals and Objectives, including,     3) Suburban Land Use Designation
but not limited to, population goals and environmental considerations,    requires 10,000 SF minimum lot
the ACTUAL yield may be considerably less than maximum                    size unless clustered pursuant to
potentials. Population density can be determined by the San Diego         General Plan Policies.
Association of Governments (SANDAG) projection of an average
number of residents per dwelling unit by the build-out target year of
(Policy continued on next page)
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                               Page II-97

                                  2035 and the maximum units per acre allowed by each land use
                                  designation. In lower density categories, the number of residents per
                                  unit will often exceed three due to relatively large structures. Con-
                                  versely, in multi-family areas, smaller unit sizes will result in 1-2 per-
                                  sons per unit being commonplace. Further, population and building
                                  intensities are estimated in the General Plan Vision and Purpose.
                                  (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                  Residential Development Policy 3.4
                                  Require that properties in Urban III, IV, and V residential desig-
                                  nations be developed at a minimum 70% of their permitted densities
                                  in order to promote transit ridership and walking, support nearby
                                  commercial establishments and take advantage of infrastructure
                                  improvements sized to accommodate their intended intensities.
                                  Residential Development Policy 3.5
                                  Establish minimum single family lot sizes as prescribed in Figure II-6
                                  unless the development is clustered in accordance with the cluster
                                  provisions.
                                  Residential Development Policy 3.6
                                  Limit the use of panhandle lots and unusual lot slopes in uncon-
                                  strained areas and consider their use to preserve slopes, ridgelines,
                                  habitat areas, and other resources identified in the Resource Con-
                                  servation Element.
                                  Residential Development Policy 3.7
                                  No permits shall be approved for the development of any lot which is
                                  not consistent with the density restrictions of the General Plan except
                                  for single-family lots which existed prior to the effective date of the
                                  General Plan. Such single-family lots shall comply with all other
                                  provisions of the General Plan, including applicable requirements of a
                                  Facilities Plan.
                                  Exceptions from density requirements may also be permitted to allow
                                  the timely development of lots created by the recordation of a vesting
                                  tentative subdivision map subsequent to the effective date of the
                                  General Plan providing it conforms to applicable requirements of a
                                  Facilities Plan.
                                  Nothing in this General Plan shall prohibit the continued use of
                                  legally established mobile home spaces and the possibility of owner-
 Mobile home parks represent a    ship conversion at existing densities legally established under
  sizable portion of Escondido    previous ordinances and statutes. Said mobile home spaces shall also
  General Plan land uses and      be exempt from General Plan clustering provisions.
    policies permit ownership
conversions at existing densities
                                  (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Page II-98                                  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
Residential Development Policy 3.8
Land use designations and zoning classifications may accommodate
maximum yields for one residential development proposal which may
not be achievable due to conflict with the overall population objec-
tives. In review of residential development proposals, population
objectives may be considered to preserve the welfare of the com-
munity.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Residential Development Policy 3.9
Promote new residential subdivisions, multi-family projects, and
development in Mixed Use Overlay areas to incorporate smart growth
principles such as:
a) Walkways, shade trees, seating areas and other pedestrian
    activity, and enhance resident quality of life;
b) Features that promote the use of alternative transportation options;
c) Opportunities for residents to conduct routine errands close to
    their residence;
d) Maximum connectivity with surrounding uses to become a part of
    the area rather than an isolated project;
e) Architectural elements or themes from the surrounding neighbor-
    hood; and,
f) Appropriate transitions between land use designations to
    minimize compatibility conflicts.
Residential Development Policy 3.10
Encourage proportionate numbers of two-story dwelling units within
single family detached subdivisions to promote variety and avoid
monotonous streetscapes and visual impacts.
Residential Development Policy 3.11
The maximum development yield for slopes over 35% is established
only for the purpose of determining the potential for density transfer
as permitted by the General Plan.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Residential Development Policy 3.12
Where slope categories are indicated, the maximum development
yield will be determined by the sum of acreages within each slope
category.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-99
            Residential Development Policy 3.13
            The development potential on slopes greater than 35% or in natural
            floodways or in City-approved environmental channels may be
            transferred to other portions on the site at one dwelling unit per 20
            acres in all residential land use categories.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            4. Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation
            GOAL 4         Residential neighborhoods that are well-maintained
                           and enduring, and continue to be great places to live
                           for multiple generations.
            Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.1
            Utilize code enforcement measures and incentive programs as neces-
            sary to promote property maintenance and prevent the deterioration of
            established housing stock.
            Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.2
            Residential neighborhoods shall be protected from the encroachment
            of incompatible activities or land uses such as heavy service com-
            mercial businesses which may have a negative impact on the
            residential living environment.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.3
            Integrate pedestrian-friendly features, promote walkability, and work
            with residents to enhance existing neighborhood character and
            aesthetics.
            Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.4
            In the design of both Rural designations and of Estate I single-family
            residential development, consideration should be given to public
            improvement standards which allow for a more rural environment,
            such as flexibility in street rights of-way, increased setbacks and
            pedestrian circulation systems such as trails or paths, provided health
            and safety are not compromised.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.5
            Mobile home parks should be given particular attention to ensure that
            building and safety regulations are continually met and that the
            mobile home parks are well maintained. Additionally, criteria will be
            developed to evaluate the conversion of mobile home parks to
            ownership or alternative uses.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Page II-100           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy 4.6
A Land Use Area Plan will be developed for the Old Escondido
Neighborhood and other neighborhoods predominately characterized
by older single-family residential housing stock. The area plans shall
address the following objectives:
a) Orientation towards pedestrian activities: The improvement of
    area streetscapes to provide, at a minimum, street lights and
    continuous sidewalks.
b) Preservation of the single-family residential character: Intro-
    duction of zoning that discourages demolition of single-family
    dwellings that are subsequently replaced by high density multi-
    family units.
c) Preservation of historic/cultural resources: Consideration of a
    conservation district that would provide guidelines for protecting
    the historical/ cultural resources in the area through design and
    development standards.
d) Integration with Downtown Specific Plan and South Escondido
    Corridor other adjacent Area Plans: Development guidelines that
    require uses that will complement the two areas that border the
    neighborhood and provide a transition between the single-family
    residential core and commercial uses.
e) Implementation measures such as overlay zones, design guide-
    lines and incentive programs for rehabilitation and preservation.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
5. Residential Clustering
GOAL 5      Clustering of single family residential units to maintain
            site topography, protect natural resources, and avoid
            hazards.
Residential Clustering Policy 5.1
Minimum lot size standards for single-family cluster development
shall be:
Designation Minimum Lot Size
 Rural I            2acres
 Rural II           1acre
 Estate I      20,000 square feet
 Estate II     10,000 square feet
 Suburban        7,920 square feet
 Urban I         3,630 square feet
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-101
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.2
                                   Clustering is not intended to maximize the density or yield, or to
                                   circumvent the existing zoning. It shall be utilized as a tool to
                                   preserve slopes, ridgelines and sensitive habitat or provide a
                                   community benefit.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.3
                                   Under the clustering provision, lot widths, building separations and
                                   setbacks, and unit bulk shall be consistent with community design and
                                   zoning policies.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.4
                                   When utilizing cluster provisions, a project shall not have an adverse
                                   visual impact on the surrounding areas by blocking scenic views, by
                                   resulting in a scale of development incompatible with the setting, by
                                   siting buildings that project above the ridgeline, or by extensive
                                   grading, cutting and filling, or by terracing that disrupts the natural
                                   shape and contour of the site.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.5
                                   Cluster developments shall not increase geotechnical and flooding
                                   hazards for adjoining properties.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.6
                                   Cluster projects shall avoid sensitive cultural and biological resources
                                   and density transfer from such sensitive areas shall be of limited yield
                                   to meet the above policies.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
                                   Residential Clustering Policy 5.7
                                   Lands devoted to permanent open space should not be developed with
                                   structural uses other than agricultural accessory buildings. Uses
                                   should be restricted to agriculture; historic, archaeological, or wildlife
                                   preserve; water storage or recharge area; leach field or spray disposal
                                   area; scenic areas; protection from hazardous area; or public outdoor
                                   recreation.
                                   (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
 The Hidden Trails development
  clustered residential units on   Residential Clustering Policy 5.8
   flatter portions of the site to The provisions for clustering units shall be utilized only within
  preserve agricultural uses on    Planned Development Zones or Specific Planning Areas.
     hillside areas through the    (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
       Specific Plan process
Page II-102                                  Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
Residential Clustering Policy 5.9
In no event shall the reduction of lot sizes for clustered projects
exceed the open space areas within the development.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Residential Clustering Policy 5.10
When clustering, the portion of the site to be developed for residential
purposes shall not significantly change the character of the
surrounding area.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval).
6. Planned Development
GOAL 6: Large scale, multi-use projects that are designed to
            create distinct districts that complement the existing
            community and urban form.
Planned Development Policy 6.1
Planned Development Zoning shall be used to address unique
characteristics of a development site and the surrounding land uses to
better implement the goals and policies of the General Plan but not to
attain maximum yield.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Planned Development Policy 6.2
Planned Development zoning should be limited to projects of
adequate size and unique physical characteristics to effectively
implement the appropriate policies.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Planned Development Policy 6.3
Development proposals involving Planned Developments shall
address and/or include, if applicable:
a) Visual impacts of the development from the Valley floor and
    from adjoining properties;
b) Preservation of the natural setting by minimizing earth movement
    and removal of native vegetation and by using compatible
    building materials, textures and colors;
c) Grading, erosion control and revegetation/ landscaping require-
    ments;
d) Preservation of the creeks and their adjoining vegetation in a
    natural state and the use of buffering techniques to control
    undesired access;
(Policy continued on next page)
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-103
            e) Implementation of appropriate management techniques in areas of
                rare and endangered plant and animal species;
            f) Adequate buffers and separations from adjacent properties;
            g) Superlative architectural design features of all structures;
            h) Adequate separation between structures and attention to the bulk
                and scale to avoid a monotonous streetscape; and
            i) Preservation / maintenance of common open space or community
                area.
            The Planned Development zoning ordinance may require further
            detailed information to achieve General Plan goals and objectives.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Planned Development Policy 6.4
            Clustering residential units shall be permitted only in conjunction
            with a Planned Development or Specific Planning Areas (SPA) (see
            provisions for clustering).
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            7. Mixed Use Overlay Zones
            GOAL 7: Districts containing a mix of uses enabling residents to
                         live close to their jobs, shopping, entertainment, and
                         recreation, reducing the need to use the automobile
                         and promoting walking and healthy lifestyles.
            Mixed Use Overlay Policy 7.1:
            Designate areas for the development of mixed-use projects in a
            pedestrian-friendly environment integrating housing with retail,
            office, and service uses (childcare, health, etc.) consistent with the
            General Plan‟s vision and long-term growth needs.
            Mixed Use Overlay Policy 7.2
            Establish guidelines and standards for mixed-use development
            through Area Plans that include but are not limited to; minimum
            density and intensity requirements; landscaping and open space,
            allowable uses; building heights; and any shared parking standards
            consistent with Figure II-6.
            Mixed Use Overlay Policy 7.3
            Focus the tallest buildings and developments with the highest
            intensities and densities in mixed use districts in the downtown and
            key urban activity centers that are well-served by transit, close to
            employment, services, utilities, and recreational facilities.
Page II-104           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Mixed Use Overlay Policy 7.4
Review proposed projects in mixed use overlay districts and
encourage features that:
a) Promote a wide range of housing opportunities;
b) Facilitate the establishment of child care homes and centers;
c) Create a walking environment to encourage pedestrian activity;
d) Maximize alternative transportation modes;
e) Provide opportunities for residents to conduct routine errands
    close to their residence;
f) Integrate with surrounding uses to become a part of the
    neighborhood rather that an isolated project;
g) Incorporate architectural elements or themes from the sur-
    rounding neighborhood;
h) Provide appropriate transition between land use designations to
    minimize compatibility conflicts;
i) Provide adequate infrastructure;
j) Ensure quality architecture and landscaping, adequate off-street
    parking, on-site open space, and recreation areas;
k) Integrate on-site or fund off-site development of neighborhood
    parks;
8. Commercial Land Uses
GOAL8:      A diversity of economically prosperous and well-
            designed commercial districts providing a choice of
            uses for Escondido’s residents and visitors.
Commercial Land Use Policy 8.1
Establish Neighborhood Commercial, General Commercial, and
Planned Commercial land use designations as described in Figure II-6
to accommodate the various types of retail and service-related needs.
Commercial Land Use Policy 8.2
Permit the development of a broad range of retail and service
activities within the General Commercial land use designation as
described in Figure II-6.
                                                                            „Via Roble‟ mixed use
Commercial Land Use Policy 8.3                                           development on Escondido
Promote the development of a variety of commercial activities within  Boulevard incorporated a variety
self-contained, comprehensively planned commercial centers within     of residential dwellings including
                                                                       shopkeeper units, single family
the Planned Commercial land use designation as described in Figure
                                                                          detached, and multi-family
II-6.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                                         Page II-105

                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.4
                                 Permit the development of convenience-oriented commercial uses
                                 that provide retail goods and services to local residents, as permitted
                                 within the Neighborhood Commercial land use designation, in areas
                                 designated for residential uses without a public vote as described in
                                 Figure II-6.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.5
                                 Allow isolated commercial development within residential and
                                 industrial designations only when commercial uses are compatible
                                 with the Neighborhood Commercial designation and the uses are
                                 intended to primarily serve the immediate needs of the area.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.6
                                 Require that commercial buildings be located in planned, group
                                 concentrations rather than in a linear strips, except for designated
                                 corridors, and incorporate features that minimize impacts on adjacent
                                 sensitive uses associated with noise, property maintenance, product
                                 deliveries, trash service, and other potentially incompatible charac-
                                 teristics.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.7:
                                 Support efforts to strengthen and rehabilitate existing commercial
                                 areas east of the I-15 freeway.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.8:
                                 Generally encourage commercial development west of the I-15
                                 freeway to uses that serve the immediate surrounding areas and
                                 regional high-volume centers requiring freeway access and visibility
                                 that are compatible with surrounding land uses.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.9
                                 Require, as necessary, new commercial development larger than five
                                 acres requiring entitlement approvals to submit a study of the existing
                                 and/or approved commercial development in the project vicinity,
                                 existing vacancy rates for similar commercial uses, market feasibility,
                                 and other information as deemed necessary by the city to identify
                                 adverse economic impacts contributing to blight.
                                 Commercial Land Use Policy 8.10
                                 Require that commercial development be located and designed to
                                 benefit from the access afforded by the circulation system without
                                 impairing its operation by:
                                 a) Requiring a traffic and circulation study for all commercial
  General Plan policies promote       development over five acres or smaller centers, if necessary, as
 self-contained, comprehensively      deemed by the City Engineer.
   planned commercial centers
                                 (Policy continued on next page)
Page II-106                                 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form
b) Prohibiting points of access if they are too close to intersections
     and will result in unacceptable congestion or in safety hazards as
     determined by city staff.
c) Limiting the number of access points and curb cuts to maintain
     efficient traffic operations.
Commercial Land Use Policy 8.11
Allow drive through facilities subject to the mitigation of identified
air quality, traffic safety, and visual impacts based on appropriate
studies submitted to the satisfaction of the city prior to approval.
9. Office Land Use
GOAL 9:       A diversity of office uses enabling residents to live
             and work in Escondido and attain good wages.
Office Land Use Policy 9.1
Establish General Office, and Planned Office land use designations
as described in Figure II-6 to accommodate the various types of
office needs.
Office Land Use Policy 9.2
Encourage the development of office buildings in planned, grouped
concentrations, and incorporate features that minimize impacts on
adjacent sensitive uses associated with noise, property maintenance,
product deliveries, trash service and other potentially incompatible
characteristics.
Office Land Use Policy 9.3
Encourage the integration of service, financial, dining, and other
support uses in office complexes to enable employees to remain on
site and reduce automobile use.
Office Land Use Policy 9.4
Locate and design office buildings to assure compatibility and
transitions with adjoining neighborhoods, with the greatest building
intensities and heights in the downtown, near transit, and mixed use
districts.
Office Land Use Policy 9.5
The General Office land use designation shall accommodate admini-
strative and professional offices, business support services, financial,
insurance, and real estate services, supportive commercial uses such
as restaurants, as well as medical related offices, short-term conva-
lescent and long-term care facilities, research labs, medical supply,
and similar uses.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-107
                                    Office Land Use Policy 9.6
                                    Accommodate large scale bio-technology, research and develop-
                                    ment, corporate office and related support office uses in a campus-
                                    like setting within the Planned Office land use designation. Allow
                                    limited support retail and service uses, such as restaurants, dry
                                    cleaners, gym/fitness centers, markets, and office services (e.g.,
                                    printing / copying / shipping) as well as compatible public uses if
                                    integrated into larger facilities.
                                    10. Industrial Land Use
                                    GOAL10: A variety of industrial uses located and designed to
                                                 assure compatibility with adjoining land uses offering
                                                 diverse jobs for the community.
                                    Industrial Land Use Policy 10.1
                                    Establish Industrial Office, Light Industrial, and General Industrial
                                    land use designations as described in Figure II-6 to accommodate the
                                    need for the various types of industrial uses.
                                    Industrial Land Use Policy 10.2
                                    Encourage the development of industrial buildings in planned, group
                                    concentrations and incorporate features that minimize impacts on
                                    adjacent sensitive uses associated with noise, property maintenance,
                                    product deliveries, trash service and other potentially incompatible
                                    issues.
                                    Industrial Land Use Policy 10.3
                                    Require that projects located within the Industrial Office classification
                                    be designed to be aesthetically attractive and compatible with
                                    adjoining land uses addressing such elements as land use, building
                                    architecture, landscaping, screening of outside storage, and out-
                                    building uses. Scale the amount of required improvements to the size
                                    of the project for businesses expanding their operations.
                                    Industrial Land Use Policy 10.4
                                    Encourage the development of ―Safety Uses‖ (e.g. police station, fire
                                    department, city related uses etc.), support commercial, and indus-
                                    trial-related office uses (e.g. architects, data processing, engineering,
                                    contractor, government services, corporate headquarters) in the
                                    Industrial Office land use designation as an incentive to transition
  General Plan policies promote     from M2 and M1 zones to the IO zone.
 self-contained, comprehensively
 planned office development with    Industrial Land Use Policy 10.5
      opportunities for support     Accommodate industries that generate moderate daytime and
 facilities such as fitness centers minimum nighttime noise levels, and require limited or no outside
           and restaurants          storage in Light Industrial designated properties.
Page II-108                                    Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Industrial Land Use Policy 10.6
Require development on properties located in designated Light
Industrial areas to incorporate stricter standards than comparable
General Industrial designated sites for building architecture, land-
scaping, and screening of outside storage, property setbacks, and open
land use.
Industrial Land Use Policy 10.7
Correlate the scale and amount of required improvements with the
size of the project for businesses expanding their operations.
Industrial Land Use Policy 10.8
Maintain building intensity standards for Industrial designated
properties as required by law.
Industrial Land Use Policy 10.9
Allow more flexible requirements affecting building architecture,
landscaping, screening of outside storage, or outbuilding use depen-
ding on location and visibility from off-site areas on properties
designated General Industrial. Scale the amount of required improve-
ments to the size of the project for businesses expanding their
operations.
11.Specific Plan Area Land Use
GOAL 11: Large-scale, multi-use projects that create a sense of
             distinct identity, provide amenities, and are cohesively
             and comprehensively developed.
Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.1
Establish the Specific Planning Area land use designation and require
submittal of a Specific Plan application to manage the phased and
cohesive development of large scale, multi-use projects (in
compliance with California Government Code Sections 65450, et
seq.) as described in Figure II-6.
Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.2
Allow additional areas to be designated as Specific Planning Areas as
requested by landowners/property owners subject to criteria defining
the type of project, the character of the intended development,
proposed land uses and intensities, pertinent conditions or restrictions
on development, appropriate application process, and demonstration
of how the proposed Specific Planning Area furthers the goals and
objectives of the General Plan more effectively than existing land use
designation(s).
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-109
            Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.3
            Specific Plans shall not be utilized in a wide-spread manner to
            circumvent or modify the character or intent of ordinances, land
            use designations and/or city goals and objectives, but rather should
            be reserved for a limited number of proposals which, by nature, are
            ideally suited for the comprehensive planning efforts involved in
            the Specific Planning process.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.4
            Specific Planning Areas (SPA‟s) shall be utilized to consider
            development proposals analyzing zoning regulations, development
            standards, land uses, densities, building intensities tailored to the
            need and unique characteristics of a particular area. Generally,
            SPAs should only be applied to larger areas and where community
            benefit can be demonstrated.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.5
            Specific criteria to evaluate the suitability of a Specific Plan shall be
            established which shall include:
            a) The site should be of sufficiently large area to take advantage of
                density transfers where appropriate, thereby preserving significant
                open space areas within the Specific Plan area;
            b) The site should have unique physical characteristics, such as
                uneven terrain or hillside areas that, without a Specific Plan,
                might not be effectively protected and incorporated into the
                overall development plan;
            c) The site should be of sufficient area that lends itself to a compre-
                hensive site design utilizing a combination of attractive land-
                scaping and open space amenities left in their natural condition;
            d) The site should be of sufficient area and nature that lends itself to
                long-term development phasing (e.g., in excess of five years)
                which can effectively be monitored and controlled; and
            e) The site should require flexibility in planning to deal with
                compatibility with different surrounding land uses and extensive
                public improvement requirements.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.6
            No Specific Plan shall be adopted by the City Council until the
            Council has reviewed the proposed Plan for compliance with the
            following requirements which are in addition to requirements
            imposed by State Government Code Sections 65450, et seq.:
            (Policy continued on next page)
Page II-110           Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

a) Residential, industrial and commercial structures built within the
    Specific Plan area shall be constructed under rigorous quality
    control programs and safeguards (e.g., appropriate restrictive
    covenants running with the land);
b) Appropriate protection against soil erosion, particularly where
    hillside development is involved, shall be assured;
c) Assurance shall be provided that any hillside cutting will be
    minimized or appropriately landscaped so that visible scarring
    will be mitigated to the extent feasible;
d) All open space areas shall be identified and appropriate measures
    providing for their preservation shall be included;
e) Design criteria, development regulations and building standards
    shall be provided sufficient to ensure that residential, industrial
    and commercial structures are compatible with the surrounding
    environment;
f) Adequate assurance shall be provided that the circulation and
    access needs of the project residents and the surrounding
    community are properly addressed;
g) Appropriate arrangements to ensure that public facilities and
    services adequate to serve the project residents are available shall
    be described; and
h) The Specific Plan demonstrates implementation of the goal and
    objectives of the General Plan and furthers the interests of the
    community.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
Specific Planning Area Land Use Policy 11.7
Clustering residential units shall be permitted only in conjunction
with a Planned Development or Specific Planning Area (SPA) (see
provisions for clustering).
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
12. Open Space / Park Land Use
GOAL 12: Open space lands that provide an attractive
              environmental setting for Escondido and visual
              relief from development, protect the viability of
              natural resources and habitat, offer recreational
              opportunities for residents and visitors, and protect
              the public from the risks of natural hazards.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                       Page II-111
            Open Space Land Use Policy 12.1
            Establish the Open Space / Park land use designation to identify city
            and county properties reserved for active and passive parks, habitat
            preservation, and public safety purposes as described in Figure II-6.
            Open Space Land Use Policy 12.2
            Require any proposed land use change in areas designated as Open
            Space to conform in type and intensity with the surrounding land
            uses.
            Open Space Land Use Policy 12.3
            Encourage the preservation of lands within the Planning Area that are
            owned by other public agencies for use as undeveloped open space,
            recreational purposes or mitigation banking.
            Open Space Land Use Policy 12.4
            Explore options to purchase lands used for recreation or open space
            purposes within the Planning Area that are owned by other public
            agencies and available for acquisition, as appropriate. Retain such
            property acquisitions in their current use for possible mitigation
            banking purposes, or to develop as additional recreational oppor-
            tunities for Escondido residents.
            13.Public Facility Overlay
            GOAL 13: Adequate and accessible civic, utility, institutional,
                          educational, cultural, and service uses supporting the
                          needs of Escondido’s residents and businesses.
            Public Facility Overlay Policy 13.1
            Establish the Public Facility overlays to accommodate ―single use‖
            municipal facilities and government operations such as libraries,
            community centers fire stations, municipal firing range, treatment
            facilities, public schools, etc. as described in Figure II-6.
            Public Facility Overlay Policy 13.2
            Ensure that any proposed land use change in this category shall
            conform to the underlying land use designation with respect to type of
            activity and intensity of development.
            Public Facility Overlay Policy 13.3
            Maintain a buffer zone around the Hale Avenue Resource Recovery
            Facility (HARRF) and restrict development in order to minimize
            public exposure to odors and public health risks. Limit the amount of
            new residential development within this zone and permit non-
            residential uses that would not adversely impact existing residences.
            Encourage development to incorporate site planning and architectural
            layout techniques that minimizes exposure to odors.
Page II-112             Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

14.Tribal Area Land Use Policies
GOAL 14: Recognition of the jurisdictional authority of local
             Native American Tribes.
Tribal Area Land Use Policy 14.1
Establish the Tribal Area land use designation as described in Figure
II-6 for federally recognized reservations or Indian Villages and for
which the city has no land use authority.
15. Development Agreement Policies
GOAL 15: Shared public and private commitments for large
             scale, multi-year, and multi-use projects to assure
             conformance with community development objectives.
Development Agreement Policy 15.1
Encourage Development Agreements as a mechanism to secure
community benefits from applicants that the city cannot require as
part of a project‘s approval.
Development Agreement Policy 15.2
Approve a Development Agreement for increased residential density
within Specific Planning Areas (SPA) #2 and #4 in excess of the
basic entitlement, provided that community benefits exceed those
normally required of comparable development projects. The
yield/benefit determination shall be made by the City Council and
shall not exceed the maximum stated in the SPA section.
Development Agreement Policy 15.3
Specify, if needed, the number of building permits to be allocated on
a yearly basis and the correlation and timing for the provision of
facilities and/or financing for on-site or off-site community benefits in
all Development Agreements.
Development Agreement Policy 15.4
Regularly monitor Development Agreements to ensure compliance
and to address community concerns and needs that may change over
time.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                        Page II-113

            16.      Annexation
            GOAL 16: Annexation of properties for the provision of municipal
                         services whose development shall complement and be
                         compatible with adjoining areas without placing an
                         undue financial burden on the city.
            Annexation Policy 16.1
            Allow property owners to annex to the city, and actively annex
            unincorporated lands owned by the city.
            Annexation Policy 16.2
            Promote the annexation of unincorporated lands where it is deter-
            mined in the city‘s interest to promote orderly development,
            implement goals and objectives, and /or to expedite facilities and
            services.
            Annexation Policy 16.3
            Demonstrate that facilities, services, and infrastructure are adequate to
            serve proposed annexations in accordance with city standards,
            acknowledging Neighborhood Maintenance & Preservation Policy
            4.4 allowing more flexible public improvement requirements in the
            Rural and Estate I single-family residential areas.
            Annexation Policy 16.4
            Allow annexations if it can be demonstrated that appropriate
            improvements as determined by the city will be financed by the
            property owner(s), and that such expansion of the city will not have
            unacceptable adverse fiscal or environmental impacts to existing city
            services or residents. Exceptions to this policy may be considered
            subject to Policy 16.2.
            Annexation Policy 16.5
            Provide services to unincorporated areas when there is a mutual
            agreement between the city and appropriate agencies, if any, provided
            the city is compensated for costs incurred.
            Annexation Policy 16.6
            Maintain an annexation procedures manual outlining the steps and
            city policies regarding annexations that includes, but is not be limited
            to, applicant‟s responsibilities, requirements for environmental
            review, requirements for development plans, and fees for annexation.
            Annexation Policy 16.7
            Update the Sphere of Influence as necessary concurrent with each
            five-year review of the General Plan.
Page II-114            Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Annexation Policy 16.8
Expand the Sphere of Influence to be coterminous with the Planning
Area boundary where such expansion is deemed appropriate by the
City and the Local Agency Formation Commission.
17. General Plan Review and Amendments
GOAL 17: A dynamic General Plan that is responsive to com-
munity values, visions, needs, economic conditions, resource
availability, and state and federal legislation.
General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.1
Track, monitor, and report the performance and the General Plan land
use goals and policies and, where there are substantive deviations in
development practice or anticipated impacts, assess their implications
and appropriateness for Plan amendments.
General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.2
Comprehensively review and update the General Plan, as appropriate
at five year intervals.
General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.3
Prior to any major extensions of services or utilities to accommodate
changes in land use, significant growth inducing, and environmental
implications including significant growth inducing impacts, shall be
thoroughly reviewed based upon the Growth Management policies of
this document and any necessary mitigation measures implemented.
(Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.4
Require General Plan Amendments when proposals:
a) Request the development of a site for a designation or density/
     intensity other than indicated on the Land Use Map or within the
     text of the General Plan;
b) Do not meet or exceed adopted Quality of Life Standards;
c) Request changes to, or not substantially consistent with, General
     Plan policies, goals or objectives; and,
d) Are determined by the city to be inconsistent with policies
     contained in the General Plan text.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                     Page II-115
            General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.5
            Substantiate the need for General Plan Amendments with written
            findings submitted by the applicant that considers the following
            criterion:
                 Identified physical, social, or city-wide economic factors or
                 changes that have made the General Plan designation, policy
                 statement goal, or intent in question inappropriate from the
                 standpoint of the general public welfare.
            Unless the applicant provides substantial documentation that the
            changes have occurred, the GPA request shall be denied.
            General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.6
            Permitted land uses in the residential areas of the City shall be
            intensified only when the voters approve such changes. No General
            Plan Amendment or new Specific Planning Area shall be adopted
            which would:
            a) Increase the residential density permitted by law,
            b) Change, alter, or increase the General Plan Residential Land Use
                 categories, or
            c) Change any residential to commercial or industrial designation on
                 any property designated as: Rural, Estate, Suburban, Urban.
            Unless and until such action is approved and adopted by the voters of
            the City at a special or general election, or approved first by the City
            Council and then adopted by the voters in such election.
            (Amendment to this policy will continue to require voter approval)
            General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.7
            Periodically review and update the city‟s Planning Area boundary to
            identify areas appropriate for amendment which shall be conducted
            through the General Plan Amendments process.
            General Plan Review and Amendment Policy 17.8
            Require California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review for
            development that exceeds the 2035 forecasted General Plan develop-
            ment capacity as defined in Figure II-5.
            18. Environmental Review
            GOAL 18: Environmental quality regulations that mitigate for
                         impacts associated with development to preserve and
                         protect Escondido’s unique environment.
Page II-116            Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form

Environmental Review Policy 18.1
Maintain Environmental Quality Regulations in accordance with city,
state, and federal requirements.
Environmental Review Policy 18.2
Require environmental review and mitigation of impacts, if
necessary, consistent with city, state, and federal requirements for
development projects the Planning Area.
Environmental Review Policy 18.3
Periodically review and update environmental thresholds and special
sensitive areas as more specific and recent information becomes
available.
Environmental Review Policy 18.4
Require all development to conform to the General Plan, Facilities
Plans, Areas Plans, and Quality of Life Standards.
Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community Form                   Page II-117
Page II-118 Escondido General Plan Land Use and Community For
                                 IV. Housing
Introduction                                    The Housing Element’s
                                                Purpose
The Housing Element is a component of the       The Housing Element is concerned with
General Plan that assesses the housing needs    specifically identifying ways in which the
of all economic segments of the City of         housing needs of existing and future resident
Escondido. In addition, the Housing Element     residents can be met. This Housing Element
defines the goals and policies that will guide  covers the planning period of January 1, 2013
the City‟s approach to resolving those needs    through December 31, 2020, and identifies
and recommends a set of programs that would     strategies and programs that focus on:
implement policies over the next few years.
                                                   Conserving and improving existing afford-
State law requires that all cities adopt a            able housing;
Housing Element and with prescribed details          Providing adequate housing sites;
and content. This Housing Element responds
                                                     Assisting in the development of afford-
to those requirements, and responds to the
                                                      able housing;
special characteristics of the City‟s housing
environment. The Element incorporates the            Removing governmental and other con-
                                                      straints to housing development; and
most current data readily available at the time
of writing and an evaluation of the Housing          Promoting equal housing opportunities.
Element adopted in 2005. Also included are
assessments of the current and potential
housing actions, and resources of the private
sector and all levels of the public sector.
This Escondido Housing Element is pre-pared
for the 2013-2020 update cycle for juris-
dictions in the San Diego Association of
Governments (SANDAG) region.

     “Everyone needs housing –
a place to live, a place to call home.”
                                        A. Escondido’s General Plan Vision
         American Planning Association
                                        The City of Escondido envisions itself becoming the vibrant and
                                        dynamic cultural, economic, and recreational hub of inland North
                                        San Diego County. This vision calls for an outstanding quality of
                                        life with exemplary public services and a safe environment that
                                        support a wide-range of housing types; quality educational
                                        facilities; desirable workplaces offering diverse employment
                                        opportunities; convenient transportation options, and unique
                                        cultural / recreational amenities. A lively, active downtown with
                                        unique and exciting land uses and a revitalized surrounding urban
                                        core are the focus for appropriate higher-intensity infill develop-
                                        ments that maximize opportunities for alternative transportation,
     „Centre City Row” was com-         and strengthen pedestrian linkages. Planning for quality, managed
  pleted in 2005 and consists of 15     growth ensures the adequate provision of infrastructure, preserves
  two- and three-bedroom market-
                                        perimeter viewsheds, respects and enhances the character of
   rate townhomes. The project is
       close to urban amenities         established single-family neighborhoods, and assures long-term
      including Grape Day Park,         sustainability for Escondido‟s future. This Housing Element
     Downtown‟s Grand Avenue,           provides policies and programs that will allow the City to achieve
       entertainment and transit.       this vision.
Page IV-2                                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

B. Escondido’s Housing Element Outline
The 2013-2020 Escondido Housing Element consists of the
following major components:
      Introduction: An overview of the purpose and contents
         of the Housing Element.
      Housing Needs Assessment: An analysis of the
         demographic and housing characteristics and trends.
      Housing Constraints: A review of potential market,
         governmental, and environmental constraints to meeting
         the identified housing needs.
      Housing Resources: An evaluation of resources avail-
         able to address housing goals.
      Review of Past Accomplishments: An evaluation of
         accomplishments under the adopted Housing Element.
      Housing Plan: A strategy to address the identified
         housing needs given the City‟s constraints and resources.
C. Community Context
Escondido is located in the North Central portion of San Diego
County. Its natural setting, Mediterranean climate, rolling hills, and
location at the intersection of two state highways provide a unique
and attractive living environment. This setting has a substantial
impact on the employment characteristics as well as the City‟s
economic base. These conditions attract growth, which in turn
creates a competitive residential atmosphere.
The City has three general areas of development: the historic town
center area; the more recently developed surrounding areas; and the
developing rural areas. Each of these areas contains housing sub-
markets that reflect their own unique attributes.
Escondido has experienced significant residential development
since 1970. It is crucial that public services expand to meet the
needs of the increasing population. These services include sewers,
streets, police, fire, schools, and recreation. It is also important to
locate housing to be accessible to other functions such as employ-
ment, services, shopping, and transportation.                           Suburban eastern Escondido as
                                                                           viewed from Lake Dixon
                                                                                camping area
    Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-3

          In 2010, the City population was 143,911, an increase of about eight
          percent in the last ten years. During this same period, the housing
          stock increased by approximately seven percent. The growth in
          population has, in turn, increased diversity within the City. From
          2000 to 2010, Escondido became more racially and ethnically
          diverse. White residents (40 percent) no longer comprise the largest
          racial/ethnic group in the community, while the City‟s Hispanic
          residents make up nearly one-half (49 percent) of the City‟s
          residents
          The 2010 Census reported an increase in average household size
          from 3.01 persons per household in 2000 to 3.12 persons in 2010.
          This trend can be partially attributed to the swell of families with
          children and the shift in racial and ethnic composition, since many
          Asian and Hispanic households are typically larger than White
          households.
          Escondido offers a mix of housing types. Single-family homes
          make up about 58 percent of the housing stock, the multi-family
          share is about 35 percent, and mobile homes comprise the
          remaining eight percent. Less than one-third (28 percent) of
          Escondido‟s housing stock is over 30 years old (built before 1980),
          with approximately 12.6 percent of the housing stock being built
          before 1959.
          The median price of a single-family home in Escondido is estimated
          at about $245,000, as of 2010. Apartment rents range from $925 for
          a one-bedroom apartment to $1,312 for a three-bedroom apartment.
          Lower income households in the City are unable to afford
          homeownership; however, affordable rental options for lower
          income households in Escondido do exist. The City has been
          actively addressing its housing issues by developing affordable
          housing, improving the existing housing, and providing assistance
          to households in need.
Page IV-4                                Escondido General Plan Housing

D. Public Participation
Public participation by all economic segments is critical to the
preparation of the Housing Element. Furthermore, the City
values community input in policy development. Outreach efforts
conducted by the City were intended to reach all segments of the
community, with efforts to solicit input from lower and moderate
income households and persons with special housing needs. The
City sent out news releases and public notices prior to public
meetings, including a news release in Spanish. General Plan
update web pages have been added to the City‟s website, with         Aerial view of Escondido looking
the ability of allowing residents and interested parties to register  west with single family neigh-
for email notifications.                                              borhoods, mobile home parks
                                                                      and schools in the foreground
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-5

                        1. General Plan Survey
                        The City of Escondido solicited community feedback as part of the
                        General Plan Update process. In addition to Community Work-
                        shops held in April 2009, an anonymous survey was prepared to aid
                        the visioning phase. The survey was made available on-line, at the
                        Planning Division counter in City Hall, and at both City Libraries.
                        The survey asked residents the following eight questions:
                             What do you consider to be Escondido's most important
                                assets that should be preserved?
                             What do you think represent the most significant challenges
                                for Escondido‟s future?
                             What do you think are the most important things that could
                                be added to enhance Escondido‟s quality of life?
                             Where should new housing be concentrated in Escondido?
                             What about Escondido would you change?
                             What about Escondido are you most proud?
                             What specific types of industries and jobs should we attract
                                to Escondido?
                             How can we enhance the sense of community in Escon-
                                dido?
                        Because of the open-ended nature of the questions, survey
                        responses varied significantly but the following sentiments were
                        echoed by a large number of residents:
                             The downtown corridor is one of the City‟s most important
                                assets and should be enhanced and protected.
                             The downtown area and transit centers would be a great
                                place for new quality, multi-family housing; however,
                                housing should not be concentrated in any one part of the
                                City.
                             The City should focus on “smart growth” and mixed use,
                                especially in the downtown area.
                        The City responded to these comments by focusing future resi-
          April 2009    dential growth in the downtown area, and in mixed use and transit-
     Community Workshop oriented developments.
          at City Hall
Page IV-6                                              Escondido General Plan Housing

2. Public Workshops
The City held a series of Community Workshops in April 2009 to
determine residents‟ long-term vision for the City. A meeting was
held at the East Valley Community Center on April 16, 2009. A
number of residents attended the meeting and provided input on
what direction the new General Plan should take. Most comments
involved the need to focus on smart growth, the rehabilitation of
existing older housing, and the need to maintain the character of the
City‟s existing single-family neighborhoods.
The City also solicited public input at a Neighborhood Leadership
Forum at City Hall on April 23, 2009. A majority of the comments
during this public forum concerned economic development and
utilities. Specifically, residents discussed the idea of using
Oceanside‟s Mercado as a model for the City‟s Mercado Escondido
and brought up questions and concerns about the City‟s sewer
capacity for additional growth.
The City held a second public workshop on the General Plan on
April 29, 2009. Residents that attended this meeting reiterated the
need to focus on “smart growth” principles and the rehabilitation of
older neighborhoods in the City. In addition, the Community
Alliance for Escondido (CAFÉ) held a public forum on January 29,
2010 to discuss issues related to the General Plan. Residents who
attended this meeting commented on the need for urban-style
“smart growth” projects and the importance of public transit. The
General Plan (including the Housing Element) focuses on higher
density development along transportation corridors.
3. Study Sessions
Study sessions were conducted before the Planning Commission
(July 26, 2011) and City Council (August 10, 2011) to review the
Draft Housing Element prior to submitting the document for review
by the State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). The meetings were advertised in North County Times and
San Diego Union Tribune, as well as the City‟s website, and special
invitations were sent out to a number of agencies serving low and
moderate income households and persons with special needs.
Agencies invited to the Study Sessions are listed in Appendix A.
One comment letter was received. This letter is also included in              April 2009
Appendix A.                                                              Community Workshop
                                                                      at the East Valley Parkway
                                                                           Community Center
    Escondido General Plan Housing                                                     Page IV-7

          4. Public Review of Draft Housing Element
          The Draft Escondido Housing Element was available for public
          review at the following locations:
                City Hall
                City Library
                City website
          The City received two comment letters on the Draft Housing
          Element. These letters and the City‟s response are included in the
          Housing Element Appendix. The City will continue to involve the
          public, especially persons of lower and moderate incomes and those
          with special housing needs. The City will send out notices of future
          public hearings regarding the Housing Element to agencies that
          serve or advocate for lower and moderate income households and
          persons with special needs. The agencies on the City‟s mailing list
          are included in The Housing Element Appendix.
          As part of the General Plan update process, the City created a
          General Plan Update webpage –http://www.escondido.org/ general-
          plan-update.aspx – to provide materials for public review in a
          timely manner. This webpage also provides a special mechanism
          for public to submit input online.
          5. Public Hearings
          Public hearings were conducted prior to adoption of the Housing
          Element involving the Planning Commission on November 13,
          2012, and the City Council on December 12, 2012.
          E. Data Sources and Methodology
          In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information
          are consulted. The 2000 Census provides the basis for population
          and household characteristics. Although dated, no better source of
          information on demographics is widely accepted. Unfortunately, the
          2010 Census data are not scheduled to be released in time for the
          preparation of this Housing Element. As of the writing of this
          Housing Element (June 2011), only limited 2010 Census data have
          been released. Therefore, several sources are used to provide
          reliable updates to the 2000 Census, including the following:
Page IV-8                                Escondido General Plan Housing

      2005-09 American Community Survey by the Census
         Bureau1
      2010 Census by the Census Bureau
      Population and demographic data updated by the State
         Department of Finance
      Housing market information, such as home sales and rents,
         from Dataquick and Realtytrack, among other sources
      Lending patterns from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
         (HMDA) database
      Labor statistics from California Employment Development
         Department
F. General Plan Consistency
According to State planning law, the Housing Element must be
consistent with the other General Plan elements. While each of the
elements is independent, the elements are also interrelated. Certain
goals and policies of each element may also address issues that are
primary subjects of other elements. This integration of issues
throughout the General Plan creates a strong basis for the imple-
mentation of plans and programs and achievement of community
goals. The Housing Element is most closely tied to the Land Use
Element as residential development capacities established in the
Land Use Element are incorporated into the Housing Element.
This 2013-2020 Housing Element was prepared as part of the
comprehensive update to the City‟s General Plan and builds upon
other General Plan elements. The updated General Plan includes the
following elements:
      Land Use and Community Form
      Mobility and Infrastructure
      Housing
      Community Health and Services
      Community Protection
      Resource Conservation
1
  The American Community Survey (ACS) is conducted on a very small sample
of the population. As such, the data tend to have large margins of errors, especially
    Escondido General Plan Housing                                                    Page IV-9

                                          Growth Management
                                          Economic Prosperity
                                    This Housing Element is entirely consistent with the policies and
                                    proposals set forth by the updated General Plan. New State law
                                    requires that the Safety and Conservation Elements include an
                                    analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and management
                                    information upon revisions to the Housing Element. The Com-
                                    munity Protection Element addresses flood hazard and management
                                    in Escondido.
                                    When an element in the General Plan is amended in the future, the
                                    Housing Element will be reviewed and modified if necessary to
                                    ensure continued consistency among the various elements. The City
                                    will ensure that updates to these Elements achieve internal con-
                                    sistency with the Housing Element.
                                    G. Housing Needs Assessment
                                    The City strives to achieve a balanced housing stock that meets the
                                    varied needs of all income segments of the community. To
                                    understand the City‟s housing needs, the nature of the existing
                                    housing stock and the housing market are comprehensively
                                    evaluated. This section of the Housing Element discusses the major
                                    components of housing needs in Escondido, including population,
    Single family homes in „Eureka  household, economic, and housing stock characteristics. Each of
      Springs;‟ a master planned,   these components is presented in a regional context, and, where
 market-rate detached single family relevant, in the context of other nearby communities. This assess-
 project under construction in 2011 ment serves as the basis for identifying the appropriate goals,
     involving 170+ homes, trails,  policies, and programs for the City to implement during the 2013-
    private parks, open space, and  2020 Housing Element cycle.
  linkages to the Escondido Creek
              trail system
Page IV-10                                                          Escondido General Plan Housing

1. Population Characteristics
Understanding the characteristics of a population is vital in the
process of planning for the future needs of a community. Population
characteristics affect the type and amount of housing need in a
community. Issues such as population growth, race / ethnicity, age,
and employment trends are factors that combine to influence the
type of housing needed and the ability to afford housing. The
following section describes and analyzes the various population
characteristics and trends that affect housing need.
a. Population Growth
According to the Census, the City population in 2010 was 143,911,
increased from 108,635 in 1990 and 133,559 in 2000. Between
2000 and 2010, the City population increased by approximately
10,000 people, representing an increase of approximately eight
percent (Figure IV-1). During the same period, San Diego County
population increased by 10 percent. The City population, as a
proportion of the County population, decreased slightly from five
percent in 2000 to 4.6 percent in 2010.
                                    Figure IV-1
      Population Growth - Escondido and San Diego County
                                  (1990-2010)
                                                             1990-  2000-
                           1990         2000         2010
                                                             2000   2010
Escondido                 108,635      133,559      143,911   22.9%  7.8%
San Diego County        2,498,016 2,813,833 3,095,313         12.6% 10.0%
Escondido as a %
                             4.3%          5.0%        4.6%   16.3% -7.0%
of the County
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010 Censuses
b. Age Characteristics
A community‟s current and future housing needs are determined in
part by the age characteristics of residents. Typically, each age
group has distinct lifestyles, family types and sizes, ability to earn
incomes, and therefore, housing preferences. As people move
through each stage of life, housing needs and preferences change.
Traditional assumptions are that the young adult population (20 to
34 years old) tends to favor apartments, low to moderate cost
townhomes/condominiums, and smaller single-family units.
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                         Page IV-11

           The adult population (35 to 64 years old) represents the major
           market for moderate to relatively high cost condominiums and
           single-family homes. The senior population (65 years and older)
           tends to generate demand for low to moderate cost apartments and
           condominiums, group quarters, and mobile homes. In order to
           create a balanced community, it is important to provide housing
           options that suit the needs of various age groups.
           In 2000, 33 percent of residents in the City were under the age of 20
           years, 23 percent were young adults between 20 and 34 years, 33
           percent were mature adults between 35 and 64 years, and 11 percent
           were elderly persons over 65 years of age (Figure IV-2).
                                               Figure IV-2
                          Escondido Age Distribution (2000-2010)
                                            2000                     2010
                  Age                                                        % of
                                       Total       % of Total      Total
                                                                             Total
             Under 5 years            11,712              8.8%   11,638      8.1%
               5-9 years              12,106              9.1%   10,795      7.5%
              10-14 years             10,153              7.6%   10,686      7.4%
              15-19 years              9,546              7.1%   10,976      7.6%
              20-24 years             10,019              7.5%   11,138      7.7%
              25-29 years             10,448              7.8%   11,436      7.9%
              30-34 years             10,754              8.1%   10,167      7.1%
              35-39 years             10,897              8.2%     9,759     6.8%
              40-44 years              9,790              7.3%     9,681     6.7%
              45-49 years               8082              6.1%     9,617     6.7%
              50-54 years              6,642              5.0%     9,190     6.4%
              55-59 years              4,835              3.6%     7,725     5.4%
              60-64 years              3,845              2.9%     6,019     4.2%
              65-69 years              3,331              2.5%     4,237     2.9%
              70-74 years              3,228              2.4%     3,162     2.2%
               75+ years               8,161              6.1%     7,685     5.3%
                 Total              133,559            100.0%   143,911    100.0%
             Median Age                      31.2                     32.5
           Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Censuses
           According to the 2010 Census, the age distribution of Escondido
           residents was as follows: 31 percent of residents in the City were
           under the age of 20 years, 23 percent were between 20 and 34 years,
           36 percent were between 35 and 64 years, and 11 percent were over
           65 years of age. Overall, the City‟s population is aging, with the
           median age increasing from 31.2 to 31.5 between the two censuses
           (Figure IV-3).
Page IV-12                                       Escondido General Plan Housing

                                                                            Figure IV-3
                                                                        Age Distribution
                                                 Escondido Age Distribution
                    14,000
                    12,000
                    10,000
Total Individuals
                     8,000
                     6,000
                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                       2010
                     4,000
                     2,000
                        0
                                 5 ye a      ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars   ye ars      ye ars
                                       rs
                               5-9 y                                                                                                                     75+ y
                                     ea rs                                                                                                                    e ar s
                                         10-14   15-19     20-24    25-29    30-34    35-39    40-44    45-49    50-54   55-59     60-64    65-69    70-74
                             Unde
                                 r
                                      Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Census
                    c. Race / Ethnicity
                    Race/ethnicity of the population is important to an analysis of
                    housing needs and conditions for several reasons. The cultural
                    influences of races are often reflective of preferences for housing
                    type, location of housing, associated services, and household
                    composition. For example, the concept of “extended family” can
                    have implications on the definitions of overcrowding and housing
                    conditions. The racial and ethnic composition of a community‟s
                    population should also be more carefully examined at the neigh-
                    borhood level.
                    Escondido, like many communities throughout California, has
                    experienced gradual changes in the racial and ethnic composition of
                    its population. According to the 2010 Census, White residents (40
                    percent) no longer comprise the largest racial/ethnic group in the
                    community. The City‟s Hispanic residents make up nearly one-half
                    (49 percent) of the City‟s residents (Figure IV-4).
                      Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                                                                          Page IV-13

                                              Figure IV-4
                              Race and Hispanic Origin (2010)
                                                              Number Percent
                Non-Hispanic Races
                   White                                       58,142  40.4%
                   Black or African American                    3,046   2.1%
                   American Indian                                577   0.4%
                   Asian                                        8,491   5.9%
                   Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander     306   0.2%
                   Some other race                                201   0.1%
                   Two or more races                            2,822   2.0%
                Hispanic                                       70,326  48.9%
                Total                                         143,911 100.0%
                Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census.
           2. Economic Characteristics
           Employment has an important impact on housing needs. Incomes
           associated with different jobs and the number of workers in a
           household determines the type and size of housing a household can
           afford. In some cases, the types of jobs themselves can affect
           housing needs and demand (such as in communities with military
           installations, college campuses, and large amounts of seasonal
           agriculture). Employment growth typically leads to strong housing
           demand, while the reverse is true when employment contracts. In
           addition, the relationship between the location of housing and the
           location of employment has an impact upon transportation systems.
           Escondido is north of the major employment centers in San Diego
           County and, to a lesser extent, east of other areas in northern San
           Diego County.
           The City has developed a number of economic programs and
           incentives to attract higher-tech businesses with higher-paying jobs.
           Thus, an increase in higher-end housing is essential; not only to
           attract higher-tech businesses and jobs but also to accommodate the
           housing needs of higher-income households.
           a. Employment
           Over the past several decades, the San Diego region has been
           adding proportionally more jobs at the low end of the pay scale than
           jobs at the high end of the pay scale. This “unbalanced” job growth
           trend is affecting the standard of living in the region. Employment
           growth has been unbalanced since about 1985, with the region
           adding proportionally fewer jobs in sectors with relatively high
           wages and proportionally more jobs in sectors with low wages.
Page IV-14                                      Escondido General Plan Housing

The San Diego region currently has a smaller share of its employ-
ment in manufacturing than California and the nation. The decline
in the proportion of jobs in manufacturing is not new and has been
progressing for more than half a century nationwide. During the
1990s and continuing after 2000, the region‟s economy continued to
diversify away from manufacturing and defense-related industries.
Manufacturing‟s share of total non-farm employment fell from 12.8
percent in 1990 to 10.3 percent in 2000 and 9.2 percent during 2005
- 2009, following a similar trend for the state and the nation.
The rise in service sector jobs is not new either. It is what has been
happening while the number of jobs in the manufacturing sector has
declined as a share of total employment. Among service sectors
regionally, professional and business services increased its share
from 12.8 percent of total employment in 1990 to 13.3 percent in
2000, to 14.2 percent during 2005-2009.
The earnings gap between low- and high-paying jobs has also
widened because of unbalanced job growth and the region‟s
capacity for low-paying jobs has increased through public invest-
ment. Public funds and facilities have been used to invest heavily in
low value-added industries, such as tourism, entertainment, the
uniformed military, and retail trade, without compensating invest-
ments for high value-added industries. Examples include Mission
Bay, Balboa Park, the San Diego Zoo, the Wild Animal Park, Sea
World, Legoland, the Convention Center, and cruise ship terminals
which have utilized public funds to help construct infrastructure that
support these low-paying jobs.
Additionally, public funds are used to pay for infrastructure require-
ments in retail centers, auto malls, and sports facilities. Publically
funded uniformed military infrastructure includes shipyards,
submarine bases, air bases, and training facilities. The aggregate
investment in these areas has diversified the economic base and
helped provide sufficient job growth to keep the region‟s unemploy-
ment rate one of the lowest in the nation, has also contributed to the
unbalanced job growth.
                                                                       Postcard, circa 1910 depicting
                                                                        Escondido‟s agriculture and
                                                                       symbolizing its dominance in
                                                                          the community‟s early
                                                                           employment patterns
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-15

                                           As of June 2011, unemployment rate in Escondido was reported by
                                           the State Employment Development Department at 10.8 percent,
                                           above the regional average of 10.4 percent but below the statewide
                                           average of 12.4 percent.
                                           Figure IV-5 highlights the difference in employment composition in
                                           Escondido versus the region. The far right-hand column shows that
                                           employment in retail services is higher in Escondido while employ-
                                           ment in the military is higher in the region. Compared to the region,
                                           Escondido has even higher proportion of lower paying jobs in the
                                           retail/sales and manufacturing sectors.
                                                                              Figure IV-5
                                            Employment Characteristics - City of Escondido and Region
                                                                           (2000-2009)
                                         Industry Sector             2000 Census                 2005-2009 ACS
                                                               % of City      % of Region  % of City     % of Region
                                                             Employment Employment Employment Employment
              Figure IV-5                Agriculture,             1.9%             0.7%       1.5%            0.7%
 Employment Characteristics              Mining
                                         Construction             9.4%             6.6%      11.4%            7.5%
         Industry Sectors that typically Manufacturing           14.6%            11.0%      10.8%            9.2%
         pay salaries less than the
         County Median Income*           Transportation,
                                         Communication,           3.4%             3.5%       4.5%            6.2%
         Industry Sectors that typically Utilities
         pay salaries more than the      Wholesale
         County Median Income*                                    3.6%             3.3%       2.9%            2.9%
                                         Trade
         Industry Sectors where the      Retail Trade            12.8%            11.3%      12.5%           10.9%
         percent of city employment is   Finance,
         equal or higher than region’s   Real Estate,             5.6%             7.1%       5.8%            7.8%
                                         Insurance
* 2010 Census San Diego County
Median Household Income = $62,771        Professional
                                                                 13.0%            13.3%      13.2%           14.2%
                                         Services
                                         Education,
                                         Health, and             15.2%            19.3%      16.0%           19.5%
                                         Social Services
                                         Arts, Recreation,
                                                                  8.7%             9.6%      11.7%           10.5%
                                         Entertainment
                                         Other Services           5.9%             5.2%       6.9%            5.1%
                                         Public
                                                                  3.2%             5.4%       2.8%            5.3%
                                         Administration
                                         Total                  100.0%           100.0%     100.0%          100.0%
                                         Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2000 Census
                                         and 2005-2009 American Community Survey (ACS)
  Page IV-16                                                                    Escondido General Plan Housing

b. Salary / Income
Figure IV-6 displays mean annual wage data for occupations com-
piled by the California Employment Development Department
(EDD) for the San Diego Metropolitan Statistical Area. Figure IV-6
shows that the food preparation and serving, personal care and
service, building and maintenance, and farming, fishing and forestry
occupations offer the lowest wages.
According to the Census and ACS, approximately 15 percent of
Escondido residents work at educational, health and social services
occupations. Education and social services usually generate
employment at the moderate income levels. Other major employ-
ment sectors for Escondido include sales and manufacturing
(production); both provide generally jobs at lower scales as shown
in Figure IV-6. Also refer to the next section regarding Escondido
Household incomes.
                                    Figure IV-6
       Mean Salary By Occupation - San Diego Region (2010)
                      Occupations                             Average Salary
 Management                                                            $113,870
 Legal                                                                 $107,196
 Healthcare Practitioners and Technical                                 $86,425
 Architecture and Engineering                                           $81,433
 Computer and Mathematical                                              $79,899
 Life, Physical and Social Science                                      $72,840
 Business and Financial Operations                                      $70,103
 Education, Training and Library                                        $60,482
 Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports and Media                          $55,851
 Construction and Extraction                                            $50,274
 Community and Social Service                                           $48,969
 Protective Service                                                     $47,927
 Installation, Maintenance and Repair                                   $45,364
 Sales                                                                  $37,650
 Office and Administrative Support                                      $36,264
 Production                                                             $33,600
 Transportation and Material Moving                                     $31,976   „Milane Lane‟ was one of several
 Healthcare Support                                                     $30,481        nationwide locations that
 Farming, Fishing and Forestry                                          $27,777     participated in the „Habitat for
 Building, Grounds Cleaning, and Maintenance                            $26,359     Humanity Builders Blitz.‟ The
                                                                                   project was completed in 2006
 Personal Care and Service                                              $26,030
                                                                                    and consists of seven single-
 Food Preparation and Serving Related                                   $22,211    family, three-and four-bedroom
 All Occupations                                                        $49,439    homes for house-holds earning
 Source: California Employment Development Division, Occupational Wage data, 2010 50%-60% of the median income.
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                      Page IV-17

     „Sunrise Place‟ was com-      3. Household Characteristics
  pleted in 1993 and consists of
    8 town-house style housing     The Census defines a "household" as all persons who occupy a
    units for low-income families  housing unit, which may include single persons living alone,
    in Escondido. The complex      families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons
     features 8 two-story units    sharing living quarters. Persons living in retirement or convalescent
      located around a central     homes, dormitories, or other group living situations are not con-
    courtyard with a landscaped
                                   sidered households. Furthermore, the Census classifies households
      picnic and play area. All
   parking is located in the front by type according to the gender of the householder and the presence
     of the site with decorative,  of relatives. Household characteristics such as size, type, income
   landscaped trellises. All units and tenure reveal important information about the housing needs of
     have small individual front   a community. Different household sizes, types and income levels
    porches and loft bedrooms.     often prefer different housing options.
Page IV-18                                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

According to the 2010 Census, there were 1,086,865 households
(also known as occupied housing units) in San Diego County. Of
these, 45,484 households, or approximately four percent, were
located in Escondido.
a. Household Type and Size
Different household types generally have different housing needs.
Seniors or young adults usually comprise the majority of the single-
person households and tend to reside in apartments, condominiums
or smaller single-family homes. Families with children often prefer
single-family homes.
Escondido had 39,267 households in 1990. By 2000, this number
grew to 43,817, an increase of 12 percent. The number of house-
holds in Escondido increased another four percent to 45,484 house-
holds by 2010. Figure IV-7 shows that, increasingly, Escondido
households are primarily comprised of families. However, the
greatest change between 2000 and 2010 was the increase in other
„non-traditional‟ families. Married couples with children ex-
perienced numerical and proportional decreases.
According to the 2010 Census, 72 percent of the Escondido house-
holds were family-households. Of the City‟s family households, 36
percent were married couples with children under the age of 18 and
                                                                     „City Plaza,‟ a market rate town-
36 percent that did not include children. The proportion of other
                                                                     home development in Downtown
families continued to grow, representing 28 percent of all family-   Escondido partially completed in
households.                                                           2009 containing 102 units with
                                                                             attached garages
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                       Page IV-19

           Approximately 28 percent of Escondido households were non-
           family households with the majority of them (75 percent) being
           residents living alone. By 2010, the average household size in the
           City increased to 3.12 and the average family size increased to 3.57.
                                                  Figure IV-7
                         Changes in Household Types (2000 – 2010)
                                                                                  Change
            Household Types                2000                   2010
                                                                                2000-2010
                                        #         %            #         %      #          %
           Families                  31,162     71.1%      32,732     72.0%  1,570       5.0%
            Married with Children    12,505     40.1%       11,812    36.1%   (693)     (5.5%)
            Married, no Children     11,121     35.7%       11,723    35.8%    602       5.4%
            Other Families            7,536     24.2%        9,197    28.1%  1,661      22.0%
           Non-Families              12,655     28.9%      12,752     28.0%      97      0.8%
            Single                    9,801     77.4%        9,528    74.7%   (273)     (2.8%)
            Other Non-Families        2,854     22.6%        3,224    25.3%    370      13.0%
           Total Households          43,817 100.0% 45,484            100.0%   1,667      3.8%
           Average H. H. Size          3.01 persons           3.12 persons          3.7%
           Average Family Size          3.5 persons           3.57 persons          2.0%
           Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000 Censuses
           and 2005-2009 American Community Survey
           Household size is an important market characteristic. Housing
           demand is shaped by the composition of its household sizes. The
           small household (one to two persons per household) traditionally
           prefers units with zero to two bedrooms, while the large household
           (five or more persons per household) prefers units with at least three
           bedrooms. Information on Figure IV-8 shows that two-person
           households (28 percent) made up the largest proportion of house-
           holds in the City in 2010. Approximately 21 percent of Escondido
           households included five or more persons.
                                                 Figure IV-8
                                       Household (HH) Size (2010)
                              Owner                    Renter-              Total
             Persons                       Percent                 Percent             Percent
                               HHs-                       HHs               HHs
           One                    4,297      18.1%        5,231      24.1% 9,528         20.9%
           Two                    7,946      33.4%        4,571      21.0% 12,517        27.5%
           Three                  3,914      16.5%        3,284      15.1% 7,198         15.8%
           Four                   3,608      15.2%        3,223      14.8% 6,831         15.0%
           Five                   1,980       8.3%        2,414      11.1% 4,394          9.7%
           Six                      932       3.9%        1,381        6.4% 2,313         5.1%
           Seven or
                                  1,082       4.6%        1,621        7.0% 2,703         5.9%
           more
           Total                23,759      100.0%      21,725      100.0% 45,484      100.0%
           Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census.
Page IV-20                                          Escondido General Plan Housing

      b. Household Income
      Household income is directly connected to the ability to afford
      housing. Income levels influence the range of housing prices within
      a region and the ability of the population to afford housing. Home
      ownership rates rise as household income increases. As household
      income decreases, households tend to pay a disproportionate
      amount of their income for housing and the number of persons
      occupying unsound and overcrowded housing increases.
      For planning and funding purposes, the California State Department
      of Housing and Community Development (HCD) has developed
      the following income categories based on the Area Median Income
      (AMI) of a metropolitan area (such as San Diego County):
       Extremely Low: Households earning up to 30% of the AMI
       Very Low: Households earning between 31 - 50% of the AMI
       Low: Households earning between 51 - 80% of the AMI
       Moderate: Households earning between 81 - 120% of the AMI
       Above Moderate: Households earning over 120% of the AMI
      Combined, the extremely low, very low, and low income groups are
      referred to as lower income. Federal programs provide assistance
      primarily to households in the lower Income category (up to 80
      percent AMI). In 2000, approximately 55 percent of Escondido
      households earned moderate or above moderate incomes (Figure
      IV-9), while 45 percent of households had incomes in the extremely
      low, very low, and low income levels.2
                                                Figure IV-9
                 Escondido Households by Income Category (2004)
          Moderate or Above, 55%                                     Extremely Low, 11%
                          Households by Income Category (2000)                   Very Low, 14%
                                                                                       Low, 20%
                    Source: Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Extremely Low (30% orComprehensive     Housing
                      less of County AMI),   11%Affordability Strategy
                                                       Very Low        (CHAS),
                                                                  (31 to        2004 AMI), 14%
                                                                         50% of County
Low (51 to 80% of County AMI), 20%                     Moderate or Above (over 80% of County AMI), 55%
      2
        Data was obtained from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
      prepared for HUD by the Census Bureau using 2000 Census data. CHAS data does not
      provide a breakdown of household income for those with more than 80 percent AMI as
      those households are not qualified for federal housing programs.
        Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                 Page IV-21

                                          Household incomes in Escondido tend to be slightly lower than
                                          those in the region as a whole. Median household income in the
                                          City was $42,567 in 2000, compared to the San Diego County
                                          median household income of $47,067. The ACS estimates the
                                          median household income in Escondido between 2005 and 2009
                                          was $54,457, compared to $62,901 in the County.
                                          Figure IV-10 compares household income in Escondido and in the
                                          San Diego region between 2005 and 2009. Approximately 54
                                          percent of Escondido households had incomes over $49,999, six
                                          percentage points lower than region wide. Approximately 22
                                          percent of Escondido households earned $100,000 or more,
                                          compared to 28 percent in all of San Diego County. Slightly more
                                          than 30 percent of Escondido residents earned less than $35,000
                                          annually, compared to 27 percent region wide.
                                                                              Figure IV-10
                                                                 Household Income   (2005-2009)
                                                                  Household Income (2005 – 2009)
                                          35.0%
                                          30.0%
             Percentage of Population
                                          25.0%
                                          20.0%
                                          15.0%
                                          10.0%
                                           5.0%
                                           0.0%
                                                     Less than   $15,000-    $25,000-    $35,000-     $50,000-   $100,000
                                                      $14,999    $24,999     $34,999     $49,999      $99,999    or Greater
                                        Escondido      9.8%       10.4%       10.4%       15.3%        31.9%       22.2%
                                        SD Region      9.2%        8.6%        8.9%        13.2%       31.6%          28.4%
                                                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2005-2009 American Community Survey
                                          Median household income compared to neighboring communities
                                          provides a way to measure income in Escondido against other cities.
                                          Figure IV-11 compares median income in Escondido to other North
                                          County cities and the region. Median household income in the City
                                          was one of the lowest in the region, comparable to the City of Vista.
Page IV-22                                                                     Escondido General Plan Housing

                                   Figure IV-11
  Median Household Income – San Diego Region (2005-2009)
                                      Median          Percent Above/Below
         Jurisdiction
                                   HH Income*           Regional Median
Carlsbad                                 $85,146                       +35%
Encinitas                                $85,538                       +36%
Escondido                                $54,457                        -13%
Oceanside                                $62,657                         +0%
Poway                                    $95,488                       +52%
San Marcos                               $64,244                         +2%
Vista                                    $54,017                        -14%
San Diego Region                         $62,901                         +0%
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2005-2009 American Community Survey.
Median household income provides only partial insight into a
community‟s income profile. A more detailed breakdown of house-
holds by income category can provide more information about the
proportion of households in Escondido whose limited incomes may
lead them to have a higher incidence of housing problems such as
overpayment (paying more than 30 percent of income on housing)
or overcrowding (having more than one person per room).
Household incomes improved from 1990 to 2000 (Figure IV-12).
The percentage of wage earners with annual incomes over $50,000
increased, while the percentage of those earning less than $50,000
decreased. Since 2000, however, while the proportion of house-
holds earning over $100,000 increased, so were the proportions of
households earning below $15,000, indicating an increase in the
number of households earning extremely low incomes.
                                   Figure IV-12
             Escondido Income Distribution (1990-2009)
   Household               Income Distribution           Percentage Change
     Income             1990        2000     2005-2009 1990-2000 2000-2009
< $10,000              10.2%        3.8%         4.7%      -6.4%     +0.9%
$10,000 - $14,999       8.4%        5.0%         5.2%      -3.4%     +0.2%
$15,000 - $24,999      18.5%       11.8%        10.4%      -6.7%     -1.4%
$25,000 - $34,999      15.7%       14.3%        10.4%      -1.4%     -3.9%
$35,000 - $49,999      19.6%       16.5%        15.3%      -3.1%     -1.2%
$50,000 - $74,999      17.4%       22.2%        19.7%     +4.8%      -2.5%
$75,000 - $99,999       6.2%       12.3%        12.1%     +6.1%      -0.2%
$100,000 or more        4.1%       14.1%        22.2%     +10.0%     +8.1%
Total                 100.0%      100.0%       100.0%        ---       ---
Source: Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000 Censuses,
and 2005-2009 American Community Survey
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                             Page IV-23

                                   4. Housing Problems
                                   The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
                                   developed by the Census for HUD provides detailed information on
                                   housing needs by income level for different types of households in
                                   Escondido. Detailed CHAS data based on the 2000 Census is
   „Via Roble‟ is a unique mixed-  displayed in Figure IV-13. Housing problems considered by CHAS
    use, mixed-income develop-     include:
       ment on a five-acre site
    completed in 2005. The site         Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or
     originally held a dilapidated         bathroom);
 trailer park where residents were
       living in and unsafe and         Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one
    unhealthy environment. The             person per room);
   project includes 72 affordable
    apartments, 10 single-family
                                        Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30
  homes (above right), and 9 new           percent of gross income; or
       shopkeeper units along           Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding
   Escondido Boulevard. The 72             50 percent of gross income.
      affordable rental units are
  available to households earning
   between 30% and 80% of the      The types of problems vary according to household income, type,
  San Diego County Area Median     and tenure. Some highlights include:
             Income (AMI).
Page IV-24                                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

      In general, renter-households had a higher level of housing
          problems (62 percent) compared to owner-households (35
          percent).
      Large renter-families had the highest level of housing
          problems regardless of income level (86 percent).
      Extremely low income (86 percent) and very low income
          households (83 percent) had the highest incidence of
          housing problems.
                                                                Figure IV-13
                         Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2000)
                                                             Renters                                    Owners
    Household by Type, Income,                                                                                                      Total
        and Housing Problem                             Small        Large       Total                  Large        Total Households
                                           Elderly                                         Elderly
                                                      Families Families Renters                        Families Owners
Extremely Low Income (0-30% AMI)             829        1,038          843       3,552        595         115         1,184         4,736
     % with any housing problem             78.9%       90.8%        99.1%       87.8%      82.4%       87.0%        78.9%         85.6%
       % with cost burden >30%              78.9%       87.6%        90.7%       84.8%      82.4%       73.9%        77.6%         83.0%
       % with cost burden > 50%             64.5%       78.0%        70.0%       73.1%      47.9%       73.9%        54.9%         68.5%
   Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)              973        1,600          985       4,298        859         258         1,705         6,003
     % with any housing problem             87.2%       93.8%        94.4%       91.6%      43.0%       98.4%        62.8%         83.4%
       % with cost burden >30%              85.1%       83.4%        65.0%       80.3%      42.5%       88.8%        60.0%         74.6%
       % with cost burden >50%              52.9%       27.8%        10.7%       31.5%      15.7%       54.3%        32.8%         31.9%
      Low Income (51-80% AMI)                793        1,985        1,240       5,077      1,649         674         3,782         8,859
     % with any housing problem             76.7%       58.7%        90.3%       70.7%      23.9%       86.1%        52.3%         62.8%
       % with cost burden >30%              74.9%       39.3%        16.9%       43.2%      23.3%       60.8%        45.7%         44.3%
       % with cost burden > 50%             25.9%        1.5%         0.8%        5.3%       9.0%       17.1%        17.0%         10.3%
          Total Households                  3,389       7,838        4,458      20,406      6,563        3,627       23,341        43,747
     % with any housing problem             69.5%       52.2%        85.7%       61.5%      25.6%       59.7%        34.8%         47.3%
Note: Data presented in this table are based on special tabulations from sample Census data. The number of households in each
category usually deviates slightly from the 100% total due to the need to extrapolate sample data out to total households. Interpretations
of these data should focus on the proportion of households in need of assistance rather than on precise numbers.
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2004.
a. Overcrowding
Overcrowding is typically defined as a housing unit occupied by
more than one person per room. A severely overcrowded household
is defined as one with more than 1.5 persons per room. Under State
law a housing unit is considered overcrowded if there is less than
120 square feet of livable space (all space except the bath, kitchen
and hallways) for the first two people and less than an additional 50
square feet for each additional person. Overcrowding can indicate
that a community does not have an adequate supply of affordable
housing, especially for large families.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                                            Page IV-25

            Overcrowding typically occurs when there are not enough ade-
            quately sized units within a community, when high housing costs
            relative to income force too many individuals to share a housing
            unit than it can adequately accommodate, or when families reside in
            smaller units than they need to devote income to other necessities,
            such as food and health care. Overcrowding tends to accelerate the
            deterioration of housing. Therefore, maintaining a reasonable level
            of occupancy and alleviating overcrowding are critical to enhancing
            quality of life.
            Figure IV-14 shows that nearly 20 percent of the households in
            Escondido were overcrowded in 1990, inclusive of the 12 percent
            that were severely overcrowded. Overcrowding was more prevalent
            among renter-households than owner-households, as rental units are
            typically smaller in size and renter-households typically have lower
            incomes. The situation with overcrowding worsened significantly
            between 1990 and 2000, with almost one-third of the City‟s house-
            holds being overcrowded. Specifically, almost one-quarter of the
            households were severely overcrowded. The prevalence of over-
            crowding among owner-households more than doubled between
            1990 and 2000.
                                               Figure IV-14
                          Overcrowded Housing Units (1990-2000)
                                     Owner                  Renter           Total
                                  Households             Households       Households
           Overcrowding
                                            % of                  % of             % of
                               Number                Number             Number
                                          Owners                Renters            Total
                                                  1990
           Total
           Overcrowded
                                    786      3.9%        3,227    17.1%   4,013   19.7%
           (More than 1.0
           persons/room)
           Severely
           Overcrowded
                                    324      1.6%        1,975    10.5%   2,299   12.2%
           (More than 1.5
           persons/room)
                                                  2000
           Total
           Overcrowded
                                  1,921      8.2%        5,637    24.2%   7,558   32.4%
           (More than 1.0
           persons/room)
           Severely
           Overcrowded
                                    954      4.7%        3,621    17.7%   4,575   22.4%
           (More than 1.5
           persons/room)
           Source: Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000 Censuses
Page IV-26                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

      b. Cost Burden (Overpayment)
      Measuring the portion of a household‟s gross income that is spent
      for housing is an indicator of the dynamics of demand and supply.
      This measurement is often expressed in terms of “over payers:”
      households paying an excessive amount of their income for
      housing, therefore decreasing the amount of disposable income
      available for other needs. This indicator is an important measure-
      ment of local housing market conditions as it reflects the afford-
      ability of housing in the community. Federal and state agencies use
      overpayment indicators to determine the extent and level of funding
      and support that should be allocated to a community.
      Figure IV-15 shows that in 2000, 43 percent of households in the
      San Diego region were paying over 30 percent of their income
      towards housing costs. In Escondido, nearly 37 percent of all house-
      holds were overpaying. Renters were more likely to overpay than
      owners; in Escondido 45 percent of renters overpaid, compared to
      29 percent of owners. In comparison, Oceanside had the highest
      levels of overpayment and Poway had the lowest level of over-
      payment.
                                           Figure IV-15
                        Household (HH) Overpayment (2000)
                   All Households                   Renters                    Owners
                                    %                            %                           %
                        Paying                       Paying                     Paying
                                 Paying Total                 Paying Total               Paying
                Total 30%+                            30%+                       30%+
                                  30%+                         30%+                       30%+
Carlsbad       31,481 11,239 35.7% 10,285 4,669 45.4% 21,196 21,196 31.0%
Encinitas      22,834     8,928 39.1%        8,172     3,898 47.7% 14,662 14,662 34.3%
Escondido 43,747 15,968 36.5% 20,406                   9,183 45.0% 23,341 23,341 29.2%
Oceanside      56,370 24,859 44.1% 21,336 12,055 56.5% 35,034 35,034 36.6%
Poway          15,493     4,911 31.7%        3,438     1,372 39.9% 12,055         3,544 29.4%
San Marcos 18,179         6,508 35.8%        6,115     2,458 40.2% 12,064         4,319 35.8%
Vista          28,950 10,740 37.1% 13,347 5,939 44.5% 15,603 5,789 37.1%
San Diego
             994,098 423,486 42.6% 442,646 232,832 52.6% 551,452 551,452 34.5%
Region
Note: Households do not equal total presented in other tables because housing costs were not
computed for all households.
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2004.
      Figure IV-16 provides more overpayment detail by income group
      for Escondido. Approximately 63 percent of lower income house-
      holds were overpaying versus 15 percent of moderate and above
      moderate households.
        Escondido General Plan Housing                                                          Page IV-27

           The 2010 Census has no data on household income or housing
           costs. According to the ACS data, between 2005 and 2009, 45
           percent of owner-occupied households in Escondido spent more
           than 30 percent of their household income on housing. By contrast,
           a higher percentage of renter-households (59 percent) overpaid for
           housing.
                                                Figure IV-16
                     Overpayment by Tenure and Income Level (2000)
              Household Income
                                       Total Renters        Total Owners             Total
                     Group
                 Extremely Low
                                            3,552                1,184              4,736
                  (<=30% AMI)
               Cost Burden >30%             3,012                 919               3,931
              %Cost Burden >30%            84.8%                77.6%               83.0%
                    Very Low
                (>30% to <=50%              4,298                1,705              6,003
                      AMI)
               Cost Burden >30%             3,451                1,023              4,478
              %Cost Burden >30%            80.3%                60.0%               74.6%
                      Low
                (>50% to <=80%              5,077                3,782              8,859
                      AMI)
               Cost Burden >30%             2,193                1,728              3,925
              %Cost Burden >30%            43.2%                45.7%               44.3%
              Moderate & Above
                                            7,479               16,670             24,149
                   (>80% AMI)
               Cost Burden >30%              524                 3,134              3,671
              %Cost Burden >30%             7.0%                18.8%               15.2%
                      Total                20,406               23,341             43,747
              Cost Burden >30%              9,183                6,816             15,968
              %Cost Burden >30%            45.0%                29.2%               36.5%
            Note: Totals may not be exact due to rounding; the Census Bureau uses a special
            rounding scheme for special tabulations such as these; totals may not match other
            census datasets
            Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2004
           5. Special Needs Groups
           Certain segments of the population may have more difficulty in
           finding decent, affordable housing due to their special needs.
           Special circumstances may be related to one‟s employment and
           income, family characteristics, disability and household charac-
           teristics, among other factors. Consequently, certain residents in
           Escondido may experience higher incidences of housing cost
           burden, overcrowding, or other housing problems.
Page IV-28                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

The special needs groups analyzed include the elderly, people with
disabilities (including persons with developmental disabilities),
homeless people, single parents, large households, military
personnel, farm workers, and students (Figure IV-17). Many of
these groups overlap, for example many farm workers are
homeless, and many elderly people have a disability of some type.
The majority of these special needs groups would be assisted by an
increase in affordable housing, especially housing located near
public transportation and services. Figure IV-18 provides a list of
services and facilities available to assist households/persons with
special needs.
                                    Figure IV-17
              Special Needs Groups in Escondido (2010)
                     # of                                              % of Total
    Special                      #        %          #         %
                  People                                                HHs or
Needs Group                 Owners Owner Renters Renter
                  or HHs                                              Population
Households
                   11,028        --        --        --        --        24.2%
with Seniors
Senior
Headed              9,253     6,077     65.7%      3,176    34.3%        20.3%
Households
Seniors Living
                    4,235     2,133     50.4%      2,102    48.6%         9.3%
Alone
Persons with
                   23,896        --        --        --        --        54.5%
Disabilities1
Large
                    9,410     3,994     42.4%      5,416    57.6%        20.7%
Households
Single-Parent
                    5,007        --        --        --        --        11.1%
Households
Female-
Headed             13,081     5,475     41.9%      7,606    58.1%        28.8%
Households
Female-
Headed
                    3,360        --        --        --        --         7.4%
Households
with children
People Living
                   17,759        --        --        --        --        13.3%
in Poverty1
Farmworkers1        1,069        --        --        --        --         0.8%
Homeless             741         --        --        --        --         0.6%
2010 Census data not available; 2000 Census data presented.
Source: Bureau of the Census (2000 and 2010) and Regional Housing Task Force on
the Homeless (2010).
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                  Page IV-29
                                                                  Figure IV-18
                                Inventory of Services for Special Needs Populations
       Services                              Program                                             Details                      Location
                           Catholic Charities, La Posada de Guadalupe                  50 beds for homeless men                 Carlsbad
                                                                               36 beds for women with children, victims of
                               Community Resource Center Libre!                                                                Encinitas
                                                                                   domestic violence; motel vouchers
                                     Encinitas Social Services                              General Population                 Encinitas
                               Brother Benno’s Foundation, Good
 Emergency Shelters                                                                    12 beds for homeless men               Oceanside
                                         Samaritan Shelter
                             Brother Benno’s Foundation, House of         6 beds for women with children, victims of domestic
                                                                                                                              Oceanside
                                          Martha Ann Mary                                        violence
                                   M.I.T.E. North County Detox               6 beds for adults, substance abuse treatment     Oceanside
                                                                               26 beds for women with children, victims of
                                    Women’s Resource Center                                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                             domestic violence
                                    CHW – Marisol Apartments                         21 beds for HIV/AIDS patients            Undisclosed
                                          CHW-Old Grove                               4 beds for HIV/AIDS patients            Undisclosed
                                          CHW-Old Grove                              40 beds for farm/day laborers            Undisclosed
 Permanent
 Supportive Housing         Fraternity House, Inc. – Michelle’s House                      12 HIV/AIDS patients                  Vista
                                             Las Casitas                         14 units for drug and alcohol recovery        Escondido
                              North County Solutions for Change –
                                                                                   40 homeless families with children            Vista
                                     Solutions Family Center
                                    Genesis/Interfaith Services                             8 homeless families                Escondido
                                 MHS – Family Recovery Center                90 Women with children and substance abuse       Oceanside
                                           Serenity Village                         24 women with substance abuse              Escondido
 Transitional                               Tikkun House                                    6 homeless women                   Escondido
 Housing/Shelters           Women’s Resource Ctr, Transition House                       61 Women with children               Oceanside
                                                                              26 Women with children, victims of domestic
                                    Women’s Resource Center                                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                                 violence
                                      YMCA Oz North Coast                                   10 Homeless Youth                 Oceanside
                                   North Coastal Mental Health                       Homeless severely mentally ill             Regional
                             North County Lifeline – Hotel Vouchers                          General homeless                 Oceanside
                           N. County Community Services Food Bank                            Food distribution                San Marcos
 Services for the                 Interfaith Community Services
                                                                                          100 General homeless                 Escondido
 Homeless and At-                          (Winter Shelter)
 Risk Families                         Interfaith Food Pantry                                Food distribution                 Escondido
                               Salvation Army Adult Rehab Center                            Drug/alcohol abuse                 San Diego
                                          Second Chance                                     Drug/alcohol abuse                 San Diego
                                           Stepping Stone                                   Drug/alcohol abuse                 San Diego
                                                 Aster                             10 beds (short-term recuperative)           Escondido
                                          Aster Apartments                                       28 beds                       Escondido
                                         Fairweather Lodge                6 mentally ill veterans (permanent supportive hsg.)  Escondido
 Veterans                                   Merle’s Place                                   44 beds (dormitory)                Escondido
                                            New Resolve                              44 beds (homeless, veterans)              Escondido
                                                                              6 beds each for homeless seniors/ disabled
                                     Raymond’s Refuge I & II                                                                   Escondido
                                                                                    (permanent supportive housing)
                                        Access Center, Inc.                          Independent living assistance               Vista
 Senior/Disabled
                                            Joslyn Center                                      Senior support                  Escondido
 Services
                           Serving Seniors-Senior Community Centers                    Meals, health and wellness               Regional
 Source: City of Escondido
Page IV-30                                                                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

The following sections provide a detailed discussion of the housing
needs facing each particular group as well as programs and services
available to address their housing needs.
a. Seniors
Many senior-headed households have special needs due to their
relatively low incomes, disabilities or limitations, and dependency
needs. Specifically, people aged 65 years and older often have four
main concerns:
     Housing: Many seniors live alone and may have difficulty
         maintaining their homes.
     Income: People aged 65 and over are usually retired and
         living on a limited income.
     Health care: Seniors are more likely to have high health
         care costs.
     Transportation: Many of the elderly rely on public
         transportation; especially those with disabilities.
The limited income of many elderly persons often makes it difficult
for them to find affordable housing. In the San Diego region, the
elderly spend a higher percentage of their income for food, housing,
medical care, and personal care than non-elderly families. Many
elderly households need smaller “efficiency” units to make inde-
pendent living possible and many single elderly persons need some
form of housing assistance.
Figure IV-19 shows that 15,084 persons were age 65 and older in
Escondido in 2010. This accounted for about 11 percent of resi-
dents, comparable to the percentage found in the region as a whole.
In comparison, most surrounding communities had higher propor-
tions of seniors. Among the City‟s senior population, 9,253 seniors
were heads of households, representing about 20 percent of the
City‟s overall households. Specifically, 4,235 senior-headed house-
holds were seniors living alone.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                     Page IV-31

                                                                        Figure IV-19
                                                             Persons Age 65 and Over
                                         Jurisdiction               Total            Age 65+ Percent Age 65+
                                     Carlsbad                     105,328             14,798      14.0%
                                     Encinitas                     59,518              7,643      12.8%
                                     Escondido                    143,911             15,084      10.5%
                                     Oceanside                    167,086             21,501      12.9%
                                     Poway                         47,811              5,900      12.3%
                                     San Marcos                    83,781              8,527      10.2%
                                     Vista                         93,834              8,673       9.2%
                                     San Diego Region            3,095,313           351,425      11.4%
                                     Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census.
                                     Figure IV-20 shows elderly households broken down by tenure and
                                     income level in 2000. A higher proportion of elderly renter-
                                     occupied households had housing problems (70 percent) than all
                                     renter-occupied households (62 percent). Housing problems are
                                     defined as overpayment (cost burden) greater than 30 percent of
                                     income and/or overcrowding and/or without complete kitchen or
                                     plumbing facilities. Additionally, 68 percent of elderly renter-
                                     occupied households were paying more than 30 percent of their
                                     income for housing compared with 45 percent of all renter-
                                     households. Elderly owner-occupied households, on the other hand,
                                     tend to be better off than all households as a group. About one-
                                     quarter (26 percent) had any housing problem compared with 35
                                     percent of all owner-occupied households. Likewise, only one-
                                     quarter (25 percent) were paying more than 30 percent of their
                                     income towards housing versus 29 percent of all owner-occupied
                                     households. While most elderly owner-households no longer hold a
                                     mortgage, some elderly homeowners may not be able to afford the
 A four-story affordable residential costs of maintenance and repairs.
  development with a community
 room replaced a dilapidated trail
   park on Washington Avenue.
       „Juniper Senior Village‟
    accommodates low-income
 seniors (eligible annual incomes
    at 30%-60% of AMI) and is
  located in the downtown area,
 one block from the Park Avenue
 Community Center, a drug store,
  grocery store, bus stop, and a
 clinic. The development is within
  a half mile of Grape Day Park,
  City Hall, the California Center
    for the Arts, Escondido, and
          Palomar Hospital.
Page IV-32                                                                 Escondido General Plan Housing

                                     Figure IV-20
     Elderly Households by Tenure and Income Level (2000)
                                   Renters                Owners
  Household by Type,
                              Elderly Total Elderly Total                   Total
 Income and Housing
                             Renters Renters Owners Owners              Households
         Problem
   Household Income
                                829       3,552         595   1,184         4,736
        <=30% AMI
   % with any housing
                               78.9%     87.8%       82.4%    78.9%         85.6%
         problems
  % Cost Burden >30%           78.9%     84.8%       82.4%    77.6%         83.0%
  % Cost Burden >50%           64.5%     73.1%       47.9%    54.9%         68.5%
   Household Income
                                973       4,298         859   1,705         6,003
   >30 to <=50% AMI
   % with any housing
                               87.2%     91.6%       43.0%    62.8%         83.4%
         problems
  % Cost Burden >30%           85.1%     80.3%       42.5%    60.0%         74.6%
  % Cost Burden >50%           52.9%     31.5%       15.7%    32.8%         31.9%
   Household Income
                                793       5,077       1,649   3,782         8,859
   >50 to <=80% AMI
   % with any housing
                               76.7%     70.7%       23.9%    52.3%         62.8%
         problems
  % Cost Burden >30%           74.9%     43.2%       23.3%    45.7%         44.3%
  % Cost Burden >50%           25.9%       5.3%       9.0%    17.0%         10.3%
   Household Income
                                794       7,479       3,460   16,670       24,149
        >80% AMI
   % with any housing
                               30.7%     25.6%       12.4%    24.9%         25.1%
         problems
  % Cost Burden >30%           29.5%       7.0%      12.1%    18.8%         15.2%
  % Cost Burden >50%           11.2%       1.4%       3.0%     2.5%          2.1%
    Total Households           3,389     20,408       6,563   23,341       43,747
   % with any housing
                               69.5%     61.5%       25.6%    34.8%         47.3%
         problems
   % Cost Burden >30           68.2%     45.0%       25.3%    29.2%         36.5%
   % Cost Burden >50           39.7%     21.2%       10.3%     9.7%         15.1%
Notes:
Any housing problems: cost burden greater than 30% of income and/or overcrowding
and/or without complete kitchen or plumbing facilities.
Other housing problems: overcrowding (1.01 or more persons per room) and/or
without complete kitchen or plumbing facilities.
Elderly households: 1 or 2 person household, either person 62 years old or older.
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2004.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                   Page IV-33
           b. Persons with Disabilities
           In Escondido and elsewhere, persons with disabilities have a wide
           range of housing needs, which vary depending on the type and
           severity of the disability as well as personal preference and lifestyle.
           Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may prevent a
           person from working, restrict one‟s mobility, or make it difficult to
           care for oneself. “Barrier-free design” housing, accessibility modi-
           fications, proximity to services and transit, and group living
           opportunities represent some of the types of considerations and
           accommodations that are important in serving this group. Also,
           some residents suffer from disabilities that require living in a
           supportive or institutional setting.
           The 2010 Census did not collect information on disability.
           According to 2008-2010 ACS data, approximately 10 percent of
           Escondido residents had a disability. The ACS also tallied the
           number of disabilities by type for residents with one or more
           disabilities. Among the disabilities tallied, cognitive, ambulatory,
           and independent living difficulties were almost equally prevalent
           Figure IV-21.
                                               Figrue IV-21
                      Disabilities Tallied by Age and Type (2008-2010)
                                               Age 5 to     Age 18
                     Disability Type                               Age 65+  Total
                                                   17        to 64
            With a hearing difficulty            18.0%       6.8%   14.1%  11.5%
            With a vision difficulty             16.1%       9.3%    9.8%   9.8%
            With a cognitive difficulty          25.7%      21.8%   17.9%  19.6%
            With an ambulatory difficulty        15.8%      24.0%   22.4%  22.8%
            With a self-care difficulty          24.4%      12.5%   14.0%  13.8%
            With an independent living
            difficulty                              --      25.6%   21.7%  22.5%
            Total Disabled Persons                971       12,481  20,347 33,799
            Note: A person can have multiple disabilities.
            Source: Bureau of the Census, 2008-2010 ACS.
           Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination –
           significantly limit the supply of housing available to households of
           persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need for
           persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs.
           Most single-family homes are inaccessible to people with mobility
           and sensory limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to widened
           doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered
           countertops, and other features necessary for accessibility.
Page IV-34                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

Location of housing is also an important factor for many persons
with disabilities, as they often rely upon public transportation to
travel to necessary services and shops. “Barrier free design”
housing, accessibility modifications, proximity to services and
transit, and group living opportunities are important in serving this
group. Incorporating barrier-free design in all new multi-family
housing is especially important to provide the widest range of
choices for the disabled.
Housing advocacy groups report that people with disabilities are
often the victims of discrimination in the home buying market.
People with disabilities, whether they work or receive disability
income are often perceived to be a greater financial risk than
persons without disabilities with identical income amounts. The
2000 Census reported that 15 percent of persons with disabilities in
Escondido were living below the poverty level. It also estimated
that 30 percent of people with disabilities between the ages of 16
and 64 years in the City were not employed.
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element
discuss the housing needs of persons with developmental disa-
bilities. As defined by federal law, “developmental disability”
means a severe, chronic disability of an individual that:
      Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or
         combination of mental and physical impairments;
      Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
      Is likely to continue indefinitely;
      Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more
         of the following areas of major life activity: self-care;
         receptive and expressive language; learning; mobility; self-
         direction; capacity for independent living; or economic self-
         sufficiency;
                                                                             „Daybreak Grove‟ was com-
      Reflects the individual‟s need for a combination and             pleted in 1993 and consists of 13
         sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic services,   townhouse style housing units for
         individualized supports, or other forms of assistance that are    low-income families. The com-
         of lifelong or extended duration and are individually             plex features a large multi-use
         planned and coordinated.                                          courtyard, children‟s play areas
                                                                             and vegetable gardens, sur-
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According            rounded by one and two-story
                                                                        town-house units. All parking is in
to the U.S. Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an
                                                                         the rear of the site and accessed
accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can be          by a one-way drive at the site‟s
defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This equates to       perimeter. Units have individual
2,158 persons in the City of Escondido with developmental                 front yards and porches, interior
disabilities based on the 2010 Census population.                             courts, and loft bedrooms.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                              Page IV-35

           The San Diego Regional Center, which provides services for per-
           sons with developmental disabilities, publishes client statistics for
           its four area offices. The City of Escondido is served by the North
           County office in San Marcos. As of January 2011, the North
           County office serves 2,774 persons. Escondido‟s population
           represents about 16 percent of the North County population.
           Therefore, it can be generally estimated that about 445 clients
           served by the North County area office of the Regional Center are
           Escondido residents.
           Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work inde-
           pendently within a conventional housing environment. More
           severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
           where supervision is provided. The most severely affected indi-
           viduals may require an institutional environment where medical
           attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
           disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive
           housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the
           person‟s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
           independence as an adult.
           c. Large Households
           Large households are defined as those consisting of five or more
           members. These households comprise a special need group because
           of the often limited supply of adequately sized and affordable
           housing units in a community. To save for other basic necessities
           such as food, clothing and medical care, it is common for lower
           income large households to reside in smaller units, which frequently
           results in overcrowding and can accelerate the deterioration of
           housing.
           The City had 2,683 large households in 1990, comprising about
           seven percent of the City‟s total households. The percentage more
           than doubled by the following decade. The 2000 Census data
           indicated that there were 8,111 households with five or more
           members, which equates to approximately 19 percent of the City‟s
           households. By the 2010 Census, the number of large households
           increased to 9,410, almost 21 percent of all households in the City.
           Figure IV-22 compares the number of large households in
           Escondido to that in the region as a whole. In 2010, 21 percent of
           households in Escondido consisted of five or more persons, com-
           pared to 14 percent region wide. Renter-households represented the
           majority (58 percent) of all large households.
Page IV-36                                  Escondido General Plan Housing

                                  Figure IV-22
                        Large Households (2010)
                                Persons in Household         Total
    Jurisdiction
                             5             6         7+   Households
Escondido                  4,394         2,313     2,703     9,410
Percent of Total           9.7%          5.1%       5.9%     20.7%
San Diego Region          80,185        36,149     32,447   148,781
Percent of Total           7.4%          3.3%       3.0%     13.7%
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census.
As shown in Figure IV-23, a greater percentage of larger house-
holds had housing problems than all households (47 percent) in
2000. Housing problems can be defined as cost burden (over-
payment) greater than 30 percent of income and/or overcrowding
and/or without complete kitchen or plumbing facilities. Renter-
occupied large households (as a group) tend to have more housing
problems than owner-occupied large households. The majority of
renter-occupied large households (86 percent) had one or more
housing problems, while more than half of larger owner-occupied
households (60 percent) had one or more housing problems.
                                                                     A former trailer park on Escondido
                                                                      Boulevard containing 64 spaces
                                                                     and 6 dilapidated apartment units
                                                                     was transformed into „Via Roble,‟
                                                                     a vibrant mixed-use development
                                                                         containing 10 single-family
                                                                      townhomes, 9 shopkeeper units
                                                                        and 72 affordable rental units
                                                                               pictured at left
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                         Page IV-37

                                                 Figure IV-23
                  Large Households by Tenure and Income Level (2000)
                                             Renters                    Owners
           Household by Type,            Large                      Large               Total
            Income, & Housing           Related      Total         Related    Total
                  Problem                                                           Households
                                      (5 or more Renters (5 or more Owners
                                      members)                  members)
            Household Income
                                           843       3,552            115     1,184     4,736
                 <=30% AMI
                 % with any
                                         99.1%       87.8%          87.0%    78.9%     85.6%
              housing problems
           % Cost Burden >30%            90.7%       84.8%          73.9%    77.6%     83.0%
           % Cost Burden >50%            70.0%       73.1%          73.9%    54.9%     68.5%
            Household Income
                                           985       4,298            258     1,705     6,003
             >30 to <=50% AMI
                 % with any
                                         94.4%       91.6%          98.4%    62.8%     83.4%
              housing problems
           % Cost Burden >30%            65.0%       80.3%          88.8%    60.0%     74.6%
           % Cost Burden >50%            10.7%       31.5%          54.3%    32.8%     31.9%
            Household Income
                                         1,240       5,077            674     3,782     8,859
             >50 to <=80% AMI
                 % with any
                                         90.3%       70.7%          86.1%    52.3%     62.8%
              housing problems
           % Cost Burden >30%            16.9%       43.2%          60.8%    45.7%     44.3%
           % Cost Burden >50%             0.8%        5.3%          17.1%    17.0%     10.3%
            Household Income
                                         1,390       7,479          2,580    16,670    24,149
                 >80% AMI
                 % with any
                                         67.3%       25.6%          47.7%    24.9%     25.1%
              housing problems
           % Cost Burden >30%             1.4%        7.0%          18.2%    18.8%     15.2%
           % Cost Burden >50%             0.0%        1.4%           2.7%     2.5%      2.1%
             Total Households            4,458      20,406          3,627    23,341    43,747
                 % with any
                                         85.7%       61.5%          59.7%    34.8%     47.3%
              housing problems
           % Cost Burden >30%            36.7%       45.0%          32.9%    29.2%     36.5%
           % Cost Burden >50%            15.8%       21.2%          11.3%     9.7%     15.1%
           Note: Totals may not match other Census 2000 products due to rounding.
           Any housing problems: cost burden greater than 30% of income and/or overcrowding
           and/or without complete kitchen or plumbing facilities.
           Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2004.
Page IV-38                                              Escondido General Plan Housing
d. Single Parent Households
Single-parent families, particularly female-headed families with
children, often require special consideration and assistance because
of their greater need for affordable housing and accessible day care,
health care, and other supportive services. Female-headed families
with children are considered a vulnerable group because they must
balance the needs of their children with work responsibilities, often
while earning limited incomes.
Figure IV-24 shows that in 2010, Escondido had 5,007 single-
parent households (11 percent of all households). Of these, the
majority (67 percent) were female-headed households. In com-
parison, less than nine percent of all County households were
single-parent households, but 72 percent of these households
were female-headed households
                                   Figure IV-24
                    Single Parent Households (2010)
                                                            Below Poverty
                                                    Percent
                         Single Percent Female                     Percent
               Total                                 Single Female
                         Parent Total Headed                       Female
                H.H.                                Parent Headed
                          H.H.      H.H.      H.H.                 Headed
                                                      H.H.   H.H.
                                                                     H.H.
Escondido     45,484      5,007    11.0%      3,360  67.1%   1,102  33.7%
SD Region 1,086,865 94,380          8.7%     68,123  72.2%  22,804  29.1%
H.H = Households
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census
e. Residents Living Below Poverty
Female-headed families are particularly affected by poverty
disproportionately. The 2010 Census does not contain information
on economic characteristics. In 2000, 13 percent of the City‟s total
residents (17,759 persons) were living in poverty. Approximately
34 percent of female-headed households with children, however,
had incomes below the poverty level. The 2005-2009 ACS reports
that 14 percent of the City‟s population and 29 percent of female-
headed families were living below the poverty level.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                           Page IV-39

                                      f. Homeless
                                      Throughout the San Diego region and country, homelessness has
                                      become an increasingly important issue. Factors contributing to the
                                      rise in homelessness include a lack of housing affordable to low and
                                      moderate income persons, increases in the number of persons
                                      whose incomes fall below the poverty level, reductions in public
                                      subsidies to the poor, and the de-institutionalization of the mentally
                                      ill.
                                      State law (Section 65583(1) (6)) mandates that municipalities
                                      address the special needs of homeless persons within their
                                      jurisdictional boundaries. “Homelessness” as defined by the U.S.
                                      Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), describes
                                      an individual (not imprisoned or otherwise detained) who:
                                            Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence;
                                               and
                                            Has a primary nighttime residence that is:
                                            A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed
                                               to provide temporary living accommodations (including
                                               welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing
                                               for the mentally ill);
                                            An institution that provides a temporary residence for
                                               individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
                                            A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily
                                               used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human
                                               beings.
   „Las Casitas II‟ is a transitional
     housing project completed in     This definition does not include persons living in substandard
   1999 that involved the rehabili-   housing, (unless it has been officially condemned); persons living in
 tation of eight, two-bedroom units   overcrowded housing (for example, doubled up with others),
  for very low-income households.     persons being discharged from mental health facilities (unless the
   The units have a small, fenced     person was homeless when entering and is considered to be
  front yard, a central courtyard, a  homeless at discharge), or persons who may be at risk of home-
    laundry building, and covered     lessness (for example, living temporarily with family or friends.)
    parking. The location is within
     walking distance to local bus    The Regional Task Force on the Homeless (RTFH) is San Diego
    service, schools, markets and
                                      County‟s leading resource for information on issues of home-
    churches. The project‟s small
    scale fits in with the neighbor-  lessness. Established in 1985, the Task Force promotes a regional
   hood‟s homes and small apart-      approach as the best solution to ending homelessness in San Diego
 ment buildings. Las Casitas II will  County. The Task Force is a public/private effort to build a base of
  remain affordable for a minimum     understanding about the multiple causes and conditions of home-
     of 40 years from its opening.    lessness.
Page IV-40                                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

According to the Task Force, the San Diego region‟s homeless
population can be divided into two general groups: (1) urban
homeless, and (2) rural homeless, including farm workers and day
laborers who primarily occupy the hillsides, canyons and fields of
the northern regions of the county. It is important to recognize that
homeless individuals may fall into more than one category (for
example, a homeless individual may be a veteran and a substance
abuser), making it difficult to accurately quantify and categorize the
homeless.
Since the homeless population is very difficult to quantify, Census
information on homeless populations is often unreliable, due to the
difficulty of efficiently counting a population without permanent
residences. The Task Force compiles data from a physical Point-In-
Time (PIT) count of sheltered (emergency and transitional) and
street homeless persons. The 2011 Count was conducted on January
28, 2011 and the results are shown in Figure IV-25. Oceanside,
Escondido, and Vista had the largest homeless populations of the
North County cities. Escondido supports the Regional Winter
Shelter program with CDBG funds. For FY 2011-12, approxi-
mately $33,000 was allocated to the program.
                                   Figure IV-25
            Homelessness in North County Cities (2011)
     Jurisdiction           Sheltered          Unsheltered   Total
 Carlsbad                       62                  21         83
 Escondido                     352                 115        467
 Encinitas                      50                 134        184
 Oceanside                     375                  77        452
 Poway                           0                  15         15
 San Marcos                      0                   1         1
 Vista                         351                  80        431
 San Diego Region             4,981               4,039      9,020
 Source: Regional Housing Task Force on the Homeless (2011).
g. Military Personnel
The military population‟s influence on the demand for housing
takes two forms: (a) the existing service households trying to find
housing; and (b) the former (either retirement or non-retirement
separations) service households trying to find housing. The San
Diego region is home to a disproportionate share of the State's and
the nation‟s military personnel. According to the 2005-2009 ACS,
52 percent of California‟s 139,269 uniformed military personnel
were stationed in the San Diego region, and six percent of the
nation‟s 1.1 million armed forces were located here.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                       Page IV-41

                                    The greatest concentration of military personnel to the overall labor
                                    force in the region is found in Coronado, home to Naval Air Station
                                    North Island. Almost one out of every two members of Coronado‟s
                                    total labor force is in the military. Other areas with relatively high
                                    concentrations of military personnel are the City of National City
                                    and the unincorporated area. However, the City of San Diego has
                                    the largest number of people in the armed forces (28,952), ac-
                                    counting for about 40 percent of the region‟s enlisted military
                                    personnel. The existing military family housing is scattered across
                                    the region, and some communities, such as Escondido, have
                                    substantial portions of their housing stock occupied by military
                                    families.
                                    h. Student Housing Need
                                    Student housing is considered a factor that affects housing avail-
                                    ability. Although students may produce only temporary housing
                                    need, the impact upon housing demand and post-study residence is
                                    critical in the immediate university areas. San Diego State Univer-
                                    sity, the largest university in the region, has an enrollment of 30,000
                                    students as of the fall of 2010, but only provides housing for 3,433
                                    students on campus. The University of San Diego houses 2,550
                                    students on campus for a student enrollment of 7,800. The
                                    University of California at San Diego provides on-campus housing
                                    for about 10,000 students for a student enrollment of 27,400. Other
                                    smaller universities and junior colleges in the County create similar
                                    housing problems. For example, the location of California State
                                    University San Marcos has had some impact on local housing, due
                                    to its location a few miles west of Escondido.
                                    Typically, students are low income and are, therefore, impacted by
                                    a lack of affordable housing, especially within easy commuting
                                    distance from campus. They often seek shared housing situations to
                                    decrease expense, and can be assisted through roommate referral
                                    services offered on and off campus. The lack of affordable housing
                                    also influences choices students make after graduation which can
                                    have a detrimental effect on the region's economy. The recent
                                    graduates provide a specialized pool of skilled labor that is vital to
                                    the region; however, the lack of affordable housing often leads to
                                    their departure from the area.
   California State University, San
   Marcos student dorms provide
     housing for a portion of the
    university‟s enrollment needs
 requiring students to seek housing
    in surrounding communities,
         including Escondido
Page IV-42                                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

i. Farm Workers
Farm workers are defined as those households whose wage earners
make their living through seasonal agricultural work and who move
with the seasons to different farming areas or communities. Per-
manent residents, who work in agriculture doing similar work, but
who live in Escondido the entire year, are included in the City‟s es-
timates of households needing assistance due to affordability.
However, the undocumented immigrant and migrant worker form a
substantial part of the farm worker population. The ability to gather
information about this segment of the farm worker population is
limited because they are so mobile and reluctant to participate in
any survey.
Due to the high cost of housing and low wages, a significant
number of migrant farm workers have difficulty finding affordable,
safe and sanitary housing. According to the State Employment
Development Department, the average farm worker earned between
$19,000 and $30,000 annually.3 This limited income is exacerbated
by their tenuous and/or seasonal employment status.
The housing needs of farm workers are difficult to quantify due to
the fear of job loss and the fear of authority. Thus, farm workers are
given low priority when addressing housing needs, and often
receive the least hospitable housing. The San Diego County
Regional Task Force on the Homeless estimates that there are at
least 2,300 farm workers and migrant day laborers who currently
experience homelessness in the San Diego region.
The 2000 Census provided a few indicators of the potential farm
worker population. The 2000 Census revealed that approximately
1,052 individuals in Escondido were employed in the agriculture,
forestry, and mining industries. More recent estimates for the num-
ber of farm workers, however, vary depending upon the different
growing seasons. The numbers can change quickly as more work
becomes available. This population remains highly migratory,
following the work as it becomes available and even returning
home for short periods during the off season. The number of
encampments located throughout the County has become very
difficult to estimate because encampments move frequently and are
now much smaller than in the past.
3 State Employment Development Department, Occupational Employment (May 2009)
and Wage Data (1st Quarter, 2010).
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                             Page IV-43

                                    It is estimated that there are between 100 and 150 farm worker
                                    camps located throughout the San Diego region, primarily in rural
                                    areas. These encampments range in size from a few people to a few
                                    hundred and are frequently found in fields, hillsides, canyons,
                                    ravines, and riverbeds, often on the edge of their employer‟s
                                    property. Some workers reside in severely overcrowded dwellings,
                                    in packing buildings, or in storage sheds. Because camps tend to be
                                    in remote locations, this population is often under-counted. Most
                                    farm workers and day laborers have moved from living inside the
                                    local jurisdictions boundary lines to just outside them in the
                                    unincorporated areas. The City of Escondido recognizes the needs
                                    of farm workers and allows housing to be partially provided
                                    through provisions in the Zoning Ordinance. The City is one of a
                                    few which allows, as a permitted use in agricultural and estate
                                    residential zones, living quarters for persons employed on the
                                    premises in conjunction with authorized agricultural uses.
      „Eucalyptus View,‟ built in
   2001, provides homeowner-
     ship as a limited-equity co-
     operative. The initial share
   prices are equivalent to what
     is typically required for rent
      and security deposits for a
    rental unit. Monthly housing
     payments are affordable to
      households with less than
  50%-60% of the Area Median
  Income (AMI). Of the 24 units,
      eight are available to farm
   worker households. The resi-
   dents can gain several bene-
    fits from cooperative owner-
     ship such as the security of
  long-term affordability and the   The City completed the development of eight units for farm
   modest build-up of the equity    workers as part of a 24-unit affordable housing complex for low
   down payment. The needs of       income households in 2001. The project is located at 1801–1821
     families with small children   South Escondido Boulevard and is called Eucalyptus View
  were a prime design consider-
                                    Cooperative Apartments. The development provides 23 units of
  ation. The units have separate
      exterior entries (front and   affordable housing to families earning less than 50 percent of the
   back) and individual porches     area median income. The unit mix includes four one-bedroom units,
      looking out onto the large    11 two-bedroom units and eight three-bedroom units. As a limited-
    interior courtyard, for child‟s equity cooperative, Eucalyptus View provides a form of home-
  play and community activities.    ownership. The initial share prices are equivalent to what is
   The development also has a       typically required for rent and security deposits for a rental unit.
       laundry facility, computer   Long-term affordability is guaranteed and resale prices are limited
    center, and onsite daycare.     to a percentage of annual increases in the equity investment.
Page IV-44                                                           Escondido General Plan Housing

H. Housing Stock Characteristics
A community‟s housing stock is defined as the collection of all
housing units located within the jurisdiction. The characteristics of
the housing stock, including growth, type, age and condition,
tenure, vacancy rates, housing costs, and affordability are important
in determining the housing needs for the community. This section
details the housing stock characteristics of Escondido to identify
how well the current housing stock meets the needs of current and
future residents of the City.
1. Housing Growth
From 1980 to 1989, the City‟s housing stock grew by 55 percent
(14,552 units) and the population grew by 54 percent. After 1989,
the figures changed dramatically. During the next 15 years (1989 to
2003), the housing stock only grew by 11 percent (5,077 units),
while the population grew by 27 percent. In the late 80s and early
90s the City implemented several growth management policies that         A former trailer park on
dramatically limited the number of units that could be built each        Escondido Boulevard
year in order to ensure the provision of adequate facilities and      containing 64 spaces and 6
services prior to development of future housing stock. The decrease   dilapidated apartment units
in housing production also occurred as a result of the recession.      was transformed into „Via
While there were building permits available to be pulled for units in Roble,‟ a vibrant mixed-use
some of the large subdivisions, developers chose not to build due to  development containing 10
                                                                      single-family townhomes, 9
the decline in the market.
                                                                       shopkeeper units and 72
                                                                         affordable rental units.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                       Page IV-45

           The decrease in housing production between 1990 and 2000 was
           also countywide. While several jurisdictions experienced large
           increases in their housing stock, such as Carlsbad (24 percent) and
           Oceanside (17 percent), others jurisdictions, including Escondido,
           experienced only moderate increases, comparable to countywide
           average. Figure IV-26 shows that between 2000 and 2010,
           Escondido‟s housing stock increased at less than seven percent,
           below the countywide average and significantly below the nearby
           Carlsbad and San Marcos, where housing growth exceeded 32
           percent and 52 percent, respectively.
                                                Figure IV-26
                              Housing Unit Growth (1990 and 2010)
                                                                         Percent Change
              Jurisdiction         1990        2000          2010      1990-        2000-
                                                                        2000         2010
           Carlsbad               27,235    33,812         44,673    24.1%        32.1%
           Encinitas              22,123    23,829         25,740    7.7%         8.0%
           Escondido              42,040    45,050         48,044    7.2%         6.6%
           Oceanside              51,105    59,583         64,435    16.6%        8.1%
           Poway                  14,386    15,714         16,715    9.2%         6.4%
           San Marcos             14,476    18,862         28,641    30.3%        51.8%
           Vista                  27,418    29,814         30,986    8.7%         3.9%
           San Diego
                                  946,240   1,040,149      1,164,786 9.9%         12.0%
           Region
           Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Censuses.
           2. Projected Housing Units
           Figure IV-27 shows that between 2010 and 2020, Escondido is
           projected to gain five percent in housing stock. Region-wide,
           approximately eight percent more units will be added to the housing
           stock. Between 2010 and 2030, Escondido will experience an
           increase of ten percent in housing stock and approximately 18
           percent more units will be added in the region. All of the North
           County coastal cities will have slower rates of housing growth
           compared to the region between 2010 and 2030.
Page IV-46                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

                                   Figure IV-27
                 Projected Housing Units (2010-2030)
                                                           Percent Change
                       2010
  Jurisdiction                      2020         2030     2010-       2010-
                     (Actual)
                                                           2020       2030
Carlsbad            44,673       48,100        49,851    7.7%       11.6%
Encinitas           25,740       26,328        27,882    2.3%       8.3%
Escondido           48,044       50,287        52,778    4.7%       9.9%
Oceanside           64,435       69,565        73,425    8.0%       14.0%
Poway               16,715       17,231        18,221    3.1%       9.0%
San Marcos          28,641       30,068        33,095    5.0%       15.6%
Vista               30,986       31,602        32,508    2.0%       4.9%
San Diego
                    1,164,786    1,262,488     1,369,807 8.4%       17.6%
Region
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census, & SANDAG Regionwide 2050 Forecast.
3. Housing Type
Figure IV-28 shows that in 2010, the largest percentage (48 percent)
of housing units in Escondido was single-family detached units.
Approximately 10 percent were single-family attached units, 35
percent were multi-family developments, and eight percent were
mobile homes/trailers.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                              Page IV-47
           Figure IV-29 shows that the proportion of both single-family units
           and mobile homes in Escondido is projected to decrease slightly,
           while the proportion of multi-family units is expected to increase.
           However, this figure may be misleading because SANDAG
           forecasts mobile homes by determining the region‟s mobile home
           growth rate and applying it to each jurisdiction.
                                                Figure IV-29
                       Projected Housing Unit by Type (2010-2030)
            Housing                  % of         2020           % of        2030         % of
                        2010
             Type                    Total     (Projected)       Total    (Projected)     Total
           Single-
                       27,477       57.6%        28,423         56.5%       29,244       55.4%
           Family
           Multi-
                       16,469       34.5%        18,246         36.3%       20,012       37.9%
           Family
           Mobile
                        3,736        7.8%         3,618          7.2%        3,522        6.7%
           Homes
           Total
                       47,682      100.0%        50,287        100.0%       52,778      100.0%
           Housing
           Note: Housing type information is not available from the 2010 Census. This table
           presents 2010 estimates obtained from SANDAG and Department of Finance.
           Source: SANDAG Regionwide Forecast (2050).
           4. Housing Availability and Tenure
           Housing tenure and vacancy rates are important indicators of the
           supply and cost of housing. Housing tenure refers to whether a unit
           is owned or rented. Tenure is an important market characteristic
           because it is directly related to housing types and turnover rates.
           The tenure distribution of a community‟s housing stock can be an
           indicator of several aspects of the housing market, including the
           affordability of units, household stability and residential mobility
           among others. In most communities, tenure distribution generally
           correlates with household income, composition and age of the
           householder.
           In 2000, among the City‟s occupied housing units, approximately
           53 percent were owner-occupied, while 47 percent were renter-
           occupied (Figure IV-30). The homeownership rate for the City has
           remained relatively steady since 1990. According to the 2010
           Census, the home ownership rate in Escondido decreased to 52
           percent of the occupied units. Renter-occupied housing units made
           up almost 48 percent of the City‟s occupied housing stock.
           Approximately five percent of total housing units were vacant.
Page IV-48                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

                                   Figure IV-30
          Tenure of Occupied Housing Units (2000-2010)
                             2000 Census                 2010 Census
      Tenure
                          Number        Percent       Number        Percent
 Owner Occupied            23,308         53.2%        23,759        52.2%
 Renter Occupied           20,509         46.8%        21,725        47.8%
       Total               43,817        100.0%        45,484        100.0%
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Census
Renter-occupied households had a slightly higher average house-
hold size than owners (Figure IV-31). Approximately 58 percent of
households with five or more persons were renter- households. In
2000, average renter-household size was 3.10 persons compared to
2.93 persons per for the average owner-household. In 2010, average
renter-household size increased to 3.26 persons compared to 2.99
persons per for the average owner-household, widening the
discrepancy in average household size based on tenure.
                                   Figure IV-31
                    Household Size by Tenure (2010)
               1-4 Persons              5+ Persons                Total
          Number Percent           Number Percent         Number Percent
Owner      19,765        54.9%       3,994      42.4%      23,759       52.2%
Renter     16,309        45.1%       5,416      57.6%      21,725       47.8%
Total    36,654074      100.0%       9,410      100.0%     45,484     100.0%
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census
Vacancy rates are an important housing indicator because they
indicate the degree of choice available. High vacancy rates usually
indicate low demand and/or high supply conditions in the housing
market. Too high of a vacancy rate can be difficult for owners
trying to sell or rent. Low vacancy rates usually indicate high
demand and/or low supply conditions in the housing market. Too
low of a vacancy rate can force prices up making it more difficult
for low and moderate income households to find housing.
Vacancy rates between two to three percent are usually considered
healthy for single-family housing; and five to six percent for multi-
family housing. However, vacancy rates are not the sole indicator
of market conditions. They must be viewed in the context of all the
characteristics of the local and regional market. According to the
2010 Census, the overall vacancy rate in Escondido was 5.3
percent. Specifically, ownership housing had a vacancy rate of 2.2
percent but the rental vacancy rate was at six percent.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                              Page IV-49
                                               Additional vacancy information was obtained for fall 2011 from the
                                               San Diego County Apartment Association (SDCAA) and is shown
                                               in Figure IV-32. Vacancy rates in Escondido were similar to those
                                               in neighboring communities and the City and County of San Diego.
                                                              Figure IV-32
                                   Vacancy Rates by Community and Property Age
                                Combined
                                                           Over 25 Years            Six to 25 Years      Less Than 6 Years
                              Property Ages
     Jurisdiction
                           %      Total       #         %       Total       #   %        Total      #   %      Total     #
                        Vacant Units Vacant Vacant Units Vacant Vacant Units Vacant Vacant Units Vacant
     Escondido            4.3%     258        11      3.7%        82        3  4.5%       176       8    --      --      --
       Carlsbad           3.8%     815        31      1.2%       172        2  4.5%       643      29    --      --      --
        Del Mar           3.8%     157         6      3.8%       157        6    --        --       --   --      --      --
       Encinitas          2.3%     171         4      1.4%       142        2  8.3%        12       1  5.9%      17      1
      Oceanside           3.4%     505        17      1.7%       235        4  4.8%       270      13    --      --      --
    Solana Beach          1.5%     202         3      1.5%       202        3    --        --       --   --      --      --
  No. County Region       4.3%    4,120      176      3.8%      1,670      64  4.6%      2,433    111  5.9%      17      1
    San Diego City        3.8%    8,545      328      4.0%      3,929      156 3.8%      4,349    164  3.0%     267      8
  San Diego County        4.3%   19,915      860        --         --       --   --        --       --   --      --      --
Source: San Diego County Apartment Association Survey (Fall 2011).
                                               5. Housing Age and Condition
                                               Housing age can be an important indicator of housing condition
                                               within a community. Like any other tangible asset, housing is
                                               subject to gradual physical or technological deterioration over
                                               time. If not properly and regularly maintained, housing can
                                               deteriorate and discourage reinvestment, depress neighboring
                                               property values, and eventually impact the quality of life in a
                                               neighborhood. Many federal and state programs also use the age
                                               of housing as one factor in determining housing rehabilitation
                                               needs. Typically, housing over 30 years of age is more likely to
                                               have rehabilitation needs that may include new plumbing, roof
                                               repairs, foundation work and other repairs. Although the Censuses
                                               did not include statistics on housing condition based upon
                                               observations, they did include statistics that correlate very closely
                                               with substandard housing.
                                               The three factors most commonly used to determine housing
                                               conditions are age of housing, overcrowding, and lack of plumbing
                                               facilities. Figure IV-33 shows that in 2010 approximately 81
                                               percent of the housing stock was more than 20 years old and 53
                                               percent was over 30 years old.
Page IV-50                                                                        Escondido General Plan Housing
                                     Figure IV-33
                    Year Housing Built (1940 – 2010)
        Year Built                    Number                        Percent
     1939 or earlier                    1,068                         2.2%
       1940-1959                        4,594                         9.6%
       1960-1969                        6,517                        13.6%
       1970-1979                        13,326                       27.7%
       1980-1989                        13,343                       27.8%
       1990-2000                        6,116                        12.7%
       2000-2010                        3,080                         6.4%
          Total                         48,044                      100.0%
Note: 2010 Census has no information on age of housing units. This table provides
an estimated only, assuming the all net new units were constructed during the last ten
years. This estimate does not account for demolitions that had occurred.
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010 Censuses.
Housing that is not maintained can discourage reinvestment,
depress neighboring property values, and can negatively impact the
quality of life in a neighborhood. Improving housing is an important
goal of the City. The age of the City‟s housing stock indicates a
potential need for continued code enforcement, property main-
tenance and housing rehabilitation programs to stem housing
deterioration.
A number of housing units in Escondido are beginning to show a
need for rehabilitation. The scope of rehabilitation needed ranges
from minor to substantial. Where it is not financially feasible to
rehabilitate the units, replacement housing may be required. The
vast majority of these substandard units (units in need of repair or
replacement) are in the urbanized core of the City. However, other
areas of the City include pockets of substandard and/or deteriorating
housing stock. Although some of the units considered as sub-
standard in the Censuses have been rehabilitated, many are in the
same condition. The substandard units are broken down in the
following table:
                                     Figure IV-34
                        Substandard Units (2000)
                                                  Number              Percentage
 Lacking complete plumbing facilities               149                   0.7%
  Lacking complete kitchen facilities               356                   1.7%
  Total occupied substandard units                  505                   2.4%
         Total occupied units:                                           43,817
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2000 Census.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                       Page IV-51

                   Because substandard housing can cause serious health and safety
                   issues, physical defects should not be used as the only indicator of
                   substandard housing. The Housing Division considers housing units
                   in compliance with local building codes to be standard units. Any
                   housing unit that does not meet these requirements is considered
                   substandard. Common housing code violations make a unit unsafe
                   and/or unsanitary, including problems with electrical wiring,
                   plumbing, windows, roofs and exterior, and heating and air con-
                   ditioning systems. Escondido's substandard units are all suitable for
                   rehabilitation. The City of Escondido provides low and no interest
                   loans to eligible households for housing rehabilitation.
                   6. Housing Cost and Affordability
                   Housing costs are indicative of housing accessibility to all
                   economic segments of the community. Typically, if housing supply
                   exceeds housing demand, housing costs will fall. If housing demand
                   exceeds housing supply, housing costs will rise. This section
                   summarizes the cost and affordability of the housing stock to
                   Escondido residents.
                   Median
                   a.              HomeMarket
                        Homeownership         Sale       Prices, North County
                   from $245,000 in Escondido toCities
                   Median home prices in the North County areas of San Diego ranged
                                                       $575,000 in Encinitas (Figure IV-
                   35). Median home sale prices in Escondido dropped 15 percent
                   between   2009 $575,000
                         $555,000    and 2010, the biggest price drop among its neigh-
           $600,000
                        Median Home Sale Prices, North County
                   boring  communities.
           $500,000                                   Figure IV-35$451,250
                                                   Cities
                                            Median Home Sale Price
           $400,000                                                        $347,000
               $600,000    $555,000 $575,000                                        $295,000 $310,000
           $300,000                                   $273,000
               $500,000                    $245,000          $451,250
           $200,000
               $400,000                                               $347,000
                                                                              $295,000 $310,000
               $300,000                             $273,000
           $100,000                        $245,000
               $200,000
                 $0
               $100,000
                     $0
                                                  Median Home Price
               Source: DQ News, 2011             Median Home Price
Page IV-52                                           Escondido General Plan Housing
                              Figure IV-36
            Changes in Median Home Sale Prices (2010)
                                      2010              Percent Change
        Jurisdiction                                     in Median Sale
                          Number Sold        Price      Price 2009-2010
 Carlsbad                     1,647        $555,000           -4.1%
 Encinitas                     550         $575,000           -8.7%
 Escondido                    2,039        $245,000          -14.9%
 Oceanside                    2,438        $273,000           -7.5%
 Poway                         490         $451,250          +6.2%
 San Marcos                   1,260        $347,000           -2.5%
 Vista                        1,059        $295,000          +6.4%
 San Diego County            36,414        $310,000           -6.1%
 Source: DQ News (2011).
b. Rental Market
The primary source of information on rental costs in the San Diego
region is the San Diego County Apartment Association (SDCAA).
SDCAA conducts two surveys of rental properties per year. For the
fall 2011 survey, 6,000 surveys were sent out to rental property
owners and managers throughout San Diego County. Responses
were received from 19,915 units. Although this survey sampled a
broad variety of rental housing, it was not a scientific sampling.
                                                                        „The Terraces‟ was completed in
Figure IV-37 shows that in the fall of 2011, average monthly rents            1996 involving 190 units of
in Escondido ranged from $920 for a one-bedroom apartment to                rental housing for low-income
                                                                          families with children. The units
$1,556 for a three-bedroom apartment. Apartment rents tend to be
                                                                        are arranged in a “single-loaded”
slightly lower in Escondido than those in the County of San Diego.           formation and each unit has
                                                                           front and rear entrances. Sixty
                                                                           percent of the project is reser-
                                                                            ved for families with incomes
                                                                          below 60% of the Area Median
                                                                            Income (AMI). The remaining
                                                                            units are available to families
                                                                        whose annual incomes are 50%
                                                                             of the AMI. Shopping, public
                                                                         transportation, and other neces-
                                                                             sities are within walking dis-
                                                                             tance. Recreational features
                                                                              include three tot lots, three
                                                                         toddler pens, five passive areas
                                                                          with barbecues, a large pool, a
                                                                             children‟s wading pool and a
                                                                          whirlpool. Three separate laun-
                                                                             dry facilities and community
                                                                         center with Internet access also
                                                                                    serves the site.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                               Page IV-53

                                                Figure IV-37
                                   Average Monthly Rent (2011)
                                                        Fall        Fall      Spring  Fall
                                     Fall 2011
                         Unit                           2011       2011        2011   2010
           Zip Code             Units/Properties
                        Type                         Monthly Rent/Sq. Monthly Monthly
                                    Surveyed
                                                        Rent        Foot       Rent   Rent
            Carlsbad    Studio           48/6           $971        $2.21      $928   $932
              92008,     1 BR          214/10          $1,056       $1.82     $1,007 $1,207
              92009,
              92010,     2 BR          537/13          $1,728       $1.73     $1,572 $1,694
              92011     3+ BR            16/5          $1,563       $1.12     $1,981 $2,005
                        Studio            2/1           $564        $1.08      $800   $759
            Encinitas    1 BR            48/3          $1,296       $1.78     $1,050 $1,215
              92023,
              92024      2 BR           108/7          $1,464       $1.57     $1,271 $1,522
                        3+ BR            13/5          $2,367       $1.70     $1,907 $1,890
           Escondido    Studio            0/0             --           --        --     --
              92025,     1 BR            61/8           $920        $1.37     $1,035  $998
              90026,
              90027,     2 BR          189/19          $1,267       $1.31     $1,001 $1,147
              90029,
              90030,    3+ BR             8/7          $1,556       $1.16     $1,508 $1,530
              90033,
              90046
           Oceanside    Studio            2/2           $863        $1.59      $835   $849
              92049,     1 BR          331/14          $1,047       $1.53     $1,045 $1,079
              92050,
              92051,     2 BR          147/13          $1,489       $1.42     $1,278 $1,287
              92052,
              92054,
              92056,    3+ BR           25/14          $1,892       $1.38     $1,670 $1,623
              92057,
              92058
                        Studio            3/2           $708        $1.32        --     --
              Poway      1 BR            61/4           $966        $1.56      $977   $980
              92064
              92074      2 BR           111/5          $1,191       $1.38     $1,307 $1,288
                        3+ BR             7/2          $1,406       $1.17     $1,542 $1,669
               San      Studio            5/1          $1,010       $1.68     $1,015 $1,013
              Marcos     1 BR           192/3           $904        $1.44      $892   $898
              92069
              92073      2 BR           314/4          $1,114       $1.22     $1,078 $1,095
            92076-79    3+ BR             4/4          $2,114       $1.32     $1,797 $1,708
                        Studio           94/2           $875        $1.89      $876   $870
               Vista     1 BR           309/7          $1,098       $1.56     $1,041 $1,008
              92081
            92083-85     2 BR          621/16          $1,249       $1.39     $1,227 $1,203
                        3+ BR           163/7          $1,522       $1.30     $1,461 $1,447
            County of Studio           747/86           $899        $2.02        --     --
           San Diego     1 BR        7,247/342         $1,090       $1.66        --     --
            (including
           City of San 2 BR         10,654/533         $1,418       $1.54        --     --
              Diego)    3+ BR        1,267/268         $1,730       $1.40        --     --
           Source: San Diego County Apartment Association Survey (Fall 2011).
Page IV-54                                         Escondido General Plan Housing
c. Housing Affordability by Income Level
Housing affordability can be inferred by comparing the cost of
renting or owning a home in the City with the maximum affordable
housing costs for households at different income levels. Taken
together, this information can generally show who can afford what
size and type of housing and indicate the type of households most
likely to experience overcrowding and overpayment.
Extremely Low income Households
Extremely low income households earn 30 percent or less of the
County area median income – up to $16,500 for a one-person
household and up to $25,450 for a five-person household in 2010.
Extremely low income households cannot afford market-rate rental
or ownership housing in Escondido without assuming a cost burden.
Very Low income Households
Very low income households earn between 31 percent and 50
percent of the County area median income – up to $27,500 for a
one-person household and up to $42,400 for a five-person
household in 2010. A very low income household can generally
afford homes offered at prices between $77,000 and $104,800,
adjusting for household size. Given the costs of ownership housing
in Escondido, very low income households would not be able to
afford a home in the City, except perhaps mobile homes. Similarly,
very low income renters could not afford appropriately-sized
market-rate rental units in the City. After deductions for utilities, a
very low income household at the maximum income limit can
afford to pay approximately $617 to $946 in monthly rent,
depending on household size.
Low income Households
Low income households earn between 51 percent and 80 percent of
the County‟s area median income - up to $44,000 for a one-person
household and up to $67,850 for a five-person household in 2010.
The affordable home price for a low income household at the
maximum income limit ranges from $135,000 to $194,000. Based
on the asking prices of homes for sale in 2010 (Figure IV-36),
ownership housing would not be affordable to low income house-
holds. After deductions for utilities, a one-person low income
household could afford to pay up to $1,029 in rent per month and a
five-person low income household could afford to pay as much as
$1,582. As of spring 2010, most low income households in
Escondido would be able to find adequately sized affordable
apartment units (Figure IV-37), although the availability of such
units may be limited.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                        Page IV-55

                                     Moderate income Households
                                     Moderate income households earn between 81 percent and 120
                                     percent of the County‟s Area Median Income – up to $97,850
                                     depending on household size in 2010. The maximum affordable
                                     home price for a moderate income household is $240,000 for a one-
                                     person household and $357,000 for a five-person family.
                                     Moderate income households in Escondido would have little trouble
                                     purchasing adequately-sized homes. The maximum affordable rent
                                     payment for moderate income households is between $1,514 and
                                     $2,332 per month. Appropriately-sized market-rate rental housing is
                                     generally affordable to households in this income group.
                                     The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
                                     (HUD) conducts annual household income surveys nationwide to
                                     determine a household‟s eligibility for federal housing assistance.
                                     Based on this survey, the California Department of Housing and
                                     Community Development (HCD) developed income limits that can
                                     be used to determine the maximum price that could be affordable to
                                     households in the upper range of their respective income category.
                                     Households in the lower end of each category can afford less by
                                     comparison than those at the upper end.
                                     Figure IV-38 shows the maximum amount that a household can pay
                                     for housing each month without incurring a cost burden (over-
                                     payment). This amount can be compared to current housing asking
                                     prices (Figure IV-36) and market rental rates (Figure IV-37) to
                                     determine what types of housing opportunities a household can
                                     afford.
     „Sonoma Court‟ involved the
 acquisition and rehabilitation of a
 61-unit multi-family REO property.
 Substantial rehabilitation included
     new roofs, stucco repair and
   replacement, exterior painting,
  kitchen and bathroom remodels.
 Twenty of the two-bedroom units
    were reconfigured into three-
  bedroom units to accommodate
 larger families. The project offers
     a computer lab, after school
     homework program, and job
      training to serve residents.
Page IV-56                                                          Escondido General Plan Housing

                                           Figure IV-38
                                  Affordable Housing Cost
                             Affordable             Utilities, Taxes and
                                                                              Affordable Price
                           Housing Cost                   Insurance
 Annual Income
                                                                    Taxes/
                           Rent        Sale       Rent       Sale               Sale         Rent
                                                                   Insure.
                Extremely Low Income (30% of Area Median Income)
1-Person $16,500            $413       $413         $71     $112      $83      $38,322        $342
3-Person $21,200            $530       $530         $90     $174     $106      $43,947        $530
4-Person $23,550            $589       $589         $99     $205     $118      $46,760        $589
5-Person $25,450            $636       $636        $114     $252     $127      $45,178        $522
                     Very Low Income (50% of Area Median Income)
1-Person $27,500            $688       $688         $71     $112     $138      $76,996        $617
3-Person $35,350            $884       $884         $90     $174     $177      $93,696        $794
4-Person $39,250            $981       $981         $99     $205     $196     $101,958        $882
5-Person $42,400           $1,060     $1,060       $114     $946     $212     $104,771        $946
                         Low Income (80% of Area Median Income)
1-Person $44,000           $1,100     $1,100        $71     $112     $220     $135,007 $1,029
3-Person $56,550           $1,414     $1,414        $90     $174     $283     $168,231 $1,324
4-Person $62,800           $1,570     $1,570        $99     $205     $314     $184,755 $1,471
5-Person $67,850           $1,696     $1,696       $114     $252     $339     $194,248 $1,582
                      Median Income (100% of Area Median Income)
1-Person $52,850           $1,321     $1,541        $71     $112     $308     $197,090 $1,250
3-Person $67,950           $1,699     $1,982        $90     $174     $396     $248,127 $1,609
4-Person $75,500           $1,888     $2,202        $99     $205     $440     $273,646 $1,789
5-Person $81,550           $2,039     $2,379       $114     $252     $476     $290,200 $1,925
                    Moderate Income (120% of Area Median Income)
1-Person $63,400           $1,585     $1,849        $71     $112     $370     $240,363 $1,514
3-Person $81,550           $2,039     $2,379        $90     $174     $476     $303,911 $1,949
4-Person $90,600           $2,265     $2,643        $99     $205     $529     $335,583 $2,166
5-Person $97,850           $2,446     $2,854       $114     $252     $571     $357,058 $2,332
Source: CA Dept. of Housing and Community Development (2010) and Veronica Tam & Associates
 Assumptions: 2010 HCD income limits; 30% gross household income as affordable housing cost;
15% of monthly affordable cost for taxes and insurance; 10% down payment; and 5.5% interest rate
   for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage loan. Utilities based on San Diego County Utility Allowance
         Escondido General Plan Housing                                                            Page IV-57
           I. Affordable Housing
           State law requires that the City identify, analyze, and propose
           programs to preserve existing multi-family rental units that are
           eligible to convert to non-low-income housing uses due to
           termination of subsidy contract, mortgage prepayment, or expiring
           use restrictions during the next ten years. Thus, this at-risk housing
           analysis covers the period from January 1, 2013 through December
           31, 2023. Consistent with State law, this section identifies publicly
           assisted housing units in Escondido, analyzes their potential to
           convert to market rate housing uses, and analyzes the cost to
           preserve or replace those units.
           1. Publicly Assisted Housing
           The City of Escondido has a large inventory of publicly assisted
           rental housing affordable to lower and moderate income house-
           holds. Figure IV-39 provides a summary listing of affordable
           projects in the City. Overall, 22 projects (totaling 1,344 rental
           housing units) include affordable units. Specifically, 1,336 units are
           set aside as housing for lower and moderate income households.
           5. Preservation of At-Risk Housing
           Within the 2013-2023 “at-risk” housing analysis period, six projects
           are considered at risk of converting to market-rate housing. These
           projects offer 200 housing units, inclusive of 198 units that are
           affordable to lower income households. Among these six projects,
           three are at risk due to expiring Section 8 contracts (Escondido
           Apartments, Silvercrest Escondido, and Michalowski House). The
           other three projects (Las Casitas I, Daybreak, and Sunrise Place) are
           nonprofit-owned affordable housing and have low risk of con-
           verting to market-rate housing.
           a. Preservation and Replacement Options
           To maintain the existing affordable housing stock, the City works to
           preserve the existing assisted units or facilitate the development of
           new units. Depending on the circumstances of the at-risk projects,
           different options may be used to preserve or replace the units.
           Preservation options typically include: 1) transfer of units to non-
           profit ownership; 2) provision of rental assistance to tenants using
           other funding sources; and 3) purchase of affordability covenants.
           In terms of replacement, the most direct option is the development
           of new assisted multi-family housing units. These options are
           described below.
Page IV-58                                  Escondido General Plan Housing

                                          Figure IV-39
                    Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing Projects
                        Total Assisted Units          Funding                         Earliest
Name of Project Units                                                    Type
                               VL      L Mod           Source                       Conversion
                           Units at Risk between 2013 and 2023
Escondido Apt.                                    HUD Section 236 &                Sec. 8: 12/31/2011
                          92    91      0     0                          Family
500 N. Midway Drive                                Section 8 Contract              Sec. 236: 2/8/2046
Silvercrest Escondido                             HUD Section 202 &
                          75    74      0     0                         Seniors        4/30/2011
832 N. Juniper Street                              Section 8 Contract
Michalowski House                                 HUD Section 811 &
                           6     6      0     0                         Disabled       8/31/2013
11337 Caprice Road                                 Section 8 Contract
Las Casitas I                                            HOME           Family/
                           6     0      6     0                                           2014
1203 S. Maple                                            TCAC         Transitional
Daybreak                                                  RDA
                          13     0     13     0                          Family         12/2021
1256 E. Washington                                       TCAC
Sunrise Place                                             RDA
                           8     0      8     0                          Family         12/2021
1245 E. Grand Ave                                        TCAC
Subtotal                 200   171    27      0
                                   Units at Risk After 2023
Orange Place Co-Op
                          32     0     31     0          TCAC            Family           2027
1500 S. Orange Place
Southwest Summit
                          91     0     89     0          TCAC            Family           2029
460 E. Washington
Aster/Genesis                                             RDA
                           8     8      0     0                          Family          6/2034
518-532 Aster St.                                    State HOME
Eucalyptus View
                          24     0     24     0          TCAC            Family           2037
1805 S. Escondido Blvd.
Sonoma Court                                         RDA, TCAC,
                          60    27     33     0                          Family          8/2037
508 W Mission Ave.                                   State HOME
Las Casitas II                                                          Family/
                           8     0      8     0      RDA, HOME                           3/2039
805-811 E. Washington                                                 transitional
The Terraces
                         190    76    114     0       TCAC, DRA          Family         12/2048
1301 Morning View Dr.
Emerald Gardens                                      HOME, RDA,
                          16     8      8     0                          Family          5/2053
425 W 11th Ave                                       CDBG, TCAC
Cobblestone
                          44     9     34     1       RDA, TCAC          Family         11/2055
360 E. Washington
Cypress Cove
                         200    20    178     0       RDA, TCAC          Family           2055
260 North Midway
Juniper Senior Village                            RDA, HOME, FHLB
                          61    51      9     0                         Seniors         12/2065
215 E. Washington                                  TCAC, HCD Infill
Las Ventanas
                          80     8     52    20       RDA, TCAC          Family          6/2061
1404-60 S. Escondido B.
Villa Escondido
                         112     0    112     0          TCAC           Seniors           2065
511 E. Grand Ave.
Windsor Gardens
                         132    65     65     2           RDA           Seniors        11/8/2065
1600 W. 9th Ave.
Orange Place
                          15     3     12     0      HOME, RDA           Family          6/2068
1611 S. Orange Place
Via Roble
                          71    24     25    22       RDA, TCAC          Family          6/2068
1553 S. Escondido
Subtotal                1,144 299    794     45            ---             ---             ---
Total                   1,344 470    821     45            ---             ---             ---
Source: City of Escondido.
            Escondido General Plan Housing                                                            Page IV-59
           Transfer of Ownership
           Transferring ownership of an at-risk project to a non-profit housing
           provider is generally one of the least costly ways to ensure that the
           at-risk units remain affordable for the long term. By transferring
           property ownership to a non-profit organization, low income restric-
           tions can be secured and the project would become potentially
           eligible for a greater range of governmental assistance. Only one of
           the six at-risk projects is not already owned by nonprofit agencies –
           the 92-unit Escondido Apartments. The estimated market value for
           the Escondido Apartments is provided in Figure IV-40.
                                                    Figure IV-40
                             Market Value of At-Risk Housing Units
                     Escondido Apartments
           One-Bedroom Units                                                       92
           Annual Operating Cost                                                $248,400
           Gross Annual Income                                                 $1,191,973
           Net Annual Income                                                    $943,573
           Market Value                                                       $11,794,658
           Market value for project is estimated with the following assumptions:
           1. Average market rent based on Fair Market Rents established by HUD. One-
              bedroom unit = $1,149 (higher than the average rent for a one-bedroom unit from
              2010 rent survey by the San Diego County Apartments Association).
           2. Average bedroom size for one-bedroom assumed at 600 square feet.
           3. Annual income is based on 91 units (with one manager’s unit) and 5% vacancy rate
           4. Annual operating expenses per square foot = $4.50
           5. Market value = Annual net project income*multiplication factor
           6. Multiplication factor for a building in good condition is 12.5.
           Current market value for the units is estimated on the basis of the
           project‟s potential annual income, and operating and maintenance
           expenses. As indicated below, the estimated market value of
           Escondido Apartments is $11.8 million. (This estimate is provided
           for the purpose of comparison and understanding the magnitude of
           costs involved and does not represent the precise market value of
           this project. The actual market value at time of sale will depend on
           market and property conditions, lease-out/turnover rates, among
           other factors.)
           Rental Assistance
           Tenant-based rent subsidies could be used to preserve the
           affordability of housing. Similar to Section 8 vouchers, the City,
           through a variety of potential funding sources, could provide rent
           subsidies to tenants of at-risk units. The level of the subsidy
           required to preserve the at-risk units is estimated to equal the Fair
           Market Rent (FMR) for a unit minus the housing cost affordable by
           a lower income household.
Page IV-60                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

Figure IV-41 estimates the rent subsidies required to preserve the
affordability of the 198 at-risk units. Based on the estimates and
assumptions shown in this table, approximately $930,735 in rent
subsidies would be required annually.
                                       Figure IV-41
                           Rental Subsidies Required
                                                        Affordable
                    Fair     House- Household                        Monthly     Total
 Unit     Total                                             Cost
                   Market      hold       Annual                     per Unit Monthly
 Size     Units                                            (Minus
                    Rent       Size       Income                     Subsidy Subsidy
                                                          Utilities)
                              Very Low Income (50% AMI)
1-BR       171     $1,149        2        $31,400           $730       $419     $71,649
                                Low Income (81% AMI)
2-BR        14     $1,406        3        $56,550          $1,344       $62       $872
3-BR        13     $1,999        5        $67,850          $1,611      $388      $5,040
Total      198       ---        ---          ---              ---        ---    $77,561
Notes:
Fair Market Rents (FMR) are determined by HUD.
San Diego County 2010 Area Median Household Income (AMI) limits set by the California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
Affordable cost = 30% of household income minus utility allowance.
Purchase of Affordability Covenants
Another option to preserve the affordability of the at-risk project
is to provide an incentive package to the owner to maintain the
project as affordable housing. Incentives could include writing
down the interest rate on the remaining loan balance, providing a
lump-sum payment, and/or supplementing the rents to market
levels. The feasibility and cost of this option depends on whether
the complex is too highly leveraged and interest on the owner‟s
part to utilize the incentives found in this option. By providing
lump sum financial incentives or ongoing subsides in rents or
reduced mortgage interest rates to the owner, the City could
ensure that some or all of the units remain affordable.
Construction of Replacement Units
The construction of new low income housing units is a means of
replacing the at-risk units should they be converted to market-
rate units. The cost of developing housing depends upon a
variety of factors, including density, size of the units (i.e. square
footage and number of bedrooms), location, land costs, and type
of construction.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-61

                                   Based on proformas of recent affordable housing projects, the
                                   average development cost (including land) for a senior unit is
                                   $258,000 and for a family unit is $478,000. Therefore, to replace
                                   the 80 senior/disabled units and 112 family units would require a
                                   total development cost of $74.2 million.
                                   Cost Comparisons
                                    The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the
                                   at-risk units under various options. Because different projects have
                                   different circumstances and therefore different options available, the
                                   direct comparison would not be appropriate. In general, providing
                                   additional incentives/subsidies to extend the affordability covenant
                                   would require the least funding over the long run, whereas the
                                   construction of new units would be the most costly option. Over the
                                   short term, providing rent subsidies would be least costly but this
                                   option does not guarantee the long-term affordability of the units.
                                   Resources for Preservation
                                   Preservation of at-risk housing requires not only financial resources
                                   but also administrative capacity of nonprofit organizations. These
                                   resources are discussed in detail later in this Housing Element in the
                                   “Housing Resources” section.
  „Orangewood‟ was coordinated
       by San Diego Habitat for
   Humanity (SDHFH) who, with
  partner families, completed the
   project in 2007. Orangewood
  involves seven, three-bedroom
   units with ownership restricted
    to first-time homebuyers with
        annual gross household
     incomes that do not exceed
       50% of the Area Median
     Income (AMI). Deed restric-
     tions provide for a minimum
     45-year affordability period.
   SDHFH holds the “first right of
        refusal” on all units and
      enforces a recorded Equity
     Share Agreement to ensure
       affordability is sustained.
                     .
Page IV-62                                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

J. Housing Constraints
Actual or potential constraints to the provision of housing affect the
development of new housing and the maintenance of existing units
for all income levels. Governmental and non-governmental con-
straints in Escondido are similar to those in other jurisdictions in the
region and are discussed below. One of the most, if not the most,
significant and difficult constraints to housing in Escondido and
elsewhere in the San Diego region is the high cost of land. This
section describes various governmental, market, and environmental
constraints on the development of housing that meets the needs of
all economic segments of Escondido population.
1. Market Influences
Market constraints significantly affect the cost of housing in
Escondido, and can pose barriers to housing production and af-
                                                                              Bellview Trailer Park on
fordability. These constraints include the availability and cost of
                                                                             Escondido Boulevard was
land for residential development, the demand for housing, financing      transformed into „Las Ventanas,‟
and lending, construction costs, development fees, and neighbor-         a vibrant mixed-use development
hood opposition which can make it expensive for developers to              involving 82 affordable rental
build affordable housing. The following highlights the primary              units and 6,800 SF of retail
market factors that affect the production of housing in Escondido.                    space.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                            Page IV-63

           2. Economic Factors
           Market forces on the economy and the trickle down effects on the
           construction industry can act as a barrier to housing construction
           and especially to affordable housing construction. California‟s
           housing market peaked in the summer of 2005 when a dramatic
           increase in the State‟s housing supply was coupled with low interest
           rates. The period between 2006 and 2009, however, reflects a time
           of significant change as the lending market collapsed and home
           prices saw significant decreases. Double-digit decreases in median
           sale prices were recorded throughout the State. These lower-than-
           normal home prices allowed for a large increase in the number of
           homes sold initially until the availability of credit became in-
           creasingly limited. As such, housing production in the last few years
           has been limited while the need for affordable housing increased
           along with high unemployment rates and foreclosure rates.
           6. Land and Construction Costs
           Raw land and improvements costs comprise approximately 40
           percent of the total development costs of a residential dwelling.
           Land prices in Escondido have risen significantly in recent years.
           However, land costs in Escondido are generally less when
           compared to land costs in many other areas of San Diego County.
           Furthermore, raw land values must be considered in relation to costs
           rising from the provision of adequate facilities and services, and the
           City's efforts to encourage redevelopment and rehabilitation will
           help lower costs where facilities and services are already provided.
           Basic construction costs for residential developments have rapidly
           increased, and together with land prices, have increased the cost of
           housing, making homeownership unattainable for many house-
           holds. These costs are relatively constant over the region. The basic
           components of labor and material do not fluctuate much by area.
           Site preparation costs can be substantial, but the variations are more
           a function of the site, than of the jurisdiction.
           7. Availability of Financing
           The availability of financing affects a person‟s ability to purchase or
           improve a home. Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
           (HMDA), lending institutions must disclose information on the
           disposition of loan applications by the income, gender, and race of
           the applicants involving home purchases, improvements and
           refinancing, whether financed at market rate or with government
           assistance.
Page IV-64                                   Escondido General Plan Housing

  The disposition of loan applications submitted to financial
  institutions in 2009 for home purchase, refinance, and home
  improvement loans in Escondido is summarized in Figure IV-42.
  The data for Escondido was compiled by census tract and
  aggregated to the area that generally approximates the City‟s
  boundaries. Included is information on loan applications that were
  approved and originated, approved but not accepted by the
  applicant, denied, withdrawn by the applicant, or incomplete.
                                          Figure IV-42
                       Disposition of Home Loans (2009)
                                          Total        Percent Percent Percent
           Loan Type
                                       Applicants Approved     Denied   Other
Government-Backed Purchase                 1,371        72.6%   13.6%   13.9%
Conventional Purchase                      1,214        69.4%   18.5%   12.1%
Refinance                                  3,531        61.9%   21.1%   16.9%
Home Improvement                            151         60.9%   25.8%   13.2%
Total                                      6,267        65.7%   19.1%   15.2%
Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
“Percent Other” includes withdrawn or incomplete applications
  a. Home Purchase Loans
  A total of 1,214 households applied for conventional loans to
  purchase homes in Escondido in 2009. The overall loan approval
  rate was 69 percent and 19 percent of applications were denied. In
  comparison, 71 percent of conventional home loan applications
  were approved in San Diego County. Approximately 1,371 home
  purchase applications were submitted in Escondido through
  government-backed loans (for example, FHA, VA) in 2009; 73
  percent of these applications approved. For government-backed
  loans, the approval rate for the San Diego County was 74 percent.
  In general, access to home purchase financing in Escondido reflects
  countywide trends.
  b. Refinance Loans
  The majority of loan applications submitted by Escondido residents
  in 2009 were for refinancing their existing home loans (3,531
  applications). About 62 percent of these applications were
  approved, while 21 percent were denied. The recent credit crisis that
  began in 2007, and heightened in 2008, has likely caused
  refinancing activities to fall recently. In the San Diego County, 65
  percent of refinancing applications were approved.
    Escondido General Plan Housing                                             Page IV-65

                                     c. Home Improvement Loans
                                     A larger proportion of Escondido applicants were denied for home
                                     improvement loans than any other type of loan applications. Over
                                     one-quarter of all applicants (26 percent) were denied and just 61
                                     percent were approved by lending institutions in 2009. The large
                                     proportion of home improvement loan denials may be explained by
                                     the nature of these loans. Most home improvement loans are second
                                     loans and therefore more difficult to qualify for due to high income-
                                     to-debt ratios. In San Diego County, home improvement loan
                                     applications had a slightly lower approval rate (57 percent) than
                                     Escondido.
                                     d. Foreclosures
                                     With low interest rates, “creative” financing (for example, zero
                                     down, interest payment only, adjustable loans), and predatory
                                     lending practices (for example, aggressive marketing, hidden fees,
                                     negative amortization), many households nationwide purchased
                                     homes that were beyond their financial means between 2000 and
                                     2005. Under the false assumptions that refinancing to lower interest
                                     rates would always be an option and home prices would continue to
                                     rise at double-digit rates, many households were unprepared for the
                                     hikes in interest rates, expiration of short-term fixed rates, and
                                     decline in sales prices that set off in 2006. Suddenly faced with
                                     significantly inflated mortgage payments, and mortgage loans that
                                     are larger than the worth of the homes, foreclosure was the only
                                     option available to many households.
                                     Statewide, the number of foreclosures in 2010 has declined
                                     substantially from the previous year. During the third quarter of
                                     2010, a total of 5,869 Notices of Default (NODs) were recorded in
                                     San Diego County, a decrease of over 32 percent from the third
                                     quarter of 2009. There were 1,022 homes in Escondido were listed
                                     as foreclosures in May 2011. These homes were listed at various
                                     stages of foreclosure (from pre-foreclosures to auctions) and ranged
        The „15th Avenue Co-op‟      in price, with some properties listed as high as $1.7 million. The
      included the acquisition and   high prices of these homes facing foreclosure indicate that the
       rehabilitation of a severely  impact of foreclosure affects not just lower and moderate income
     deteriorated, fifteen-year old,
                                     households, but also households with higher incomes.
  sixteen-unit multifamily complex
    in 1995. The complex was re-
      configured to create twelve,
   three- and four- bedroom units
     to accommodate larger fami-
  lies. The project is 100% afford-
  able to low income house-holds
   and remains so for a minimum
        of 55 years after opening.
Page IV-66                                                           Escondido General Plan Housing

K. Governmental Constraints
Aside from market factors, housing affordability is also affected by
factors in the public sector. Local policies and regulations can
impact the price and availability of housing and, the provision of
affordable housing. Land use controls, site improvement re-
quirements, fees and exactions, permit processing procedures,
among other issues may constrain the maintenance, development
and improvement of housing. This section discusses potential
governmental constraints in Escondido and efforts to address them.
1. Land Use Controls
The Land Use Element sets forth City policies for guiding local
land use development. These policies, together with existing zoning
regulations, establish the amount and distribution of land allocated
for different uses. The City initiated a comprehensive update to its
General Plan in 2008. While the General Plan update examines
different land use policies and opportunities for growth, most of the
existing residential neighborhoods are expected to be preserved.
Future residential growth will be focused in two areas: Downtown
Specific Plan and south Escondido Boulevard.
a. Residential Land Use Designations
The land use policies of the City have a direct impact upon the
provision of housing for all economic sectors of the community.
The General Plan designates substantial areas of land for residential
development, and the Zoning code permits a wide variety of
residential uses, ranging from multi-family housing to large estates.
Figure IV-43 lists the residential land use designations in the
General Plan. Currently, the General Plan residential land use
designations do not have minimum densities. The General Plan
update introduces a minimum density for each designation,
ensuring the efficient use of land in the City and reducing the
potential for incompatibilities among neighboring issues.
Furthermore, 80 acres of land are designated for Urban IV. As part
of the General Plan update, the City redesignated 44 acres of the
Urban IV (R-4) and increased the density to 30 units per acre, with
a 70 percent minimum floor density (at 21 units per acre). Because
the Zoning Code update to implement this new land use designation
will occur after the adoption of the new General Plan (anticipated in
2013), this Housing Element (required to be adopted by the end of
2012) does not factor in this density increase when estimating
development capacity.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                      Page IV-67
                                                          Figure IV-43
                              Land Use Designations Permitting Residential Use
 Land Use      Zoning       Max. Density
                                                                                   Character
 Category      District        (du/acre)
                                               To promote a rural living environment in areas of agricultural production,
                            1 unit/4, 8, 20
 Rural I         R-A                           rugged terrain, and environmentally constrained lands that are remote from
                                 acres
                                               urban development.
                            1 unit/2, 4, 20    To promote a rural living environment in areas of agricultural production or
 Rural II        R-A
                                 acres         rugged terrain that is relatively remote from urban development.
                                               To promote a large lot, single-family development in areas bordering Rural
                           1 unit/1, 2, 4, 20
 Estate I        R-E                           lands. This classification is typified by development along Mary Lane, North
                                  acre
                                               Broadway and around Felicita Park.
                                               To promote single-family urban development on relatively large lots. This
 Estate II       R-E           Up to 2.0       classification typified by development at Lomas Serenas, Rancho Verde,
                                               and along Citrus Avenue around San Pasqual Valley Road.
                                               This residential classification is characterized by single-family homes. The
                                               density is appropriate where the traditional neighborhood character of
 Suburban        R-1           Up to 3.3       detached single-family units prevails. This classification is typified by
                                               development at Summercreek and areas southeast of Bear Valley Parkway
                                               along Citrus Avenue and along the south side of Avenida del Diablo.
                                               Detached single-family homes, characteristic of much of Escondido,
 Urban I         R-1           Up to 5.5       constitute this medium density category. Typical R-1 development is found
                                               along Country Club Lane and between Ash and Citrus north of Washington.
                                               This residential classification allows living accommodations, ranging from
                                               conventional single-family units to mobile homes. Development at this level
                                               of intensity normally would be semidetached or attached units, and include
 Urban II        R-2            Up to 12
                                               duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes. Typical Urban II development is found
                                               on North Broadway between Lincoln and Sheridan Avenues, and Citrus
                                               Avenue between Valley Parkway and the Flood Control Channel.
                                               This residential category is typified by low-rise townhouses and apartment
 Urban III       R-3            Up to 18       buildings. Typical projects at this density can be found near Centre City
                                               Parkway at El Norte, east Grand Avenue, and near Washington and Fig.
                                               This residential category is predominantly characterized by apartment
 Urban IV        R-4            Up to 24       buildings about three stories in height. Representative development at this
                                               density is found south of 9th Avenue west of I15.
 Source: Land Use Element, City of Escondido General Plan
                                              b. Specific Plans
                                              The City of Escondido has adopted a number of specific plans,
                                              which offer a range of housing types, densities, and mix of uses.
                                              The City anticipates that much of its new residential growth will
                                              occur in the following areas:
                                                    Downtown Specific Plan (Revised October 17, 2011)
                                                    South Escondido Blvd Area Plan (Revised July 9, 2010)
Page IV-68                                                                            Escondido General Plan Housing

Downtown Area Specific Plan
The Downtown Specific Plan area encompasses approximately 460
acres extending from I-15 and West Valley Parkway to Palomar
Hospital, between Washington and Fifth Avenues. The Specific
Plan Area includes the City‟s urban core along Grand Avenue
where Escondido was incorporated in 1888. The Downtown
Specific Plan provides a comprehensive plan for land use,
development regulations, development incentives, design guidelines
and other related actions aimed at implementing the following
strategic goals for Downtown Escondido:
     Ensure an economically viable Downtown by providing a
        balance of retail, office, residential, entertainment and
        cultural uses.
     Expand Escondido‟s reputation as a local and regional
        destination for specialty shopping, dining, nightlife,
        employment, culture, and the arts.
     Promote a vibrant and exciting Downtown environment by
        establishing areas with land uses that foster an “18-hour”
        atmosphere, in addition to areas that provide mixed use,
        office employment and high density residential oppor-
        tunities.
     Strengthen the character of Downtown with new develop-
        ment that is architecturally compatible with the existing
        urban fabric.
     Improve the pedestrian orientation of Downtown by
        incorporating street level human-scale design elements in
        new and remodeled developments.
     Maintain the character of Downtown by preservation of
        historically significant sites and structures.
     Reinforce and expand the unique character of Grand
        Avenue‟s retail core area by promoting pedestrian-oriented,
        ground-floor, specialty retail and restaurant uses.
     Promote higher residential densities in key locations that
        will support Downtown retail, employment and cultural
        uses.
     Enhance the pedestrian opportunities in Downtown by
        providing pedestrian connections, convenient access and
        opportunities for alternative modes of transportation.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                    Page IV-69

                Improve the walkability by developing enhanced pedestrian
                    connections with such features as embellished landscaping,
                    public art, comfortable street furniture and decor.
                Maximize parking opportunities in the Downtown area
           The Downtown Specific Plan includes seven distinct land use
           districts that allow for residential development or mixed-use
           development with substantial residential components:
                Historic Downtown District (HD)
                Parkview District (PV)
                Centre City Urban District (CCU)
                Gateway Transit District (GT)
                Mercado District (M)
                Southern Gateway District (SG)
                Creekside Neighborhood District (CN)
                                          Figure IV-44
                           Downtown Escondido Specific Plan
           Residential development of up to 45 units per acre (through mixed
           use development) can be accommodated in most of the Downtown
           Specific Plan area, with certain areas allowing up to 75 units per
           acre. The Specific Plan also establishes development standards that
           differ from the rest of the City. Figure IV-45 summarizes the
           standards specific to the City‟s downtown area.
Page IV-70                                   Escondido General Plan Housing

                                     Figure IV-45
     Downtown Specific Plan Residential Development Standards
             Maximum            Setbacks (ft.)       Min.      Max.     Allows
              Building
District                         Side Side Rear       Lot    Building Mixed
               Height     Front
                                Street   Yard Yard   Size   Coverage Use?
                 (ft.)
HD             45-120              0      n/a
                                                  0
PV              35-85       0*
                                  10
CCU             60-75                             5
GT              35-57                       0        None      None        Y
                             0
M                 55               0              0
SG              28-57       10
CN              28-57       10    10        5     10
* 10 feet strongly encouraged
    South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan
    The entire South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan is approximately
    2.25 miles in length, beginning at 5th Avenue and continuing south
    to the terminus of Escondido Boulevard at Center City Parkway and
    Verda Avenue. This area plan was developed with the intention of
    implementing strategies for the South Escondido Boulevard
    commercial corridor and Centre Center Parkway residential area to
    provide a wide range of opportunities in the area. The Plan includes
    goals and recommendations regarding existing and future uses,
    development standards and regulations, incentives, design guide-
    lines, and the extent and timing of public facilities and services.
    For residential land use, the Area Plan seeks to maximize affordable
    housing opportunities and provide opportunities for a balanced mix
    of housing types through a variety of incentives and programs. The
    Plan provides for a Mixed Use (MU) designation that permits the
    integration of residential, commercial, and professional office uses
    in a single project via a Planned Development (PD) zone. The MU
    designation allows up to 24 units per acre and a maximum height of
    three stories.
    c. Growth Management Controls
    The City has three growth management measures that impact the
    pace and capacity of residential growth:
          Ordinance 94-16
          Proposition S
          Ordinance 2004-01
      Escondido General Plan Housing                                           Page IV-71

                                  Ordinance 94-16
                                  This ordinance is a Citywide Facilities Management Plan that came
                                  into effect on May 18, 1994 and replaced all prior growth
                                  management ordinances. While facilities are generally available
                                  citywide, the North Broadway Region of Influence has had critical
                                  infrastructure deficiencies with respect to drainage and water
                                  storage capacity. The region is located in the northeast part of
                                  Escondido. Should adequate facilities not be available within the
                                  region, the ordinance allows development of projects subject to the
                                  approval of a development agreement. The agreement must ensure
                                  that the project either provides facilities necessary to upgrade
                                  existing deficiencies or financially participates toward their
                                  solution.
                                  A subsequent ordinance (95-11) also allows development of a
                                  single-family residence on an existing vacant lot of record, zoned
                                  for residential use, where the lot was created prior to June 6, 1990,
                                  within the Region of Influence. A supplemental deposit is required
                                  at the time of Building Permit issuance to ensure facility impacts are
                                  addressed.
                                  Proposition S
                                  Proposition S was adopted by voters 1998 and requires voter
                                  approval of specified future changes to the Escondido General Plan.
                                  General Plan changes, subject to Proposition S, include increasing
                                  residential densities, changing or increasing the residential land use
                                  categories, or changing any residential to commercial or industrial
                                  designation on any property designated as Rural, Estate, Suburban,
                                  or Urban. Thus, voter approval is required for amendments that
                                  would increase residential densities, but also deters the loss of
                                  residential land when associated with an amendment to commercial
                                  or industrial. Furthermore, Proposition S states, “Nothing in this
   „Brotherton Square‟ included   initiative shall be constructed to:
  the acquisition, demolition and
                                        Interfere with rights to obtain density bonuses or other
  redevelopment of the 50-room
     Penny Lodge Motel, a site
                                           entitlements available under affordable housing laws, or
    with chronic policing issues           Proposition S
  originally constructed in 1972.       Limit right or entitlements available under affordable
      Redevelopment in 2007                housing laws.”
     involved demolishing the
    motel, clearing the site, and In the short term, Proposition S does not present a constraint to
     developing 22 affordable,    housing development in the City. This Housing Element examines
      single-family, detached     the residential development capacity under the existing General
    manufactured homes made       Plan and zoning and has demonstrated adequate capacity to
    available to first-time home- accommodate the City‟s RHNA for the 2013-2020 Housing
   buyers earning up to 120% of   Element planning period.
     the area median income.
Page IV-72                                                          Escondido General Plan Housing

The City recognizes that Proposition S may serve to constrain
housing development in the long term, beyond 2020. Therefore, the
City initiated a comprehensive General Plan update in 2008 to
address land use distribution, preservation of neighborhoods, and
identification of appropriate growth centers within the community.
The updated General Plan was approved by the City Council on
May 23, 2012. Portions of the updated General Plan were placed on
the November 2012 ballot and approved by Escondido residents.
The General Plan update preserves existing land use policies in
much of the City‟s residential neighborhoods and proposes no
significant residential land use changes throughout the City except
for the mixed use development along South Escondido Boulevard
(see discussion above). The proposed increase in density from 24
units per acre to 30 units per acre in the South Escondido Boulevard
Area Plan results in increased capacity in the City.
Due to the timing of the General Plan update, this increased
capacity was not factored in the City‟s sites inventory for meeting
the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2013-2020
planning period. Approval of the General Plan update by the voters
increases the City‟s capacity for residential growth over the long
term. Recognizing Proposition S as a potential constraint, the
Housing Element includes a program to monitor the impact of this
growth management measure.
Ordinance 2004-01
This ordinance (currently expired) was adopted as an urgency
measure to regulate growth and development within an area in
northern Escondido due to a critical water infrastructure deficiency.
The City Council found that imminent danger to the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Escondido has arisen and is
directly linked to growth and development in the northern portions
of the City due to deficiencies in the existing water infrastructure.
d. Overlay Zones and Other Districts
Mixed Use Overlay Zone
As part of the General Plan update, new areas for mixed use
development involving Mixed Use Overlay areas (approximately
340 acres) will accommodate up to 80 units per acre. Because the
Zoning Code will not be updated to implement this new overlay
zone until after the adoption of the General Plan (expected in 2013),
this Housing Element (required to be adopted by the end of 2012)
does not include the additional capacity to be made available
through the proposed Mixed Use Overlay areas.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                      Page IV-73

                                  Flood Plain Overlay Zone
                                  The Flood Plain (FP) overlay zone establishes land use regulations
                                  in areas with properties situated within designated flood plains of
                                  rivers, creeks, streams and water courses in order to protect the
                                  public health, safety and welfare and to minimize losses to property
                                  and life due to flooding and periodic inundation. The City restricts
                                  or prohibits uses in this zone which are dangerous to health, safety
                                  or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood
                                  heights or velocities. The City also requires uses vulnerable to
                                  floods to be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
                                  construction.
                                  Centre City Residential (CCR) Overlay Zone
                                  The purpose of Centre City Residential (CCR) Overlay Zone is to
                                  provide standards for development in the Centre City Residential
                                  Area that will encourage the revitalization of the neighborhood. The
                                  CCR overlay zone is used in conjunction with the R-4 (residential
                                  multifamily) zone. Within the CCR overlay zone, the City‟s density
                                  bonus provisions may be applied to projects that contain less than
                                  four units. Residential development in this zone is subject to
                                  separate development standards and design guidelines.
                                  Planned Development (P-D) Zone
                                  The purpose of the Planned Development (P-D) zone is to provide a
                                  more flexible regulatory procedure by which the basic public
                                  purposes of the Escondido general plan and the Escondido zoning
                                  code may be accomplished and to encourage creative approaches to
  „Emerald Garden Townhomes‟      the use of land through variation in the siting of buildings and the
    were completed in 1995 as a   appropriate mixing of several land uses, activities and dwelling
     16-unit rental development,
                                  types.
      consisting of 14 two-story
   townhome-units and two flats.
  The flat units were designed to For planned developments in which residential uses are proposed
     meet handicap accessibility  on parcels of land in the R-3 and R-4 zones, area plans, and in
    requirements, including sen-  specific plan areas with a maximum specified multifamily
  sory impairment. The units are  residential density, no planned development will be approved at a
    centered around a recreation  density below 70 percent of the maximum permitted density of the
   area, garden, playground and   underlying multifamily zone, area plan or specific plan multi-family
     picnic area. There also is a designation. Residential planned developments in this overlay zone
   community meeting room with    are also encouraged to depart from standard subdivision and
     a kitchen and laundry room.
                                  housing design by providing a variety of lot sizes and housing
    Each town-home unit has an
   attached one-car garage. The
                                  types, provided that the overall residential density yield conforms
    project is 100% affordable to with the City‟s policies.
    low-in-come households and
    remains so for a minimum of
      55 years from its opening.
Page IV-74                                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

Old Escondido Neighborhood Historic District
The boundaries of this District are Fifth Avenue on the north,
Chestnut Street on the east, Thirteenth Avenue on the south and
South Escondido Boulevard on the west (excluding properties
fronting on Escondido Boulevard) and including north side of Fifth
Avenue from Juniper to Date. The purpose and intent of the Old
Escondido Neighborhood historic district is to preserve the single-
family residential character of the neighborhood and the historic /
cultural resources of the neighborhood as well as emphasize
orientation towards pedestrian activities.
e. Density Bonus and Residential Incentive Ordinance
The City adopted and updated its Density Bonus and Residential
Incentive Ordinance in the 1990s. The current ordinance allows a
minimum density bonus of 25 percent and deviations from the
Zoning Code for affordable or senior housing. Since parking and
setbacks can be reduced, a developer could feasibly increase the
number of units or bedrooms without increasing the size of the site.
The City‟s Density Bonus and Residential Incentive Ordinance is
useful in the acquisition and rehabilitation of developments made
affordable to low-income residents in the higher multi-family zones.
For example, the ordinance was utilized to increase the number of
bedrooms in the acquisition and rehabilitation of the 15th Avenue
Cooperative and Sonoma Court, affordable housing projects.
However, current State law requires jurisdictions to provide density
bonuses and development incentives to all developers who propose
to construct affordable housing on a sliding scale, where the amount
of density bonus and number of incentives vary according to the
amount of affordable housing units provided. Specifically, State law
requires the provision of certain incentives for residential develop-
ment projects that set aside a certain portion of total units to be
affordable to lower and moderate income households. Under State
law, a development of more than five units is eligible to receive
density bonuses if it meets at least one of the following:
     Very Low Income Units: Five percent of the total units of
        the housing development as target units are affordable to
        very low-income households; or
     Low Income Units: Ten percent of the total units of the
        housing development as target units are affordable to low-
        income households; or
     Moderate Income Units: Ten percent of the total units in
        newly constructed condominiums or planned developments
        as target units are affordable to moderate-income house-
        holds, provided all the units are offered for purchase; or
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                      Page IV-75

                                        Senior Units: A senior citizen housing development of 35
                                           units or more.
                                   The existing Escondido density bonus provisions are not consistent
                                   with the State density bonus law. The Housing Plan of this Housing
                                   Element includes a program to amend the City‟s density bonus
                                   provisions to ensure compliance with State law.
                                   The Density Bonus and Residential Incentives Ordinance en-
                                   courages development of housing for lower income and senior
                                   households. Other processes in the Zoning Ordinance help in the
                                   development of housing for the higher income households as well
                                   as the lower income households. For example, the City retains a
                                   sizeable amount of large-lot zoning to accommodate the housing
                                   needs and preferences of moderate and higher income households.
                                   This strategy is aimed at satisfying high-tech businesses desiring to
                                   locate in Escondido. Planned Developments, Specific Plans and
                                   Administrative Adjustments are also available to assist in the
                                   development and rehabilitation of housing for all economic sectors
                                   of the community.
                                   These processes are particularly helpful where properties may be
                                   constrained. Specific Plans and Planned Developments allow for
                                   clustering of smaller lots into buildable areas, while preserving
                                   unique or environmentally sensitive areas such as ridgelines, stream
                                   courses and steep slopes. Planned Developments and Specific Plans
                                   are useful for large scale developments, while administrative
                                   adjustments are more useful on a small scale basis where deviations
                                   from the code may enable the development on a constrained site or
                                   an addition to an existing single-family home or apartment
                                   complex.
                                   2. Residential Development Standards
  North County Interfaith Council
   (NCIC) acquired and rehabili-   Citywide, outside the specific plan areas, the City regulates the type,
    tated „Aster Street‟ involving location, density, and scale of residential development primarily
    eight (8) two-bedroom rental   through the Zoning Code. The following summarizes the City‟s
     units The project provides    existing residential zoning districts:
  permanently affordable housing
    for families earning between    Residential Agricultural (R-A) – 1 unit per 5 acres: This
     30% and 50% of the Area           zone is designed to protect agricultural uses from en-
   Median Income (AMI). Under          croachment by urban uses until residential, commercial or
    the owner-ship of NCIC, the        industrial uses in such areas become necessary or desired.
   units will remain affordable to
  very low-income families for the
          life of the project.
Page IV-76                                                          Escondido General Plan Housing

 Residential Estates (R-E) – 2 units per acre: This zone is to
    provide an area exclusively for single-family dwellings in a
    rural setting. Provisions are made for the main-tenance of
    limited agricultural pursuits as well as those uses necessary
    and incidental to single family living.
 Single-Family Residential (R-1) – 7 units per acre: This
    zone is to encourage and promote a suitable environment
    for family life by providing a district for the establish-ment
    of one-family, detached dwellings, exclusively.
 Mobilehome Residential (R-T) – 9 units per acre: This zone
    is established to encourage and promote a suitable
    environment for family life by providing a district for one-
    family homes, exclusively.
 Light Multiple Residential (R-2) – 15 units per acre: This
    zone is established to provide low height, low density
    residential areas in close proximity to single-family
    residential neighborhoods.
 Medium Multiple Residential (R-3) – 18 units per acre: This
    zone, is established to provide medium density, low-height
    residential areas for two, three and multifamily dwelling
    units.
 Heavy Multiple Residential (R-4) – 24 units per acre: This
    zone is established to provide an area for a suitable
    environment for family life for those wishing to live in
    apartments near the city‟s center.
Development standards specific to each zone district are designed to
protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
residents as well as implement the policies of the General Plan.
These standards also serve to preserve the character and integrity of
existing neighborhoods. Specific residential development standards
are summarized in Figure IV-46.
Generally, development standards can limit the number of units that
may be constructed on a particular piece of property. These include
density, minimum lot and unit sizes, height, and open space
requirements. Limiting the number of units that can be constructed
will increase the per-unit land costs and can, all other factors being
equal, result in higher development costs that may impact housing
affordability.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                       Page IV-77

                                                    Figure IV-46
                                   Residential Development Standards
                        Maximum       Minimum                        Setbacks (ft.)
                                                    Minimum                            Maximum
           Zoning        Building      Net Lot
                                                    Lot Width                            Lot
           District        Height        Area                    Front Rear Side
                                                        (ft.)                          Coverage
                            (ft.)      (sq. ft.)
           R-A               35         217,800         150        25      20       10   20%
           R-E               35          20,000         100        25      20       10   30%
           R-1               35           6,000          60        15      20        5   40%
           R-T                --          4,500          55        15       5        5   60%
           R-2               25           6,000          60        15      15        5     --
           R-3               35           6,000          60        15      10        5     --
           R-4               75           7,000          50        15      10        5     --
           Source: City of Escondido Zoning Ordinance, 2011.
                a. Setback Requirements
                Setback requirements can encourage or discourage development.
                As seen on Figure IV-46, the City's residential setback requirements
                are minimal. The City also offers adjustments to requirements (up
                to 25 percent) with the approval of the Community Development
                director. Even further reductions to setback requirements for
                landscaping and parking are available to affordable or senior
                housing proposals, pursuant to the Residential Incentive Ordinance.
                b. Building and Parcel Requirements
                Building and parcel requirements for residential development can
                also encourage or discourage development. While development
                standards are necessary in order to preserve the character of that
                particular zone, those that are too restrictive can increase develop-
                ment costs and inhibit or reduce the achievable number of permitted
                dwelling units.
                Building and parcel requirements in the City are not overly
                restrictive and offer the flexibility needed to encourage develop-
                ment. Minimum parcel sizes vary, depending on the zone, and are
                minimal in the multi-family zones. Minimum unit sizes are closely
                tied to the minimum standards required by the State for health and
                safety purposes. Lot coverage and floor area ratios are high enough
                to have little or no constraint on development proposals. And,
                usable open space requirements are low and can be lowered further
                for affordable and senior housing development proposals. Building
                and parcel requirements in the Downtown area are even less
                restrictive than those of the single-family and multi-family zones.
Page IV-78                                             Escondido General Plan Housing
c. Zone Changes and General Plan Amendments
Residential zone changes that propose density increases consistent
with the General Plan do not require an initiative or a referendum.
Pursuant to proposition S, General Plan amendments involving an
increase in residential densities or change from residential to
commercial or industrial require a majority vote by the people.
Proposition S specifies that General Plan amendments or specific
plans cannot be adjusted without a vote of the people, if changes
increase residential density, alter or increase the General Plan's
residential land use categories, or change any Rural, Estate,
Suburban or Urban residential designation to a commercial or
industrial designation. Thus, voter approval is required for amend-
ments that would increase residential densities, but also deters the
loss of residential land when associated with an amendment to
commercial or industrial.
The General Plan update was approved by the City Council on May
23, 2012 and portions involve voter approval to be decided at the
November 2012 election. The updated General Plan provides for
increased residential development capacity through mixed use
development, primarily along South Escondido Boulevard. Most
other residential areas retain their current General Plan and zoning
designations. Furthermore, Proposition S states, “Nothing in this
initiative shall be construed to:
      Interfere with rights to obtain density bonuses or other
         entitlements available under affordable housing laws, or
      Limit right or entitlements available under affordable
         housing laws.”
Additionally, few residential subdivisions have been denied, and
current zoning allows multi-family development by right with
ministerial processing only.
d. Parking Standards
High numbers of parking spaces required per dwelling unit can
negatively impact the feasibility of providing affordable housing by
reducing the achievable number of dwelling units per acre and
increasing development costs. Typically, the concern for high
parking standards relates mostly to multi-family, affordable, or
senior housing. Escondido has one of the lowest parking require-
ments in San Diego County and its requirements for single-family
and multi-family residential are summarized in Figure IV-47. In
some instances, tandem spaces are permitted and in others, guest
parking may be provided on-street.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                     Page IV-79

                                                   Figure IV-47
                         Escondido Residential Parking Requirements
                 Type of Residential
                                                       Required Parking Spaces Per Unit
                     Development
             Single-Family or
                                                Two (2) car garage or carport spaces
             Two-Family Residence
                                                One (1) parking space plus those spaces
             Second Dwelling Unit
                                                required for the primary residential use.
             Multiple-Family Dwelling*
             Efficiency Unit                    One (1) parking space
             One-Bedroom Unit                   One and one-half (1.5) parking space
             Two-Bedroom Unit                   One and three-quarter (1.75) parking space
             Three or More Bedrooms             Two (2) parking spaces
             Source: City of Escondido Zoning Ordinance, 2011
             * One space is required for each four (4) units required for guest parking
           Escondido‟s Density Bonus and Residential Incentive Ordinance,
           allows parking reductions for affordable and senior development at
           the following ratios: one space/one-bedroom unit; 1.2 spaces/two-
           bedroom unit, and 1.5 spaces/three-bedroom unit. These standards
           are lower than even the State-mandated parking standards for
           density bonus projects. Additionally, on-street resident parking for
           affordable or senior units can be substituted for required off-street
           parking at a ratio of one-to-one on non-Circulation Element streets.
           Requirements to cover spaces can also be waived.
           3. Provision for a Variety of Housing Opportunities
           Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify
           adequate sites to be made available through appropriate zoning and
           development standards to encourage the development of a variety
           of housing types for all economic segments of the population. This
           includes single-family homes, multi-family housing, second units,
           mobile homes, emergency shelters, and housing for persons with
           disabilities. Figure IV-48 below summarizes the various housing
           types permitted within the City‟s zoning districts.
           a. Single-Family Dwelling
           “Single-family dwellings” are defined in the Zoning Code as
           detached or semi-detached buildings. Single-family dwellings are
           permitted in all residential zones, except the R-T zone. As part of
           the General Plan update, the City proposes to establish a 70 percent
           minimum density for each zoning district, effectively discouraging
           single-family homes to be developed on properties designated for
           multi-family uses. This change will promote the efficient use of the
           City‟s residential land and mitigate neighborhood compatibility
           issues.
Page IV-80                                            Escondido General Plan Housing

                                        Figure IV-48
                    Use Regulations for Residential Zones
                                                                                  Mixed
            Use             R-A R-E R-1 R-T R-2 R-3 R-4 H-P C-G                    Use
                                                                                 Overlay
Single-Family Dwelling        P     P      P      --   P    P   P      --    --     --
Second Dwelling Unit          P     P      P      --   P    P   P      --    --     --
Multi-Family Dwelling         --    --     --     --   P    P   P      --    --     P*
Mobile Home Park              C     C      C     C     C    C   C      --    --     --
Manufactured Housing          P     P      P      P    --   --  --     --    --     --
Care Facility (6 or fewer) P        P      P      P    P    P   P      P     P      P*
Care Facility (7 or more)     --    C      C      --   C    C   C      P     P      P*
Senior Housing*               --    --     --     --  P*    P*  P*     --    --     P*
Emergency Shelters*           --    --     --     --   --   --  --    P*     --     --
Transitional* (6 or fewer) P        P      P      P    P    P   P      P     P      P*
Transitional* (7 or more) C         C      C     C     C    C   C      P     P      P*
Disabled* (6 or fewer)        P     P      P      P    P    P   P      --    --     P*
Disabled* (7 or more)         C     C      C     C     C    C   C      --    --     P*
Single Room Occupancy* --           --     --     --   --   --  --     --    --     C*
Farm Worker Housing           P     P      --     --   --   --  --     --    --     --
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
* Refer to Housing Element Text regarding future Zone Code Amendment to be implemented.
Source: City of Escondido Zoning Code, 2011
    b. Secondary Dwelling Unit
    Secondary dwelling units are attached or detached dwelling units
    that provide complete independent living facilities for one or more
    persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
    cooking and sanitation. Second dwelling units may be alternative
    source of affordable housing for lower-income households and
    seniors. The passage of AB 1866 (effective July 2003) requires
    cities to use a ministerial process to consider accessory dwelling
    units in an effort to facilitate the production of affordable housing
    state-wide. Accessory units must be permitted in all residential
    zones where a primary single-family unit already exists.
    The City of Escondido permits second dwelling units in the R-A, R-
    E, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones on properties with only one single-
    family residence on the lot, subject to the approval of a second
    dwelling unit permit. Second dwelling units must also comply with
    the following development standards:
           The owner of the property must reside on the parcel on
              which the second dwelling unit is located.
      Escondido General Plan Housing                                                     Page IV-81

                                           Second dwelling units shall conform to the height limits of
                                               the zone and shall be limited to one story.
                                           A maximum of one bedroom shall be permitted.
                                           Second dwelling units must be physically attached to the
                                               primary structure by a substantial contiguous wall and shall
                                               also have access from the primary structure.
                                           For lots less than 10,000 square feet, attached second
                                               dwelling units shall not exceed 500 square feet. For lots
                                               over 10,000 square feet, second dwelling units shall not
                                               exceed 640 square feet.
                                           The minimum permitted size of a second dwelling unit shall
                                               be defined by the Uniform Building Code and Uniform
                                               Housing Code. The minimum unit size of the residential
                                               zone shall not apply to the second dwelling unit.
                                           One additional off street parking space, covered or
                                               uncovered, shall be provided for a second dwelling unit, and
                                               shall not be tandem.
                                           The second dwelling unit shall not create a second front
                                               entrance visible from adjacent streets. Access doors and
                                               entry for the second dwelling unit shall not be oriented to
                                               the nearest adjacent property line.
                                      c. Multi-Family Dwelling
     „Orange Place Apartments‟
 involved the total rehabilitation of According to the State Department of Finance, multiple-family
   15 two-bedroom units in 2004.      housing makes up approximately 35 percent of the 2010 housing
    Because of the buildings‟ de-     stock in Escondido. The Zoning Code provides for multi-family
  terioration and interior contami-   developments in the higher density residential zones (R-2, R-3, and
    nation, such as asbestos and      R-4). The maximum density for the R-4 zone is 24 units per acre.
   mold, the complex was gutted
   and stripped down to its studs.
   It was replaced with an all new
                                      d. Mobile Home Parks and Manufactured Housing
   interior and exterior, including   Manufactured housing and mobile homes can be an affordable
   mission tile pitched-roofs with    housing option for low and moderate income households.
     gables, dormers and stucco       According to SANDAG, there were 3,736 mobile homes in the City
   walls. Added features include      as of January 2010. A mobile home built after June 15, 1976,
   extensive landscaping, private     certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and
  porches and patios, a masonry       Safety Act of 1974, and built on a permanent foundation may be
   perimeter wall, laundry facility   located in any residential zone where a conventional single-family
   and a central picnic and a bar-
                                      detached dwelling is permitted subject to the same restrictions on
    beque area. Twelve units are
 affordable to households earning
                                      density and to the same property development regulations.
  60% or less of the Area Median      Manufactured / mobile homes are permitted in all of the City‟s
    Income (AMI); three units are     lower density residential zones (R-A, R-E, R-1 and R-T). The City
 affordable to households earning     also continues to explore ways to expand opportunities for
       50% or less of the AMI.        manufactured housing to serve a wide range of income groups.
Page IV-82                                                              Escondido General Plan Housing

e. Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities licensed or supervised by a Federal, State,
or local health/welfare agency provide 24-hour non-medical care of
unrelated persons who are handicapped and in need of personal
services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the
activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a
family-like environment. The Community Care Facilities Act
(California Health and Safety Code) and Lanterman Developmental
Disabilities Services Act (California Welfare and Institution Code)
require that State-licensed residential care facilities serving six or
fewer persons (including foster care) be treated as a regular
residential use and therefore must be permitted by right in all
residential zones allowing residential uses. These facilities cannot
be subject to more stringent development standards, fees, or other
standards than the same type of housing single-family homes in the
same district.
The City amended its Zoning Code, in accordance with the
Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act of the
California Welfare and Institutions Code and the Health and Safety
Code in 2004. The amendment clarifies that the use of property for
the care of six or fewer disabled persons is a “residential use” for
the purposes of zoning. A State-authorized, certified or authorized
family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer
disabled persons or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-
a day basis is considered a residential use that is permitted in all
residential zones. The amendment also clarifies that in Commercial
and Hospital Professional zones, licensed residential care facilities
serving any number of residents are permitted by right, and in
residential zones, licensed residential care facilities serving more
than six persons are permitted with a Conditional Use Permit.
f. Emergency Shelters
Senate Bill 2, enacted in October 2007, requires local governments
to identify one or more zoning categories that allow emergency
shelters (year-round shelters for the homeless) without discretionary
review. The statute permits the City to apply limited conditions to
the approval of ministerial permits for emergency shelters. The
identified zone must have sufficient capacity to accommodate at
least one year-round shelter and accommodate the City‟s share of
the regional unsheltered homeless population. Escondido‟s share of
the regional unsheltered homeless population is estimated to be 741
individuals.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                        Page IV-83

           Escondido‟s Zoning Code does not explicitly address emergency
           shelters. The City will amend its Zoning Code within one year of
           adoption of the Housing Element to permit homeless shelters by
           right, without discretionary review, within a portion of the Light
           Industrial (M-1) zone, consistent with State law (identified as in
           map contained in the Housing Element Appendix). The portion of
           M-1 zone identified would be appropriate for emergency shelter
           since it contains vacant and underutilized properties and is located
           near a transit station and the new Palomar Hospital. This area
           includes 58 parcels and approximately 74 acres. It is currently
           occupied by mostly light industrial, commercial, and warehousing
           uses. However, due to the changing economic structure in the
           region and current economic status, many operations have left the
           area. A field check by staff conducted in March 2012 identified at
           least seven vacant buildings that are available for lease or for sale
           and a vacant property (descriptions of these properties are provided
           in the Housing Element Appendix).
           In addition to eight buildings identified, some buildings in the area
           are antiquated, with deferred maintenance issues, and were
           developed below the allowable intensity. Therefore, development of
           emergency shelters in this area can occur either as new construction
           on one of the underutilized properties, or as adaptive reuse of an
           existing vacant building (or just a portion of the building). Based on
           the field survey of existing conditions and uses in this area,
           sufficient land is available to accommodate Escondido‟s homeless
           population of 741 individuals.
           g. Transitional and Supportive Housing
           California Health and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines
           “transitional housing” and “transitional housing development” as
           buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated
           under program requirements that call for the termination of
           assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible
           program recipient at some predetermined future point in time,
           which shall be no less than six months.
           Residents of transitional housing are usually connected to
           supportive services designed to assist the homeless in achieving
           greater economic independence and a permanent, stable living
           situation. Transitional housing can take several forms, including
           group quarters with beds, single-family homes, and multi-family
           apartments and typically offers case management and support
           services to help return people to independent living (often six
           months to two years).
Page IV-84                                  Escondido General Plan Housing

Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social
services for the homeless, people with disabilities, and a variety of
other special needs populations. California Health and Safety Code
(Section 50675.2) defines “supportive housing” as housing with no
limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the low income adults
with disabilities, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that
assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability
to live and, when possible, work in the community. Target popu-
lation includes adults with low incomes having one or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance
abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for
services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities
Services Act (Division 4.5, commencing with Section 4500, of the
Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations,
include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging
out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional
settings, veterans, or homeless people.
Escondido‟s Zoning Code makes provisions for transitional and
permanent supportive housing. Transitional and supportive housing,
with on-site services, are similar to and have been classified with           „Serenity Village‟ was com-
the same land use code as licensed residential care facilities. They       pleted in 2007 and offers eight
are permitted by right in the General Commercial and the Hospital           group sober-living homes for
Professional zones, and with a Conditional Use Permit in all                   female households with in-
                                                                             comes ranging between 30-
residential zones. Facilities with six or fewer residents are also
                                                                                 60% of the Area Median
permitted by right in all residential zones. In just the residential        Income (AMI). Length of stay
zone alone, there are also over 3,000 acres of residential land that is          averages between three
either vacant or re-developable in the City. Additionally, where no             months to one year. Each
on-site services are involved, uses are permitted by right in              home is 1,250 SF, with access
apartments and single-family homes in all residential zones.                 to a large common area and
                                                                            off-street parking. The project
The Zoning Code will be amended to differentiate transitional /            offers transitional housing that
supportive housing that is operated as group quarters versus that is          is 100 percent affordable to
operated a regular housing development. For transitional /                 women with very low incomes
                                                                            who graduate from Serenity‟s
supportive housing facilities that operate as group quarters, such
                                                                                 drug and alcohol abuse
facilities will be permitted as residential care facilities. Potential       programs. Women pay only
conditions for approval of large residential care facilities (for more        30 percent of their salary in
than six persons) as transitional/supportive housing may include            monthly rent and one-third of
hours of operation, security, loading requirements, noise                  their rent money is placed in a
regulations, and restrictions on loitering. Conditions would be              savings account so they can
similar to those for other similar uses and would not serve to                  afford permanent housing
constrain the development of such facilities. For transitional /           when they leave. The complex
supportive housing facilities that operate as regular housing                  is intended as a temporary
developments, such uses will be permitted by right where housing is         solution upon re-entering the
otherwise permitted (regardless of size or presence on-site services).        work field, so the maximum
                                                                                     stay is one year.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                Page IV-85

                                  h. Senior Housing
                                  Currently, the Zoning Code conditionally permits senior housing
                                  (for persons aged 55 or over) in R2, R3, and R4 zones. The Zoning
                                  Code will be amended to provide specific standards (such as
                                  parking requirements and minimum unit size) appropriate to the
                                  use. However, senior housing as a use will be permitted as regular
                                  housing where housing is allowed in the City.
                                  i. Single Room Occupancy Units (SROs)
                                  SRO units are one-room units intended for occupancy by a single
                                  individual. They are distinct from a studio or efficiency unit, in that
                                  a studio is a one-room unit that must contain a kitchen and
                                  bathroom. Although SRO units are not required to have a kitchen or
                                  bathroom, many SROs have one or the other and could be
                                  equivalent to an efficiency unit. The South Escondido Boulevard
                                  Neighborhood Plan provides transient lodging as a conditionally
                                  permitted use whereby the average length of stay exceeds 30 days.
                                  j. Farm Worker Housing
                                  Pursuant to the State Employee Housing Act (Section 17000 of the
                                  Health and Safety Code), employee housing for agricultural
                                  workers consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or
                                  12 units or spaces designed for use by a single-family or household
                                  is permitted by right in an agricultural land use designation. For
                                  properties that permit agricultural uses by right, a local jurisdiction
                                  may not treat employee housing that meets the above criteria any
                                  differently than an agricultural use. Furthermore, any employee
                                  housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees
                                  shall be deemed a single-family structure within a residential land
                                  use designation, according to the Employee Housing Act.
                                  Employee housing for six or fewer persons is permitted wherever a
                                  single-family residence is permitted. To comply with State law no
                                  conditional use permit or variance will be required.
   Escondido‟s successful citrus
  and avocado orchards solidified The City‟s Zoning Code allows, as a permitted use in agricultural
    the community‟s agricultural  and estate residential zones (RA and RE), living quarters for
  importance, symbolized by this  persons employed on the premises in conjunction with authorized
     historic Escondido packing   agricultural uses. Dwellings serving six or fewer employees are
   label. Agriculture remains an  considered single-family dwellings and those serving more than six
      important component of      are still permitted by right and would also not operate for a profit. In
     Escondido‟s economy and      addition to housing farm workers on the work-site, affordable
 community character, creating a  housing is available for permanent farm workers in multi-family
    need to accommodate farm
                                  zones.
           worker housing.
Page IV-86                                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

k. Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Both the federal Fair Housing Amendment Act (FHAA) and the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act direct local
governments to make reasonable accommodations (that is,
modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use
regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
The City conducted an analysis of the zoning ordinance, permitting
procedures, development standards, and building codes to identify
potential constraints for housing for persons with disabilities. The
City‟s policies and regulations regarding housing for persons with
disabilities are described below.
Land Use Controls
Under State Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act
(also known as the Lanterman Act), small licensed residential care
facilities for six or fewer persons must be treated as regular
residential uses and permitted by right in all residential districts. In
accordance with State law (Lanterman Developmental Disability
Services Act, AB 846, compiled of divisions 4.1, 4.2 and 4.7 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code and Title 14 of the Government
Code), Escondido allows residential care facilities serving six or
fewer persons within all residential zones. Residential care facilities
serving more than six persons are conditionally permitted in all
residential zones. The City does not have a local requirement for
proximity between two special needs housing sites.
The City‟s Zoning Code provides for transitional/supportive
housing as residential care facilities only. The Zoning Code will be
amended to address the provision of these housing types pursuant to
State laws (see discussions above).
Definition of Family
Local governments may restrict access to housing for households
failing to qualify as a “family” by the definition specified in the
Zoning Code. Specifically, a restrictive definition of “family” that
limits the number of and differentiates between related and
unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the develop-
ment and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities, but not
for housing families that are similarly sized or situated.
The City of Escondido Zoning Code defines a “family” as “one or
more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group
including unrelated individuals living together as a relatively
permanent, bona fide, housekeeping unit.” The City‟s definition of
family does not restrict access to housing.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                         Page IV-87

                                  Building Codes
                                  The Building and Safety Division actively enforces the California
                                  Building Code provisions that regulate the access and adaptability
                                  of buildings to accommodate persons with disabilities. No unique
                                  restrictions are in place that would constrain the development of
                                  housing for persons with disabilities. Government Code Section
                                  12955.1 requires that 10 percent of the total dwelling units in multi-
                                  family buildings without elevators consisting of three or more rental
                                  units or four or more condominium units subject to the following
                                  building standards for persons with disabilities:
                                       The primary entry to the dwelling unit shall be on an
                                           accessible route unless exempted by site impracticality tests.
                                       At least one powder room or bathroom shall be located on
                                           the primary entry level served by an accessible route.
                                       All rooms or spaces located on the primary entry level shall
                                           be served by an accessible route. Rooms and spaces located
                                           on the primary entry level and subject to this chapter may
                                           include but are not limited to kitchens, powder rooms,
    „Las Casitas I‟ involved the           bathrooms, living rooms, bedrooms, or hallways.
   acquisition and rehabilitation
       of six historic bungalows
                                       Common use areas shall be accessible.
      scheduled for demolition,        If common tenant parking is provided, accessible parking
      moved from their original            spaces is required.
     location to a nearby unim-
   proved 10,000 square foot lot  Reasonable Accommodation
   in 1991. At the new location,  Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employ-
    four of the bungalows were    ment and Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable
    paired in a “modified-dumb-   accommodations (i.e. modifications or exceptions) in their zoning
  bell” shape with a new kitchen
                                  laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations
         addition allowing these
    transitional housing units to may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to
      be used by two individual   use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be reasonable to
   single parent families sharing accommodate requests to waive a setback requirement or other
   only the oven and sink, or by  standard of the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that homes are
    one larger family occupying   accessible for the mobility impaired. Whether a particular
     the entire double unit. The  modification is reasonable depends on the circumstances.
       improvements include a
       laundry/storage building   The City adopted an amendment to the Zoning Code establishing a
        located in the courtyard  formal reasonable accommodations procedure in 2001. The Zoning
    complete with a front porch   Code gives authority to the Direction of Community Development
   Las Casitas is small in scale  (or his/her designee) to make decisions regarding reasonable
    and fits comfortably among    accommodation requests. There is no fee imposed on the request for
     the older homes and small
                                  reasonable accommodation. However, if the project for which the
      apartment buildings in the
   neighborhood. The project is   request is being made also requires some other planning permit or
      available to lower-income   approval, then the applicant must file the request together and
        households indefinitely.  submit the required fees associated with the related permits.
Page IV-88                                                         Escondido General Plan Housing

In determining the reasonableness of a requested accommodation,
the Director will consider the following factors:
     Whether the housing which is the subject of the request for
         reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual
         protected under the Acts;
     Whether fulfillment of the request is necessary to make
         specific housing available to an individual protected under
         the Acts;
     Whether the accommodation will impose an unreasonable
         financial or administrative burden on the City;
     Whether the accommodation will require a fundamental
         alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or
         procedures of the City;
     Whether the accommodation will have any potential impact
         on surrounding uses;
     Physical attributes of the property and structures; and
     Any other factor deemed relevant to the determination
         according to the Acts, as amended.
Permits and Processing
A request for a retrofit of property to increase accessibility would be
handled through the building permit process, if the retrofit is of a
nature to be governed by the building code. Group homes, with
fewer than six persons, are permitted by right in the residential
zones. Modifications to the structure would be made through the
building permit process, if the modifications proposed are under
building code jurisdiction.
Depending on the zone classification of the property, a group home
for more than six persons requires either a plot plan or a Conditional
Use Permit. There is no standard list of conditions; each site would
be reviewed and conditions assigned based on the specifics of the
site and proposed project. A plot plan does not require a public
hearing. A Conditional Use Permit requires a public hearing in
front of the Planning Commission.
Conclusion
The City will amend the Zoning Code to address the provision of
transitional and supportive housing. The City does not have any
other policies or regulations that may constrain the development of
housing for persons with disabilities.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                        Page IV-89

                                            4. Development Conditions and Fees
                                            Residential developers are subject to a variety of fees and exactions
                                            to process permits and provide necessary services and facilities as
                                            allowed by State law. In general, these development fees can be a
                                            constraint to the maintenance, improvement, and development of
                                            housing because the additional cost borne by developers contributes
                                            to overall increased housing unit cost. However, the fees are
                                            necessary to maintain adequate public services and facilities in the
                                            City in concert with adopted Quality of Life Standard thresholds
                                            (see side box). These fees have not been found to act as a constraint
                                            to the development of housing in Escondido.
                                            Planning processing costs are covered in part by applicant fees.
     Escondido General Plan
                                            Approximately a third of actual costs are recovered in processing
    Quality of Life Standards               fees. Development impact fees are charged to a new development to
                                            pay for the local infrastructure needed to serve it. Within the San
The General Plan includes                   Diego region, all 18 of the local jurisdictions and the County charge
thresholds for the following                development impact fees. Impact fees can be charged for a variety
Quality of Life Standards:*                 of public facilities, including utilities, parks, open space, fire
 Traffic and Transportation                stations, libraries, and transportation improvements such as streets,
 Schools                                   highways, and transit.
 Fire Service
 Police Service                            Development impact fees enable the City to shift at least part of the
 Wastewater System                         capital-financing burden to new development, and synchronize new
 Parks System                              development with the installation of these new public facilities.
 Library Service                           Escondido's impact fees fall within the average when compared to
 Open Space System                         those of the other jurisdictions. Additionally, the City conducts a
 Air Quality                               periodic review of the fees to insure they reflect the current impacts
 Water System                              and necessary improvements for the standard level of service. To
 Economic Prosperity
                                            facilitate residential development in the Downtown area, the City
* Refer to the General Plan Introduction    charges reduced impact fees in the Downtown area.
  for a detailed description of the Quality
  of Life standards.
                                            Development fees vary depending on housing type and the location
                                            of the project totaling approximately $39,860 (including planning
                                            and development impact fees) for a typical single-family dwelling
                                            unit. For a condominium project, fees total approximately $25,198
                                            per unit, and for a multi-family project, fees total approximately
                                            $24,247 per unit. Based on the proformas for two affordable
                                            housing projects – Juniper Senior Village and The Crossings –
                                            planning and development impact fees constitute three and ten
                                            percent of the total development costs (including land cost).
                                            Figure IV-49 summarizes the most common planning and develop-
                                            ment impact fees for the City of Escondido and other North County
                                            cities. In general, the City‟s fees are comparable to developments in
                                            other North San Diego communities.
 Page IV-90                                                                   Escondido General Plan Housing

                                                                  Figure IV-49
                               Planning & Development Fees Regional Comparison (2011)
                             Escondido                 Encinitas              Carlsbad               Oceanside           Solana Beach
Planning Fees
Design Review/
Development                       n.a.             $1,000-$4,800                  n.a.              $4,838-$6,435        $3,030-$10,000
Review
Major Use Permit/
Conditional Use                 $3,375                   $6,000                 $4,162                  $4,503                $9,300
Permit
Minor Use Permit                $1,550                   $1,600                  $697                   $3,152                $2.327
Tentative Parcel
                                $1,825                   $3,500                 $3,531                  $3,089                 n.a.
Map
                           65% of Building                                 65% of Building
Plan Check                                            $50-$1,500                                         n.a.                  n.a.
                              Permit Fee                                      Permit Fee
Final Parcel Map                 $410                    $1,600                 $3,115                   n.a.                  n.a.
Tentative
                            $2,840-$4,705               $10,000            $7,647-$15,283          Deposit Account       $8,674-$10,858
Subdivision Map
Final Subdivision
                                 $995                    $2,000                 $6,939                   n.a.             $4,002-$5,777
Map
Variance                    $1,320-$1,455          $1,200-$3,200                $2,624                  $4,000                $2,163
Environmental
Review-Initial                  $1,710                   $4,200                   n.a.             Deposit Account        $291 plus cost
Study
General Plan
                            $3,590-$6,720         $13,000-$20,000           $3,962-$5,714               $9,234               $10,000
Amendment
Impact/Capacity Fees
Parks and
                             $1,098/unit1       $5,423-$9,220/unit        $3,696-$7,649/unit         $3,503/unit            $600/unit
Recreation Fee
Community/Public                                                                                                         1% of valuation
                             $1,582/unit1          $387-$571/unit                 n.a.               $2,072/unit
Facilities Fee
                             $2,931/unit2
Traffic Impact Fee                                         n.a.           $1,372-$2,286/unit             n.a.                  n.a.
                       ($425-$850 City fee)
                               $0.15/sf
Public Art Fee           (2,000 sf exempt)1
                                                           n.a.                   n.a.                   n.a.           0.5% of valuation
                               $0.30/sf
                          (1,800 sf exempt)
Sewer
                            $3,750-$7,500                  n.a.                   n.a.                   n.a.                  n.a.
Connection Fee
Water Connection
                         $2,340-$7,930/unit                n.a.                   n.a.               $4,597/unit               n.a.
Fee
Drainage Fee                    $3631                      n.a.                   n.a.                   n.a.                  n.a.
Notes:
1. These are reduced fees for the downtown area in order to encourage residential uses in the Downtown area. Drainage fee is $1,071
   per single-family unit and $428 per multi-family unit elsewhere.
2. The traffic fee of $2,931 includes a regional traffic fee (RTCIP) from which very low, low, and moderate income housing units are
   exempt. City traffic fee is $425-$850.
Source: Cities of Escondido, Encinitas, Carlsbad, Oceanside and Solana Beach, 2011.
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                                          Page IV-91
                                To facilitate residential development in the current economic
                                climate, the City recently revised its Development Fee Deferral
                                Policy in June 2012. This revision expanded the existing policy to
                                allow residential developers (for projects of five or more units) to
                                defer payment of development fees until occupancy, not to exceed
                                one year from building permit issuance.
                                5. On- and Off-Site Improvements
                                Infrastructure is already in place in multi-family areas. Service
                                levels and improvement standards are comparable to other cities in
                                the County. For traffic, the City strives to achieve a Standard Level
                                of Service (LOS) “C” which describes the acceptable volume to
                                capacity ratio. The City also allows the level to drop down to a mid
                                Level of Service “D” without requiring an environmental impact
                                report.
   „Via Roble‟ involved a mixed
   unit, mixed income develop-  Development standards vary depending on the land use pattern in
   ment including 72 affordable the area. Street width requirements (curb to curb) are 36 feet for
    apartments, 9 market-rate   public and 28 feet for private residential streets, 42 for local
     shopkeeper units and 10    collectors, 64 for collectors and 82 for major roads. Full curb and
     market-rate single family
                                gutter are required, with the standard five-foot wide sidewalk per
  detached townhomes pictured
   above. The project fronts on
                                ADA requirements.
   Escondido Boulevard and is
     centered around a large
  community open space area.
Page IV-92                                                       Escondido General Plan Housing

Water and sewer capacity must be adequate to meet normal and
emergency situations with a water capacity to provide a minimum
of 540 gallons of water per day per household and a sewage
capacity to treat a minimum of 250 gallons per day for each
residence. The City is also required to comply to NPDES (National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System) storm water standards
with structural and non-structural methods, such as the use of
detention basins, catch basin and filters, and drains.
Requirements for on- and off-site improvements vary depending on
the presence of existing improvements, as well as the size and
nature of the proposed development. In general, the City requires
the following improvements and facilities for new developments:
     Grade Improvements: The City requires developers to
         grade and improve all land dedicated or to be dedicated
         for streets or easements, bicycle ways and all private
         streets and private easements involved in a Final Map or
         Parcel Map in such manner and with such improve-
         ments as are necessary in accordance with the
         Escondido City standards.
     Sewers: The City requires developers to install sewers
         or sewage disposal systems in accordance with the
         Private Sewage Disposal Systems ordinance.
     Water Supply: The City requires developers to provide
         proof satisfactory to the City Engineer that there exists
         an adequate potable water supply available to each lot or
         parcel and that the developer will install or agree to
         install water supply facilities to the satisfaction of the
         City Engineer provided that the City Engineer may
         require such other system or size of water supply pipe as
         recommended by the water facility serving the project.
     Fire hydrants: The City requires developers to install as
         required by the City Engineer, fire hydrants and
         connections, which hydrants and connections shall be of
         a type approved by the Escondido Fire Chief.
     Public Sewer system: When the City Engineer de-
         termines that, by reason of the size and shape of the
         proposed lots, the nature of the terrain to be subdivided,
         the soil condition of the lots and the development of the
         area in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision, a public
         sewer system serving the lots will be required to
         preserve the public health, or if there is a public sewer
         main within two hundred (200) feet of the property
         boundary, the developer shall be required to install or
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                    Page IV-93

                   agree to install a public sewer system serving said lots
                   as a condition precedent to the approval of any Final or
                   Parcel Map.
                Undergrounding Utilities: All new and existing utilities
                   distribution facilities, including cable television lines
                   and other communication facilities within the bound-
                   aries of any new subdivision or within any property
                   abutting a proposed new subdivision, shall be placed
                   underground pursuant to the requirements of Escondido
                   Municipal Code.
                Flood Control: The developer is required to install all
                   flood control and drainage improvements in
                   conformance with the drainage policies of the General
                   Plan, the Drainage Master Plan, the Engineering
                   Division Policy for Drainage Studies, and City design
                   standards.
                Street Trees: The developer is required to install street
                   trees as required by Escondido City standards pursuant
                   to the landscape standards of the Zoning Code.
                Traffic Control Signals: The developer is required to
                   install such traffic control signals as may be required by
                   the City Engineer, Planning Commission or City
                   Council.
           6. Building Codes and Enforcement
           The City of Escondido has adopted the 2010 California Building
           Code. The City has also adopted the 2010 Green Building
           Standards Code. No amendments have been made that diminish the
           ability to accommodate persons with disabilities. There are no
           locally amended universal design elements; the universal design
           provisions of the California Building Code are enforced. Exceptions
           or methods of alternative compliance to the requirements of the
           California Building Code are contained in the code. The City has no
           local ability to waive the provisions of the State building codes.
           However, a mechanism within the building code allows for an
           appeals process to challenge interpretations of the building code
           requirements.
Page IV-94                                   Escondido General Plan Housing

7. Permits and Processing Times
The processing time needed to obtain development permits and              „Hickory Heights‟ involved
required approvals is commonly cited by the development com-            property acquisition and new
munity as a prime contributor to the high cost of housing.            construction of 12 homeowner-
Depending on the magnitude and complexity of the development           ship units coordinated by San
proposal, the time that elapses from application submittal to project    Diego Habitat for Humanity
approval may vary considerably.                                       (SDHFH). Eligible homeowners
                                                                        were selected from a pool of
                                                                       applicants who completed an
a. Processing Times                                                    application, attended an orien-
Factors that can affect the length of development review on a            tation meeting, met income
proposed project include: completeness of the development appli-        requirements and agreed to
cation submittal, responsiveness of developers to staff comments        participate as a Partner with
and requests for information, and projects that are not exempt from       SDHFH. Each family was
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), require              required to contribute volunteer
rezoning or general plan amendment, or are subject to a public        hours in the construction of their
hearing before the Planning Commission or City Council.               home (above right), and/or time
                                                                         working at the SDHFH thrift
                                                                       store or administrative offices.
                                                                          Ownership is restricted to
                                                                      households at or below 50% of
                                                                      the area median income (AMI).
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        . Page IV-95

           Certainty and consistency in permit processing procedures and
           reasonable processing times is important to ensure that the
           development review/approval process does not discourage
           developers of housing or add excessive costs (including carrying
           costs on property) that would make the project economically
           infeasible. The City is committed to maintaining comparatively
           short processing times. Total processing times vary by project, but
           most residential projects are approved in six months to two years.
           Figure IV-50 provides a detailed summary of the typical processing
           procedures and timelines of various types of projects in the City.
                                           Figure IV-50
                         Processing Time by Development Type
                                              Public      Appeal
              Project        Reviewing                               Estimated Total
                                             Hearing       Body
               Type             Body                                 Processing Time
                                            Required      (if any)
           Single-
                              Planning
           Family                              Yes      City Council    3-5 months
                             Commission
           Subdivision
           Multiple-             Staff/                  Planning
                                                No                     12-20 weeks
           Family           Administrative              Commission
           Multiple-          Planning
           Family (with Commission and         Yes          None        4-6 months
           subdivisions)     City Council
                              Planning
           Mixed Use       Commission and      Yes          None        4-6 months
                             City Council
           For apartment projects, processing periods normally require an
           administrative review and take approximately 12 to 20 weeks from
           the time of submittal of a complete application to the time of
           construction. Below are the required steps in the following order:
                    Submit Plot Plan Application
                    Environmental and Plot Plan Review
                    Building and Grading Permits Construction Plans Submittal
                    Resubmit Construction Plans as needed.
                    Permits Issued
           Other residential development proposals require administrative,
           Planning Commission, or City Council approval as shown below:
Page IV-96                                    Escondido General Plan Housing

Administrative Approval
Staff review – up to 10 weeks:
       Lot Line Adjustments
       Certificate of Compliances
       Parcel Maps
       Administrative Adjustments
       Second Dwelling Units
Planning Commission Approval
Public hearing – up to 16 weeks including environmental review:
       Conditional Use Permits (for easement access)
       Grading Exemptions (for grading exceeding requirements)
       Precise Development Plans
       Tentative Subdivision Maps
       Variances
City Council Approval/with Planning Commission Recommendation
Public hearing – up to 20 weeks including environmental review:
     Zone Changes (rezones and pre-zones)
     General Plan Amendments
     Extensions of Time for Tentative Subdivision Maps
     Planned Developments
     Specific Plans
     Condominium Permits
     Habitat Loss Permits
     Development Agreements
The processing time for the most common residential development
applications are summarized in Figure IV-51. These applications
are often processed concurrently. The City continues to explore
ways to streamline the processing of applications and reduce fees
for redevelopment/ rehabilitation of affordable, fair market and
mixed use housing. The City also explores ways to encourage
development of housing for middle- and high-income households in
order to promote a balanced community. The City recently con-
ducted an evaluation to streamline processes and processing times.
Specifically, the City consolidated the Design Review Board into
the Planning Commission. In so doing, the City eliminated one step
in the review process, thereby shortening the timeframe of review.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                   Page IV-97

                                               Figure IV-51
                             Processing Time by Process / Permit
                Process/Application                                 Time
            Conditional Use Permit                              3-5 months
            Design Review                                        2-4 weeks
            General Plan Amendment                4-6 months if no public vote is needed
            Environmental Impact Reports                        9-12 months
                                               15-20 working days for plan check, or longer
            Plan Check/
                                                depending on resubmitted plan checks and
            Building Permits
                                                 how fast architect responds to corrections
            Variance                                            3-5 months
            Zone Change                                         4-6 months
            Source: City of Escondido Planning Department, 2011.
           b. Design Review Process
           The design review process is regulated by Municipal Code Chapter
           33, Article 64. The purpose of design review is to preserve the
           natural charm, integrity and quality of the built environment, by
           regulating the design and appearance of development in order to
           insure compatibility with existing development and ensure that new
           development is consistent with or exceeds the high quality of the
           development projects currently located in the City.
           Design review takes the following into account: site development,
           circulation, grading, setbacks, exterior appearance of buildings,
           structures, signs, lighting, street furniture, landscaping and other
           outdoor appurtenances. The review of plans is done either by City
           staff or by the Planning Commission in conjunction with other
           discretionary reviews. Planning Commission recommendations are
           forwarded to the City Council for certain projects. Planning staff
           provides recommendations to the Planning Director regarding
           administrative projects that require design review, In order to gain
           approval, the following findings must be made:
                 The proposed site plan has been designed in a manner
                    which is compatible with the natural and urban charac-
                    teristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood.
                 The bulk, scale, and architectural design of the proposed
                    structure is compatible with the character of the surrounding
                    neighborhood.
                 The project incorporates screening, irrigation and drought
                    tolerant landscaping appropriate for the site, and in com-
                    pliance with standards established by the City.
                 All grading related to the project conforms to design
                    standards set by Article 55 (grading and erosion control).
Page IV-98                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

     The project incorporates applicable design review standards
        contained in the Zoning Code and other applicable ordi-
        nances into the site layout and building design.
     The project is consistent with the goals and objectives on
        the General Plan.
These findings are reasonable and do not constrain housing
development in the City. Typical revisions required by the DRB
include: changes to landscape materials; building elevation details /
enhancements / articulation; changes to colors; and minor site plan
adjustments. Usually, these changes can be accommodated without
increasing the costs of development.
Decisions of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Com-
mission by filing a written request to the Planning Division within
ten days following the final decision of the Director. Decisions of
the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.
c. Conditional Use Permit
A conditional use permit is a zoning instrument used primarily to
review the location, site development or conduct of certain land
uses. These are uses which generally have a distinct impact on the
area in which they are located, or are capable of creating special
problems for bordering properties unless given special attention.
The Planning Commission has the authority to grant, conditionally
grant or deny a conditional use permit application, with one
exception: The decision on whether or not to issue a conditional use
permit for residential care facilities for the handicapped lies with the
Director of Planning and Building. In order to be approved, the
Planning Commission must make the following findings:
     A conditional use permit will be granted upon sound
        principles of land use and in response to services required
        by the community.
     A conditional use permit will not be granted if it will cause
        deterioration of bordering land uses or create special
        problems for the area in which it is located.
     A conditional use permit must be considered in relationship
        to its effect on the community or neighborhood plan for the
        area in which it is to be located.
Planning Commission decisions can be appealed to the City
Council. Most residential uses are permitted by right in residential
zones. Therefore the CUP process does not serve to constrain
housing development.
  Escondido General Plan Housing                                         Page IV-99

            L. Environmental and Infrastructure
                  Constraints
            A community‟s environmental setting affects the feasibility and cost
            of developing housing. Environmental issues range from the
            availability of water to the suitability of land for development due to
            potential exposure to seismic, flooding, wildfire and other hazards.
            If not properly recognized and accommodated in residential design,
            these environmental features could potentially endanger lives and
            property. This section summarizes these potential constraints on
            residential development in Escondido.
            1. Soil, Steep Slopes, and Seismic Safety
            Regulation of development in areas of steep slopes is directly
            related to public safety and health, as the degree of slope is related
            to flood control problems, erosion control, landslides, and fire
            hazard. These problems become particularly acute on slopes greater
            than 25 percent. Accordingly, many communities, including the
            County, map slopes greater than 25 percent, recognizing them as
            potentially hazardous areas. Similarly, many of the soil com-
            positions that comprise the Escondido Planning Area present
            difficulties for development in that they cannot support roadways or
            foundations, are unacceptable for septic systems, and are highly
            erodible.
            The historical seismicity of the San Diego region is low compared
            to the rest of Southern California. This may be due to San Diego
            being on a more stable block or it may only be a reflection of a
            period of historical record which is too short to be meaningful. San
            Diego County has experienced strong shaking and damage from
            several earthquakes, but none of the recent ones have been
            particularly destructive.
            All of the faults which could affect San Diego County are part of
            the San Andreas system of faults. The portion of California west of
            San Andreas fault is part of the Pacific plate and is moving north
            with respect to the rest of the continent which is part of the North
            American plate. This movement is distributed among several faults
            in addition to the main San Andreas Fault. In and near San Diego
            County these other faults include the San Jacinto, Coyote Creek,
            Earthquake Valley, Agua Caliente, Elsinore, Rose Canyon, San
            Miguel (Mexico), Agua Blanca (Mexico), and Coronado Banks (off
            shore).
Page IV-100                                    Escondido General Plan Housing

The largest fault in the San Diego region, the San Andreas Fault, is
at least 800 miles long and is located 27 miles east of Borrego in the
Coachella Valley. There is increasing concern that the 85 mile
section from north of San Bernardino to the Salton Sea is overdue
to rupture, having been “locked” for the last 200 years. Such an
event could cause an 8.3 magnitude earthquake - the size of the
1906 San Francisco quake. An 8.3 event on the San Andreas would
subject San Diego County of shaking of intensity VII to VIII,
enough to cause considerable damage.
East of San Diego the closest active fault is the Elsinore. It passes
through the town of Elsinore, along the south side of Palomar
Mountain, through Lake Henshaw, Santa Ysabel Indian Reser-
vation, down Banner Canyon east of Julian, and out in the desert
near Vallecitos. The Elsinore fault apparently joins the Laguna
Salada fault on the east side of the Sierra Cocopah in Baja
California. The Elsinore fault is probably capable of generating an
earthquake of magnitude 7.4. Depending upon which segment
moved, considerable damage might occur in Escondido, Ramona,
Julian, Borrego, and Jacumba. Portions of all of the roads to the east
would probably be temporarily closed by landslides.
The Community Protection and Safety Element of the City‟s
General Plan includes goals, policies, and actions that are designed
to reduce the risks of hazards related to soil, steep slopes, and
seismic activity, such as the strict enforcement of standards from the
Uniform Building Code and the requiring of specific geotechnical
reports.
2. Flood Hazards                                                       „Orangewood‟ was coordinated
                                                                            by San Diego Habitat for
                                                                        Humanity (SDHFH) who, with
There are sections of the City that would be subject to inundation in
                                                                       partner families, completed the
the event of a 100-year storm. These areas include northern portions    project in 2007. Orangewood
of Reidy Creek north of Rincon Avenue, an area alongside               involves seven, three-bedroom
Escondido Creek west of Hale Avenue, along Kit Carson Park              units with ownership restricted
Creek north of Via Rancho Parkway, an area straddling Midway             to first-time homebuyers with
Drive north of the Escondido Channel, and an area straddling                 annual gross household
Valley Parkway between Ash and Citrus.                                    incomes that do not exceed
                                                                            50% of the Area Median
The Community Protection Element of the City‟s General Plan               Income (AMI). Deed restric-
includes policies to designate appropriate land uses to minimize          tions provide for a minimum
                                                                          45-year affordability period.
flood related damages and to ensure proper creek and channel
                                                                        SDHFH holds the “first right of
maintenance to ensure their water-carrying capacity.                         refusal” on all units and
                                                                           enforces a recorded Equity
                                                                          Share Agreement to ensure
                                                                            affordability is sustained.
                                                                                          .
Escondido General Plan Housing                                                             Page IV-101

            3. Hazardous Materials
            Hazardous materials represent a potential threat to those who are
            working with the materials and those who could be affected by its
            improper or accidental disposal. The cleanup of hazardous wastes
            from the past and the handling and disposal of newly generated
            wastes will affect people many generations from now. Site
            contamination may impair the City‟s ability to implement this Plan
            by increasing the costs of development, requiring certain land use
            restrictions, and causing delays while necessary cleanups are
            implemented. The policies presented in the Community Protection
            Element of the City‟s General Plan are intended to protect the
            public from existing and future hazardous contamination problems.
            4. Ridgeline and Hillside Conservation
            One characteristic that distinguishes Escondido from other commu-
            nities in the region is its location in a series of valleys that are
            surrounded by visually distinctive hillsides and ridgelines. The
            varied topography has been identified as one of Escondido‟s most
            important assets – one that has helped create the City‟s distinct
            identity. To protect these assets, the City outlined a series of policies
            in its Resource Conservation Element that are geared toward
            controlling development on the hillsides and along the ridgelines.
            5. Water Supply
            Water supply for the City stems primarily from two sources: local
            water, derived from precipitation, and stored in Lakes Henshaw and
            Wohlford, and imported water transmitted by the San Diego County
            Water Authority. A master plan, administered by the City ensures
            the adequacy of these facilities to meet the demands imposed by
            development projected over the General Plan horizon. Continued
            urban development will place increasing demands on these
            supplies. Potential limitations on the availability of supplies require
            the need to combine long-term planning for water supply with long-
            term planning for community development in Escondido.
            The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for General Plan Update
            concludes that existing water supply is not adequate to accom-
            modate the growth anticipated under the General Plan Update,
            which would add over 9,400 units by 2035.
Page IV-102                                     Escondido General Plan Housing

The Escondido Water and Wastewater Division (EWWD) recently
updated its water master plan to ensure adequate water supply to
serve the General Plan‟s projected buildout population. The
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2013-2020
Housing Element planning period is accommodated within the
City‟s current General Plan (see Housing Resources section).
Adequate water supply exists to accommodate the growth allowed
under the current General Plan.
6. Wastewater Capacity
Escondido‟s wastewater is treated at the Hale Avenue wastewater
treatment plant, conveyed over land, and discharged through an
ocean outfall. A Master Plan, administered by the City, ensures the
adequacy of these facilities to meet the demands imposed by
development projected over the General Plan horizon. Significantly,
the availability of sewer service distinguishes between urban
development and rural development. Thus, the extension of services
and the availability of capacity will influence how much and where
Escondido grows.
The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for General Plan Update
concludes that existing wastewater treatment capacity is not
adequate to accommodate the growth anticipated under the General
Plan Update, which would add over 9,400 units by 2035. The
Escondido Water and Wastewater Division (EWWD) updated its
sewer master plan to ensure adequate sewage treatment capacity to
serve the projected buildout population of the updated General Plan.
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2013-
2020 Housing Element planning period is accommodated within the
City‟s current General Plan (see Housing Resources section).
Adequate sewage treatment capacity exists to accommodate the
growth allowed under the current General Plan.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                       Page IV-103

                                  M. Housing Resources
                                  This section analyses the resources available for the development,
                                  rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Escondido. This
                                  analysis includes an evaluation of the availability of land resources
      Completed in 2011, „The
  Crossings‟ involved a 3.1-acre  for future housing developments, the City‟s ability to satisfy its
  former crime-ridden area next   share of the region‟s future housing needs, the financial resources
     to Mission Middle School.    available to support housing activities, and the administrative
   Tenant relocation, demolition  resources available to assist in implementing the City‟s housing
  of dilapidated apartments and   programs and policies.
    redevelopment of the area
        now provides a safe
   residential area consisting of
                                  1. Future Housing Needs
      55 new multi-family units
      available to house-holds    Future housing need refers to the share of the regional housing need
   earning less than 60% of the   that has been allocated to the City of Escondido. The State
     area median income. The      Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
    project consists of 5 three-  supplies a regional housing goal to the San Diego Association of
    story buildings providing 38  Governments (SANDAG). SANDAG is mandated to allocate the
  two-bedroom town home style     housing goal to city and county jurisdictions in the region. In
  apartments, 15 three-bedroom    allocating the region‟s future housing needs to jurisdictions,
   flat style apartments, 2 four- SANDAG is required to take the following factors into con-
  bedroom flat style apartments
                                  sideration pursuant to Section 65584 of the State Government
      and a community center.
                                  Code:
Page IV-104                                                        Escondido General Plan Housing

      Market demand for housing;
      Employment opportunities;
      Availability of suitable sites and public facilities;
      Commuting patterns;
      Type and tenure of housing;
      Loss of units in assisted housing developments;
      Over-concentration of lower income households; and
      Geological and topographical constraints.
a. Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA)
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) allocates to each
city and county a “fair share” of the region‟s projected housing
needs by household income group. The major goal of the RHNA is
to assure a fair distribution of housing among cities and counties
within the San Diego region, so that every community provides an
opportunity for a mix of housing for all economic segments.
SANDAG adopted its RHNA in July 2011 that covers an 11-year
planning period (January 2010 through December 2020) and
addresses housing issues that are related to future growth in the
region. The housing allocation targets are not building require-
ments, but goals for each community to accommodate through
appropriate planning policies and land use regulations. Allocation
targets are intended to assure that adequate sites and zoning are
made available to address anticipated housing demand during the
planning period.
Escondido‟s share of regional future housing needs is a total of
4,175 new units for the January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2020
period. This allocation is distributed into various income categories,
as shown Figure IV-52. The RHNA includes a fair share adjustment
which allocates future (construction) need by each income category        Typical older, underutilized
in a way that meets the State mandate to reduce the over concen-         commercial properties along
tration of lower income households in one community.                      Pennsylvania Avenue and
                                                                          Washington Avenue in the
b. Credits toward RHNA                                                  Downtown Escondido Specific
                                                                        Plan area. Most buildings are
Housing units developed, under construction, or approved can be
                                                                        low-scale (one or two stories)
credited against this RHNA. Figure IV-53 summarizes the units           with large parking areas in the
that can be credited against the City‟s RHNA. The majority of           front – a site configuration not
these units were achieved through recycling of existing lower          encouraged by the Specific Plan.
intensity uses in the Downtown Specific Plan area.                      Many buildings show signs of
                                                                            deferred maintenance.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                                           Page IV-105

                                                                        Figure IV-52
                                      Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) 2013 - 2020
                                   Income Category (% of County AMI)               Number of Units          Percent
                                   Extremely Low (30% or less)*                         460                  11.0%
                                   Very Low (31% - 50%)*                                582                  13.9%
                                   Low (51% - 80%)                                      791                  19.0%
                                   Moderate (81% - 120%)                                733                  17.6%
                                   Above Moderate (Over 120%)                          1,609                 38.5%
                                   Total                                               4,175                100.0%
                                   AMI = Area Median Income
                                   * Pursuant to AB 2634, local jurisdictions are also required to project the housing
                                     needs of extremely low income households (0-30% AMI). In estimating the number
                                     of extremely low income households, a jurisdiction can use 50% of the very low
                                     income allocation or apportion the very low income figure based on Census data.
                                     Therefore, the City’s RHNA of 1,042 very low income units can be split between
                                     44.1% extremely low and 55.9% very low income units.
                                     Total numbers may not add up due to rounding; however, the number of housing
                                     units required at each income level is fixed.
                                     Source: Regional Housing Needs Allocation, SANDAG, 2011
                                   Units Constructed
                                   Since January 1, 2010, 181 new units have been constructed in
                                   Escondido, including the 61-unit Juniper Senior Village and 120
                                   market-rate units. Juniper Senior Village consists of 51 housing
                                   units affordable to extremely low and very low income house-holds,
                                   nine units affordable to low income households, and one manager‟s
                                   unit. Juniper Senior Village is funded with Low Income Housing
                                   Tax Credits, redevelopment housing set-aside, and other affordable
                                   housing funds and therefore, required to be deed restricted as long-
                                   term affordable housing. The project was completed in 2010 and
                                   available for occupation in December 2010. The remaining new
                                   units added to the City‟s housing stock are market-rate units
                                   affordable primarily to above moderate income households.
                                   Units under Construction
                                   An affordable housing project – 55-unit The Crossings – is under
                                   construction as of the writing of this Housing Element (June 2011).
                                   The Crossings includes six units affordable to extremely low
                                   income household, 33 units to very low income households, 15
                                   units to low income households, and one manager‟s unit. The
                                   Crossings is funded with Low Income Housing Tax Credits and
                                   therefore required to be deed restricted as long-term affordable
 Projects under construction (from housing.
      top): 55-unit City Plaza;
   18 existing units completed of  Units Approved
     the 102-unit City Square;     In addition, the City has approved several market-rate housing
           82-unit Venue.          projects. These projects total 209 units.
Page IV-106                                                                   Escondido General Plan Housing

                                       Figure IV-53
           Credits Toward the RHNA (since January 1, 2010)
                      Extremely                                          Above
                                          Low         Moderate
                          Low/                                         Moderate
                                        51-80%        81-120%
                       Very Low                                         > 120%
                                           AMI           AMI                    Total
                      0-50% AMI                                           AMI
Units Completed
Juniper Senior
Housing
                            51              9              1               --     61
Market-Rate Units           --              --             --             120    120
Under Construction
The Crossings               39              15             1               --     55
City Plaza                  --              --             --              55     55
Venue                       --              --             --              82     82
City Square 1               --              --             --              84     84
Paramount  2                --              --             --             112    112
Units Approved
Lumina Project              --              --             --              64     64
424 N. Juniper St.          --              --             --              20     20
456 Escondido Blvd.         --              --             --             125    125
Total                       90              24             2              662    778
RHNA                     1,042             791           733             1,609  4,175
Remaining RHNA             952             767           731              947   3,397
Notes:
1. City Square has a total of 102 units, including 18 existing units to remain.
2. Paramount has a total of 116 units, including 4 existing units to remain.
  N. Residential Development Potential
  The Housing Element must demonstrate the City‟s ability in
  accommodating the RHNA either through production or the
  availability of capacity for growth. Much of the City‟s future
  residential growth is expected to occur in the Downtown Specific
  Plan and South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan areas, although
  opportunities for lower density residential development are also
  available throughout the City. The following discussions summarize
  the City‟s residential development capacity. A detailed sites
  inventory is provided in the Housing Element Appendix.
  1. Downtown Specific Plan Area
                                                                                      Typical older residential and
  Downtown Escondido is envisioned as a dynamic, attractive,                            low-intensity commercial
  economically vital city center providing social, cultural, economic,                 uses (e.g. gas station and
  and residential focus while respecting its historic character. The                   lumberyard) along 3rd, 4th,
  Downtown Specific Plan promotes higher residential densities in                        and 5th Avenues in the
  key locations to support retail, employment, and cultural uses.                     Downtown Specific Plan area
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                                                    Page IV-107

                                   The Downtown Specific Plan Area (SPA) encompasses approxi-
                                   mately 460 acres extending from I-15 and West Valley Parkway to
                                   Palomar Hospital, between Washington and Fifth Avenues. The
                                   City identified a number of properties within the SPA where the
                                   conditions of existing uses are conducive to redeveloping in the
                                   future. Such conditions include large parking areas, older buildings,
                                   marginally operating businesses, noncom-forming uses, and
                                   capacity for additional units. GIS analysis, staff knowledge, and
                                   field checks were used to identify and refine the sites selected.
                                   Criteria used in the selection include:
                                           Vacant lot;
                                           Vacant building;
                                           Large parking area;
                                           Age of structure (over 30 years);
                                           Land-to-improvement value (more than 1.0, meaning land is
                                            worth more than the improvements on site);
                                        Sits on Escondido Circulator route;
                                        Within one mile of transit center; and/or
                                        Expressed interest in reuse/redevelopment of property.
                                   Each selected parcel meets at least one of the above factors. Overall,
                                   these vacant and underutilized properties in the Downtown Area
                                   can accommodate 3,680 new units. This estimate is based on a
                                   density factor at 33.75 units per acre (i.e., at 75 percent of the
                                   maximum allowable density of 45 units per acre). Most recently
                                   constructed projects or projects under construction in the Down-
                                   town area realized densities that are at least 70 percent of the
                                   maximum allowable density:
                                           424 N. Juniper Street (32.7 units per acre)
                                           456 Escondido Boulevard (45.6 units per acre)
                                           City Plaza (68.8 units per acre)
                                           Venue (70.7 units per acre)
                                                                  Figure IV-54
                                              Downtown Specific Plan Residential Capacity
                                                   Maximum                    Number
    Several vacant properties are                               Potential                Total  Potential
                                      Zoning        Density                      of
    located within the Downtown                                 Density                 Acres     Units
                                                   (du/acre)                  Parcels
   Escondido Specific Plan area.
   There are also properties with  Vacant             45.0        32.5           29      4.60      141
 little improvements/structures on
                                   Underutilized      45.0        32.5          463     115.66    3,539
  site (such as aging warehouses
 and service stations) that can be Total               --           --          492     120.26    3,680
          easily redeveloped
Page IV-108                                                            Escondido General Plan Housing

a. Existing Conditions and Recycling Trends
Downtown Escondido is characterized by a variety of underutilized,
small-scale commercial development and low-intensity residential
uses. In 1992, the City identified Downtown Escondido as an area
in need of concentrated revitalization efforts and adopted the
Downtown Revitalization Area Specific Plan. The Plan has
undergone several revisions and in between 2003 and 2005, the
City and the Downtown Business Association co-sponsored “At
Home Downtown” community workshops to discuss the merits of
increasing residential densities within Downtown.
The Housing Element Appendix includes a list of parcels within the
Downtown Specific Plan area that are identified as vacant or
considered as underutilized. The parcel list provides specific
information on the conditions of individual parcels. In addition,
block-level descriptions are provided. Each parcel identified is
assigned a block letter. Individually, some specific parcels may not
be considered underutilized. However, when contiguous parcels are
considered together, they present a stronger redevelopment potential
and can include individual parcels that may contain viable uses but
serve to connect the vacant and underutilized properties. These
block-level descriptions further substantiate the reasons why these
areas are underutilized with potential and need for revitalization.
The Through the incentives and flexibility offered by the Down-
town Specific Plan, the City has experienced a steady pace of
redevelopment activities in the area, recycling from aging comer-
cial developments, older single-family or small multi-family homes,
or parking lots into higher intensity developments. For example,
several projects under construction in the Downtown Specific Plan
area are developed at densities that exceed 30 units per acre (or at
least 70 percent of the maximum permitted density): 424 N. Juniper
Street – 32.7 units per acre; 456 Escondido Boulevard – 45.6 units
per acre; City Plaza – 68.8 units per acre; and Venue – 70.7 units
per acre. Both The Crossings and Juniper Senior Village were
developed by demolishing existing run-down multi-family units and
replacing with higher density developments.
Furthermore, transit-oriented development involving high density
(five+-story) residential development is envisioned for the
Escondido Transit Center. A conceptual site plan has been prepared
although no actual number of units has been determined. The             Typical older single-family
conceptual site plan envisions buildings with up to five to seven     homes along S. Juniper Street
                                                                       in the Downtown Escondido
stories of residential units and buildings with two stories of live /
                                                                         Specific Plan Area; many
work lofts above retail space, public plaza, and/or community         homes exhibit structural and/or
center.                                                                deferred maintenance issues
Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-109

                                 2. South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan
                                 The South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan covers a length of
                                 approximately 2.25 miles between 5th Avenue and Center City
                                 Parkway and Verda Avenue. This area plan was developed to
                                 implement strategies for revitalizing the South Escondido
                                 Boulevard commercial corridor and Centre Center Parkway
                                 residential area.
                                 The City identified a number of properties within the Plan area
                                 where the conditions of existing uses are conducive to redevelop-
                                 ment in the future. Such conditions include large parking areas,
                                 older buildings, marginally operating businesses, nonconforming
                                 uses, and capacity for additional units. GIS analysis, staff
                                 knowledge, and field checks were used to identify and refine the
                                 sites selected. Overall, these properties in Plan area can accom-
                                 modate 1,084 new units (Figure IV-55).
                                                                Figure IV-55
                                   South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan Residential Capacity
                                                                            Number
                                                 Maximum     Potential               Total    Potential
                                    Zoning                                      of
                                                  Density     Density                Acres     Units
                                                                             Parcels
                                 Vacant            24.0         16.8           10     7.75      126
                                 Underutilized     24.0         16.8           228   73.86      958
                                 Total              --            --           238    81.61    1,084
                                 a. Existing Conditions and Recycling Trends
                                 South Escondido Boulevard is characterized by a variety of aging,
                                 underutilized, and small-scale commercial development, inter-
                                 spersed with older single-family residential uses. Of the 228
                                 underutilized parcels selected, 101 parcels are currently developed
                                 with either single-family, duplex, or triplex units, when recycling
                                 these properties can yield a substantially higher density at 24 units
                                 per acre. The other 117 parcels have low intensity, small, and aging
                                 commercial uses. The majority of these uses are small, independent
                                 stores; the decision to relocate and/or redevelop these uses does not
   Typical aging, underutilized  usually involve the strategic planning of large regional or national
   commercial properties and     chains and therefore can be more responsive to the local market
     vacant land along South     economics. Through the incentives and flexibility offered by the
   Escondido Boulevard. Most     South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan, the City has seen redevelop-
  properties have large parking  ment interests in the area. Several housing projects have been
  areas with little improvements approved in the area in recent years. However, due to the economy,
   and many buildings exhibit    many of these approvals have expired.
      deferred maintenance
Page IV-110                                                          Escondido General Plan Housing
   Overall, this area has been seriously impacted by the recession.
   Many businesses are operating at a marginal level and many have
   left the area. As a result, vacant buildings can be found throughout
   the area. While stand-alone, some smaller businesses may be
   surviving, the lack of maintenance among the vacant building and
   in the general area does not foster economic health. The City‟s goal
   is to encourage the consolidation and redevelopment of smaller
   parcels into well-designed modern uses. The City anticipates that
   interest in redeveloping the area with higher density residential uses
   would be renewed once the economy improves.
   3. Other City Areas
   Residential development potential in areas other than the Down-
   town Specific Plan or South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan
   areas is summarized in Figure IV-56. Most are relatively large
   low density properties that can be subdivided to accommodate
   additional units with the exception of opportunities available in
   two areas – Palomar Medical Center and the Mercado Area Plan.
   The housing Element Appendix provides a list of the vacant and
   underutilized properties in areas outside the Downtown Specific
   Plan and the South Escondido Boulevard Area Plan.
   a. Palomar Medical Center
   The City entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
   with the Palomar Pomerado Health (PPH) in 2006, regarding the
   improvement and expansion of the Palomar Medical Center.
   Pursuant to the MOU, the Palomar Medical Center will replace,
   repair and renovate aging facilities at the Downtown Medical
   Campus and expand its medical facilities into the Escondido
   Research and Technology Center (ERTC). Improvements at the
   Downtown Medical Campus may include adding up to 300
er housing units at an allowable density of up to 45 units per acre.
   The types of housing may include short- and long-term employee
   housing, assisted care housing, and senior housing. The City will
   facilitate this project by vacating a segment of Valley Boulevard.
                                                                           Typical older homes in South
                                                                          Escondido Boulevard Area Plan.
                                                                          Most homes are at least 40 years
                                                                           old, occupying relatively large
                                                                              lots; some homes exhibit
                                                                           deferred maintenance issues.
                                                                                       (above)
                                                                           Downtown Escondido Palomar
                                                                                    Medical Center
   Escondido General Plan Housing                                                         Page IV-111

                                    a. Mercado Area Plan
                                    The area defined as Mercado Escondido comprises 11 acres located
                                    along four blocks between Valley Parkway on the north, Pine Street
                                    on the east, Fourth Avenue on the south and Quince Street on the
                                    west. Intersecting streets also include Grand, Second and Third
                                    Avenues. This area is within the older urban core of the community
                                    situated between Escondido‟s historic Downtown and Interstate 15.
                                    The City identified approximately four acres of aging commercial /
                                    industrial properties and lumberyard in the Mercado Area with
                                    mixed use development can occur at a density of 45 units per acre.
                                    Due to the changing economic structure in the region and the
                                    current economic conditions, many of these older commercial /
                                    industrial uses are operating at a marginal level.
                                    c. Low Density Residential Uses
                                    Lower density vacant and underutilized residential sites throughout
                                    the City can accommodate 1,157 units. Most of these properties are
                                    zoned RA, RE, R-1, and R-2.
                                                                   Figure IV-56
                                                   Residential Capacity in Other Areas
                                                 Maximum       Potential     Number of  Total   Potential
                                      Zoning
                                                  Density       Density        Parcels Acres     Units
                                                                      Vacant
                                    RA/RE           <2.2         <1.5            60    422.49     298
                                    R-1            2.2-7.3      1.5-5.1          34    104.36     295
                                    R-2           8.0-12.0      5.6-8.4           3     1.57       13
                                    R-3             18.0         12.6             1     0.37        4
                                    Subtotal          --           --            98    528.79      610
                                                                  Underutilized
                                    RA/RE           <2.2         <1.5            62    184.46     170
                                    R-1            2.2-7.3      1.5-5.1          59    120.78     277
                                    R-2           8.0-12.0      5.6-8.4          20    19.09      104
                                    R-3             18.0         12.6             9     4.09       38
                                    R-4             24.0         16.8             1     0.96       14
                                    H-P              45          30.0             1    10.01      300
                                    M-1              45          31.5             5     4.02      124
    Typical aging, underutilized    Subtotal          --           --            157   343.41    1,027
 industrial properties along W. 4th Total             --           --            255   872.2     1,637
   Avenue in the Mercado area.
Page IV-112                                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

O. Ability in Meeting the RHNA
The City‟s Downtown Specific Plan area can accommodate 3,680
additional units. While not all underutilized properties will be
redeveloped with a residential component, market studies in the
region have indicated future growth will most likely be spearheaded
by mixed use developments. Assuming 50 percent of the Down-
town properties to be redeveloped as mixed use projects, at least
1,840 units can be achieved in Downtown. In addition, the Palomar
Medical Center and Mercado district offer high density residential
opportunities for another 424 units. Overall, the City has the ability
to accommodate 2,264 lower income units under the existing
General Plan and zoning, adequate to accommodate the City‟s
lower income RHNA of 1,719 units.
Based on the City‟s currently available residential and mixed use
sites, adequate residential capacity is available to meet the City‟s
RHNA for all income groups. Figure IV-57 summarizes the City‟s
RHNA status.
                               Figure IV-57
                    Summary of RHNA Status
                    Extremely
                                                      Above
                    Low/Very       Low      Moderate            Total
                                                     Moderate
                       Low
RHNA                  1,072         791       733     1,609     4,175
RHNA Credits            90          24         2       662       778
Remaining RHNA         952          767       731      947      3,397
Residential
Capacity
RA/RE/R1/R2
                                                      1,157     1,157
(<18 du/ac)
R3/R4
                                             1,140              1,140
(18-24 du/ac)
Downtown
                           3,680                                3,680
(MU - 45 du/ac)
50% Capacity               1,840                                1,840
Medical Center
                            300                                  300
(30 du/ac)                                                              Typical aging, underutilized
Mercado                                                                commercial properties along
                            124                                  124
(M1 - 45 du/ac)                                                            Grand Avenue in the
Total Capacity             2,264             1,140    1,157     4,561  Downtown Specific Plan Area
Surplus                                                                   where high vacancy and
                            545               409      210      1,164
(Shortfall)                                                              turnover rates impact the
                                                                       economic viability of this area
Escondido General Plan Housing                                                        Page IV-113

                                     Escondido has also introduced a new Mixed Use Overlay as part of
                                     the General Plan update that involves an additional 340 acres where
                                     the density can reach 80 units per acre and increase the density at a
                                     portion of the Urban IV district from 24 units per acre to 30 units
                                     per acre. Both actions, if approved by the voters, will provide
                                     additional affordable housing opportunities in the community.
                                     However, at this time, these potential capacities have not been
                                     factored into the City‟s sites inventory.
                                     Moderate income housing can be accommodated in the City‟s
                                     multi-family residential zones (R3 and R4) at allowable densities
                                     between 18 and 24 units per acre. Lower density residential zones
                                     (RA, RE, R1, and R2) offer single-family and low-intensity, multi-
                                     family residential opportunities that are affordable primarily to
                                     above moderate income households.
                                     P. Financial Resources
                                     Affordable housing for lower and moderate income households
                                     requires the creative layering of multiple funding sources. Key
                                     funding sources available for the construction, acquisition /
                                     rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing include:
                                     1. Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Funds
                                     The Escondido Redevelopment Agency was dissolved on February
                                     1, 2012, pursuant to AB1X26 and the subsequent California
                                     Supreme Court decision on December 29, 2011. Consequently, tax
                                     increment financing will no longer be available as a tool to generate
                                     funding for future community development and affordable housing
    „Cobblestone Village‟ involved   activities. Assembly Bill 1585 that would potentially allow
  the acquisition and rehabilitation redevelopment agencies to retain the existing balance of housing
  of 44 multi-family rental-housing  set-aside funds is currently pending on Senate approval.
      units in 2002. All units were
   completely rehabilitated, inclu-
   ding the introduction of energy   2. Community Development Block Grants
     efficient heating and cooling
      systems. The newly gated       The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program was
     community offers residents a    initiated by the Housing and Community Development Act
      community court-yard with      (HCDA) of 1974. The primary objective of the program is to
  barbecues, a play-ground and a     develop viable urban communities by providing decent housing, a
   resource center that includes a   suitable living environment, and economic opportunities,
    computer lab for resident use.
                                     principally for persons of low incomes (up to 80 percent AMI).
         Units are restricted to
     households earning between
                                     CDBG funds can be used for a wide array of activities, including:
       50% and 60% of the Area             Housing rehabilitation;
         Median Income (AMI).              Lead-based paint screening and abatement;
Page IV-114                                                             Escondido General Plan Housing

     Acquisition of buildings and land;
     Construction or rehabilitation of public facilities and
        infrastructure; and
     Public services for low income persons and persons with
        special needs.
The City of Escondido is an entitlement jurisdiction for CDBG
funding and receives approximately $1.6 million annually. The City
uses CDBG funds to provide residential rehabilitation assistance
and a variety of supportive services for lower income residents and
those with special needs.
3. HOME Investment Partnership Program (HOME)
The HOME program provides federal funds for the development
and rehabilitation of affordable rental and ownership housing for
households with incomes not exceeding 80 percent of area median
income. The program gives local governments the flexibility to
fund a wide range of affordable housing activities through housing
partnerships with private industry and non-profit organizations.
HOME funds can be used for activities that promote affordable
rental housing and homeownership by low income households.
Escondido is an entitlement jurisdiction that receives HOME funds
directly from HUD. Each year, the City receives approximately
$800,000 in HOME funds. The City uses HOME funds to support
affordable housing development through Community Housing
Development Corporations (CHDOs) and pursue acquisition /
rehabilitation of multi-family rental housing.
Q. Administrative Capacity
Escondido collaborates with a number of nonprofit organizations to
expand affordable housing opportunities for residents including:
     Community HousingWorks: 16-unit 15th Avenue Coop; 13-
        unit Daybreak Cove; 24-unit Eucalyptus View; 32-unit
        Orange Place Cooperative; and 8-unit Sunrise Place
     Interfaith Services: 8-unit Aster Street Apartments
     National Core: 44-unit Cobblestone Street Apartments; and
        61-unit Juniper Senior Village
The City will continue to work with these and other qualified non-
profit affordable housing developers to create affordable housing
through new construction, acquisition/rehabilitation, and preser-
vation.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                      Page IV-115

  A resident-controlled, Limited-
     Equity Cooperative formed     R. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
  the „The Orange Place Co-op‟
   in 1997. The project offers 32  Sustainability is a key community goal reflected throughout the
  units of affordable housing for  General Plan. Escondido is largely built-out with limited vacant
     families earning less than    land available for new development. Updated General Plan policies
      50% of the Area Median       will guide citizens, developers, city staff, and decision-makers over
    Income (AMI). Units feature    the next decades to facilitate the community‟s long-term vision. The
    private front entries and rear
                                   plan‟s smart growth principles represent a shift in focus from “how
    porches, individual washer /
  dryer hookups, extra storage,    to develop vacant land” to “how to reinvest in existing neigh-
   and a private garden area for   borhoods.”
  each family. The complex has
    secured, covered parking, a    Escondido‟s smart growth principles preserve and enhance single-
    playground with play equip-    family development patterns in established neighborhoods, main-
     ment, three separate land-    tain residential densities in outlying areas to accommodate growth,
     scaped court-yards, and a     and guide additional employment and residential growth toward
        community building.        downtown and urbanized sectors along key transportation corridors.
Page IV-116                                                           Escondido General Plan Housing

A land use strategy of the General Plan is to promote mixed use
developments, with the goal of integrating employment, retail,
entertainment, and community amenities within close proximity to
create vibrant urban areas. Successfully integrating residential,
employment, entertainment, shopping, and services in a mixed use
overlay is effective in reducing reliance on the automobile as
residents are able to conveniently access facilities and services.
1. General Plan Conservation Goals and Policies
In addition to policies contained in this Housing Element, Land Use
and Community Form Element contains the following policies that
promote energy conservation:
Community Character Policy 1.8
Require development projects to locate and design buildings, con-
struct energy and water efficient infrastructure, reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, enhance community livability and economic vitality,
and implement other practices contributing to sustainable resources.
Community Character Policy 1.9
Require that development in downtown, at transit stations, and other
key districts accommodate a mix of land uses and configure uses to
promote walkabilty, bicycling, and transit uses, reducing the need
for the automobile.
2. Building Code Enforcement
Building Energy Standards for Residential Development (Title 24),
establishes energy budgets or maximum energy use levels. Title 24
standards supersede local regulations, and State law mandates Title
24 requirements through implementation by local jurisdictions. The
City will continue strict enforcement of local and state energy
regulations for new residential construction, and continue providing
residents with information on energy efficiency.
3. Utility Company Programs
                                                                        Typical aging, underutilized
SDG&E offers an Energy Savings Assistance program offers                commercial properties along
income-qualified households assistance to:                                Woodward Avenue in the
                                                                       Downtown Specific Plan Area.
      Install improvements to help make the home more energy        Most buildings are low-scale with
         efficient;                                                  large parking areas in the front –
      Help understand the best ways to save energy around the        a site configuration discouraged
                                                                         by the Specific Plan. Many
         home; and
                                                                     buildings show signs of deferred
      Determine whether some of the appliances are eligible for      maintenance and high vacancy
         free repairs or replacement.                                        and turnover rates.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                                         Page IV-117

                                   Examples of free home improvements offered by PG&E include:
                                   attic insulation; door weather stripping and caulking; low-flow
                                   showerheads and faucet aerators; water heater blankets; energy-
                                   efficient lighting; and assistance in selecting energy-efficient
                                   appliances
                                   S. Review of Past Accomplishments
                                   To develop appropriate programs to address the housing issues
                                   identified in the 2013-2020 Housing Element, the City of
                                   Escondido has reviewed the housing programs adopted in 2005-
                                   2010 Housing Element (extended by law to cover through 2012)
                                   and evaluated the effectiveness of these programs in delivering
                                   housing services and assistance. Figure IV-58 summarizes the
                                   City‟s progress toward the previous RHNA and Appendix D Table
                                   D-1 provides a detailed program-level assessment of housing
                                   accomplishments over the last planning period.
                                                                    Figure IV-58
                                                     Progress Toward 2005 – 2010 RHNA
                                                          Extremely
                                                           Low/Very    Low       Moderate  Above   Total
                                                              Low                         Moderate
                                    RHNA                      548       417        461     1,011   2,437
                                    RHNA Credits               93       75         18       957    1,143
                                    Remaining RHNA            455       432        443      54     1,384
                                    Source: City of Escondido
      Playground and courtyard
       area of, „The Crossings‟
   completed in 2011 consisting
     of 55 new multi-family units
       available to households
   earning less than 60% of the
      area median income. The
     project consists of 5 three-
    story buildings providing 38
  two-bedroom town home style
  apartments, 15 three-bedroom
    flat style apartments, 2 four-
  bedroom flat style apartments
      and a community center.
Page IV-118                                                              Escondido General Plan Housing

T. Housing Plan
The Housing Plan identifies the City‟s housing goals, polices, and
implementing programs. The overall strategy is to present a diverse
and balanced array of policies that cover four overall areas of con-
cern: construction, rehabilitation, conservation, and administration.
The goals and policies of the Housing Element are organized into
concise goal and policy directives. Section U reflects State goals
and Section V reflects the City's goals, policies, and actions.
U. State Housing Goals
California legislature sets the context and findings for housing goals
as part of the State‟s housing laws (Government Code §65580):
      The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance,
         and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable
         living environment for every Californian, including
         farmworkers, is a priority of the highest order.
      The early attainment of this goal requires the cooperative
         participation of government and the private sector in an
         effort to expand housing opportunities and accommodate
         the housing needs of Californians of all economic levels.
      The provision of housing affordable to low and moderate
         income households requires the cooperation of all levels of
         government.
      Local and State governments have a responsibility to use the
         powers vested in them to facilitate the improvement and
         development of housing to make adequate provision for the
         housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
      The Legislature recognizes that in carrying out this
         responsibility, each local government also has the respon-
         sibility to consider economic, environmental, and fiscal
         factors and community goals set forth in the general plan
         and to cooperate with other local governments and the
         State in addressing regional housing needs.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                         Page IV-119

            V. City Housing Goals and Policies
            A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision
            and Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to housing provided
            below are intended to guide development to meet present and future
            needs, achieve a vibrant community, and enhance the character of
            Escondido
            GOAL 1: Plan for quality, managed, and sustainable growth
            Housing Policy 1.1
            Expand the stock of all housing while preserving the health, safety,
            and welfare of residents, and maintaining the fiscal stability of the
            city.
            Housing Policy 1.2
            Pursue a balance of jobs to housing.
            Housing Policy 1.3
            Channel residential growth to areas where the concurrent provision
            of services and facilities, including schools, parks, fire and police
            protection, and street improvements can be assured.
            Housing Policy 1.4
            Encourage a compact, efficient urban form that conserves land and
            other natural and environmental resources, and that promotes
            transit, supports nearby commercial establishments, and takes
            advantage of infrastructure improvements installed to accommodate
            their intended intensities.
            Housing Policy 1.5
            Encourage creative residential developments and partnerships that
            result in desirable amenities and contribute to infrastructure needs.
            Housing Policy 1.6
            Incorporate smart growth principles in new residential subdivisions,
            multi-family projects, and Mixed Use Overlay areas.
            GOAL 2:      Provide a range of housing opportunities for all income
                         groups and households with special needs
            Housing Policy 2.1
            Accommodate the regional share of housing for all income groups.
Page IV-120                                   Escondido General Plan Housing
Housing Policy 2.2
Increase homeownership in the city through education, availability,
and affordability.
Housing Policy 2.3
Apply criteria demonstrating appropriateness for converting
mobilehome parks to ownership or alternative uses.
Housing Policy 2.4
Seek ways to eliminate all forms of discrimination based on race,
ancestry, national origin or color, religion, sex, familial or marital
status, disability, medical condition, age, sexual orientation, or
source of income in obtaining housing.
GOAL 3:      Enhance the quality of the city’s housing stock and
             preserve the integrity of neighborhood character
Housing Policy 3.1
Maintain and enhance the existing housing stock as a source of low-
and moderate-cost housing and as a conservation measure.
Housing Policy 3.2
Seek ways to eliminate substandard housing through continued
enforcement of the Health and Safety Code and the provision of
programs which facilitate the maintenance and rehabilitation of
housing.
Housing Policy 3.3
Utilize code enforcement measures and incentive programs as
necessary to ensure that building and safety regulations are met and
to promote property maintenance.
Escondido General Plan Housing                                         Page IV-121

Page IV-122 Escondido General Plan Housin
           IX. Economic Prosperity
Introduction                                       The Economic Prosperity
                                                   Element’s Purpose
Escondido’s prosperity relies upon com-            The purpose of the Economic Prosperity
petitive local businesses linked to the regional   Element is to establish policies that promote
and international economy, and a commitment        the long-term vitality of Escondido’s local
from the community to provide the economic         economy by developing and guiding employ-
foundations and infrastructure necessary for       ment and business opportunities and en-
their growth. Major issues facing the com-         couraging appropriate economic and business
munity’s economic vitality include attracting      development in the city. Policies in this ele-
economic growth, increasing Escondido’s            ment promote a sustainable local economy to
median income, and improving the city’s jobs       benefit current and future generations without
and housing balance. Additionally, the city’s      compromising resources, and are intended to
reliance on retail sales tax and construction      favorably influence the balance between em-
related industries as the primary source for       ployment and housing.
financing municipal operations can be un-
certain during economic downtrends.                The community’s vision includes an environ-
                                                   ment where Escondido is the “economic hub”
The ability to meet labor force requirements is    of inland San Diego North County with
dependent upon collaborations between busi-        desirable workplaces offering diverse employ-
ness, government, and educational institutions.    ment opportunities. Achieving that vision
Escondido’s economic sustainability is closely     requires a well qualified and increasingly
linked to its quality of life and its desirability productive labor force to maintain a com-
as a place for workers to live and businesses to   petitive edge in a business community that
locate, which correlates the Economic Pros-        attracts entrepreneurs and fosters opportunities
perity Quality of Life Threshold (Figure IX-       for business expansion and attraction.
1).

              Figure IX-1
       GENERAL PLAN                  A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #11
                                          General Plan
      ECONOMIC PROSPERITY
The city shall implement programs    The Economic Prosperity Element is most closely related to the Land
   and support efforts to increase   Use and Community Form, Mobility and Infrastructure, and Housing
  Escondido’s median household       Elements. Providing properly placed and ample land use designations
    income and per capita wage.      for retail, office and industrial are important in maintaining a viable
  Programs shall focus on actively   economy. The efficient movement of people and goods, as well as
 fostering entrepreneurial opportu-  adequate infrastructure and utility improvements, are vital con-
 nities, recruiting new businesses,  siderations for businesses evaluating options for locating and
and encouraging the expansion of
                                     expanding their establishments. Housing to meet the needs of all
  existing businesses to increase
employment densities. Efforts shall  income levels is a goal of the Housing Element, and a primary factor
  support retaining skilled workers  in attracting jobs and retail businesses whose employers seek
   whose wages exceed the San        workforce housing and a population with a healthy disposable
Diego Region’s median per capita     income.
 income, and bringing new dollars
       into the local economy.       All General Plan Elements must work together to support sustainable
                                     development, and improve the quality of life of all residents.
                                     Escondido’s environment, municipal facilities, cultural resources,
                                     recreation, trails, and open space all relate to economic sustainability.
                                     For example, maintaining adequate infrastructure, preserving open
                                     space, protecting environmental resources, and maintaining recrea-
                                     tional amenities will help ensure that the Escondido remains an
  Westfield Mall provides over 1.6
 million square feet of retail space
                                     attractive location for businesses, visitors and residents. The
 and is one of Escondido’s primary   Economic Prosperity Element provides additional guidance for
   sources of economic revenue       planning and implementing a balanced and city-wide approach to
                                     attaining a more economically viable community.
Page IX-2                                                  Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

                                                                             -Economic Development-
                                                                        “Any change in a community that
                                                                            enables greater production,
                                                                     increased employment, and a better
                                                                      distribution of goods and services.”
                                                                            American Planning Association
B. Adequate Supply of Employment
     Acreage to Support Economic Growth
Diverse businesses interests are present the community. However, the
percent of Escondido’s General Plan Area devoted for employment
uses is comparably less than other communities in the region. Many
residents currently commute out of the city for employment, con-
tributing to local and regional traffic congestion. Escondido
recognizes that the need for growth in the economic sector is a
component of an economically healthy community as described in
Figure IX-2. An environment for attracting businesses with jobs that
raises the community’s median income is critical for economic
sustainability and included as a goal in the Economic Prosperity
Quality of Life Standard (Figure IX-1). An adequate supply of
employment acreage provides Escondido the opportunity to promote       Underdeveloped area around the
technology, manufacturing, office space, professional services and        Interstate 15 and Felicita Road
shopping.                                                              Interchange provide opportunities
                                                                         for Planned Office development
  Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                                   Page IX-3

                Figure IX-2
                                         C. Raising Median Income, Balancing
     FEATURES OF AN                            Jobs and Housing
      ECONOMICALLY
                                         Raising median income and providing higher wage employment
HEALTHY COMMUNITY                        opportunities promote economic sustainability. A variety of housing
                                         types helps Escondido remain competitive in the regional marketplace
Meets the Following Criteria:            in terms of location, amenities, and costs. These attributes assist the
 Exports goods and services             city in attracting new, targeted businesses to provide a diversified and
   and imports cash                      abundant employment base for Escondido. It is essential that areas of
 Meets public service needs /           the city are properly designated for a variety of housing types from
   expenditures with revenues            high intensity mixed-use, to multi-family, to estate. This will provide
 Maintains a sustainable tax            a balance of jobs and housing in the local economy, minimize
   base                                  commutes, and reduce regional traffic congestion.
 Provides opportunities for
   personal growth
                                         D. Promoting Small Business and Entre-
              -International Economic          preneurial Opportunities
                 Development Council
                                         Significant sources of new jobs in Escondido’s economy are the
                                         community’s existing locally owned and operated small business
                                         enterprises. The continued success of these establishments is
                                         important in the diversification and invigoration of the local economy.
                                         It is also important to have a long-term economic strategy that focuses
                                         on identifying and assisting Escondido’s existing and potential high-
                                         growth, job-creating firms. The success of small business enterprises
                                         will lead to a stronger economy and one that is increasingly driven by
                                         locally owned companies, rather than ones that are dependent on
                                         decision making from remote locations.
                                         E. Attracting 21st Century High Paying
                                               Industries
                                         Opportunity exists in recruiting higher wage jobs in areas such as bio-
                                         tech, bio-med, telecommunications, software, and “green” industries.
                                         Attracting technology and life-science related industries to Escondido
                                         can create desirable jobs for local residents, resulting in higher per
 Escondido wastewater treatment          capita incomes; more discretionary income to spend on local goods
   facility installed California's first and services generating more local tax revenues for public services;
  “green technology” that converts       and more income to invest in local improvements and amenities. This,
   raw sewage gas into renewable         in turn, will help to continue raising the community’s overall standard
 natural gas, clean enough for use       of living.
      in homes and businesses
Page IX-4                                                      Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

F. Promoting Tourism and Recreational
      Opportunities
Regional-serving retail centers, hotels, and attractions bring new
wealth into a community, create numerous jobs, and help diversify
the local economic base. Local investment in these types of venues
can also contribute to a higher quality of life for local residents. A
high quality of life, in turn, is essential in attracting targeted
technology and science related businesses to the community. Escon-
dido has the opportunity to build upon its reputation as a growing
progressive community in San Diego North County, and to establish
itself as the recognized hub for leisure, recreation, shopping and
entertainment throughout the region.
The community’s tourist and recreational venues include Escondido’s    Unique restaurants and revitalized
historic downtown and California Center for the Arts, Lakes Dixon       Mercado District street improve-
                                                                       ments add character to downtown
and Wohlford, several public golf courses, a renowned public art
                                                                               (above, and left)
program (including Queen Califia’s Sculpture Garden by Niki de
Saint Phalle), Daley Ranch and San Dieguito Open Space Preserves,
as well as nearby attractions including the San Diego Zoo Safari Park,  Additional local attractions and
Orfila Winery; and Lawrence Welk Resort. Also refer to the Com-         events offer a variety of tourist
munity Health and Services Element for additional information.         and recreational opportunities for
                                                                             residents and visitors
  Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                                  Page IX-5

                                G. Strengthening Connections of Existing
                                     Economic Districts
                                Escondido has experienced significant growth in new master
                                planned communities, business parks and commercial shopping
                                centers over the past several decades. Areas within Escondido’s
                                urban core represent opportunities for focused reinvestment in
                                existing infrastructure. Revitalizing land uses in Escondido’s urban
                                core, and establishing and maintaining attractive and efficient
                                transportation links to outlying areas will support and strengthen the
                                community’s overall economic development. These efforts will
                                encourage residents to shop, recreate, seek employment, locate
                                businesses and socialize throughout the community, facilitate a
                                better use of existing commercial areas, and create a more cohesive,
                                fiscally sound and well-balanced city.
                                H. Enhancing Marketability and Image
                                Cities have increasingly taken a more proactive approach in their
                                efforts to attract desirable businesses to their community. A com-
                                munity must understand its assets and clearly and appropriately
                                articulate them for a successful marketing approach. Quality of life
                                factors, proximity to markets, costs of doing business, and
                                availability of incentives need to be effectively communicated to
  Attracting upscale businesses
  to the community such as the  gain the attention of companies seeking to relocate or expand.
      Lexus Lifestyle Center    Conveying a progressive and positive image is important as Escon-
       enhances community       dido continues to attract and recruit businesses whose owners and
     marketability and image    employees demand a high-quality working and living environment.
Page IX-6                                            Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

I. Long-Term Revitalization Efforts
As economic change is inevitable, Escondido must focus on
economic revitalization in a variety of ways. There are several
older employment areas in the community involving underutilized
properties where the General Plan recommends transitioning to
higher, more employee-intensive land uses. A proactive approach
is the best strategy to encourage a strong local economy. Ongoing
long-range planning, as well as building partnerships with local,
regional and national business organizations, are ways to plan
effectively for the future. Revitalizing the community’s older and
underutilized employment areas will stimulate economic activity
and increase revenue to the city.
J. Minimize Impediments for Business
     Attraction and Expansion
Escondido is committed to supporting and providing high-quality
infrastructure, exceptional public services, a secure and affordable Upgrading water lines in El Norte
energy supply, a reliable supply of clean water, and adequate          Parkway near I-15 to ensure
wastewater capacity. This will be accomplished in a manner that           adequate infrastructure
does not place excessive financial burdens on the business com-        promotes revitalization and
munity and maintains a vibrant local economy for attracting and         minimizes impediments for
retaining a healthy mix of businesses.                                  future business expansion
  Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                               Page IX-7

                              K. Education to Strengthen Workforce
                                   Qualifications
                              For our economy to grow, Escondido must encourage a population of
                              educated workers. Higher levels of training lead to higher earnings
                              and more discretionary income. The ability to meet labor force
                              requirements is largely dependent upon a state-of-the-art education
                              system, job training programs, and collaborations between govern-
                              ment, business, and education. Higher education can take many forms
                              from traditional degree programs, vocational education, customized
                              business training, shorter certificate programs, online courses and
                              noncredit, skill-specific classes. The need for a well-qualified, well-
                              trained and increasingly productive labor force is a critical factor in
                              maintaining a competitive position for businesses in the community
                              and a more financially and socially secure citizenry.
  Palomar Community College’s
  East Valley Parkway campus
Page IX-8                                          Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

L. Government Leadership Promoting
      Economic Development
A key element of creating and maintaining a thriving local business
and industrial environment is the development of effective partner-
ships with public and private economic development interests. The
professional, efficient and effective provision of municipal services
affords a positive impression of the city. It also ensures that business
needs are appropriately addressed, thereby reducing development
costs and time. This creates a business friendly environment that en-
courages and supports the business community and leads to a diver-
sified and thriving local economy. As the demand on city services
continues to grow, Escondido will continue to ensure that its services
and materials are provided in a manner to further support these
efforts.
M. Monitoring Economic Development
Economic sustainability and development is influenced by market,
physical, regulatory, financial, and political issues. Moreover, eco-
nomic sustainability is a multifaceted philosophy subject to constantly
changing growth pressures. The fundamental purpose of economic
sustainability and development is shared between all levels and types
of policy and program decision making: namely, to create and
maintain an economically healthy community. Monitoring key indi-
cators that measure and compare factors associated with the commu-
nity’s economic strength is important to gauge Escondido’s fiscal
vitality, as well as for identifying major factors affecting the pace and
nature of economic growth and developing measures for improvement.
N. Economic Prosperity Goals and Policies
A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and
Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to economic prosperity
are intended to guide development to meet present and future needs,
raise median income levels, achieve a vibrant community, and
enhance the character of Escondido.
1. Employment Acreage
GOAL 1: High quality, diversified, and employee-intensive,
             industrial, retail, technology, manufacturing and
             service-oriented businesses that create and sustain a
             strong economic base and provide opportunities for
             the full employment of a diverse set of skills.
  Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                              Page IX-9

                                  Employment Acreage Policy 1.1
                                  Provide sufficient land at a variety of parcel sizes for industrial and
                                  commercial uses to sustain a stable economic base.
                                  Employment Acreage Policy 1.2
                                  Encourage the preservation and expansion of existing industrial uses
                                  in appropriate designated areas that are consistent with the city’s
                                  vision and goals.
                                  Employment Acreage Policy 1.3
                                  Consider the fiscal implications of General Plan Amendments for
                                  changes in land use designations that reduce the capacity of industrial
                                  and commercial development.
                                  Employment Acreage Policy 1.4
                                  Promote quality economic development that fosters job availability,
                                  economic revitalization, and tax revenues.
                                  Employment Acreage Policy 1.5
                                  Encourage a variety of economic activities in Escondido that:
                                  a) Diversifies and balances the economic base and cushions the
                                      city’s economy from a downturn in any one sector or cyclical
                                      fluctuations;
                                  b) Provides a broad spectrum of employment opportunities ranging
                                      from semi-skilled to high-technology positions;
                                  c) Reduces the need for Escondido residents to commute out of the
                                      area for their employment;
                                  d) Improves the city’s fiscal stability;
                                  e) Enhances overall property values;
                                  f) Provides support products and services for local businesses;
                                  g) Expands opportunities for arts and artists supporting the city as a
                                      cultural destination; and,
                                  h) Locates and designs buildings and properties in a campus style
                                      environment, where feasible.
                                  2. Wage and Job / Housing
         Escondido Research
  Technology Center (shown in     GOAL 2: A range and balance of job and housing opportunities
   its grading stage) represents              for all residents.
  a significant percentage of the
     city’s employment acreage
     available for development
Page IX-10                                               Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.1
Implement programs and support efforts to increase Escondido’s
median income and wage by: actively fostering entrepreneurial
opportunities, recruiting new businesses, annexing key unincor-
porated lands, and encouraging existing business expansions that
increases employment densities and retains skilled workers whose
wages exceed the San Diego Region’s median per capita income, and
bringing new dollars into the local economy.
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.2
Facilitate increased employment densities in the Downtown, near
transit stations, and along transit routes.
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.3
Provide opportunities for a balance of local job and housing
opportunities offering a diverse supply of housing types at prices and
rents correlated with the wage levels of local jobs.
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.4
Provide economic development incentives to businesses that offer
high quality job opportunities which result in raising the median
income level for Escondido residents
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.5
Permit ancillary commercial development in business parks, such as
banks, restaurants, and limited retail uses in order to provide
amenities for future tenants and enhance economic vitality.
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.6
Collaborate with nearby jurisdictions to attract and retain large scale,
high wage employment businesses that are unable to locate in
Escondido but still offer local residents employment opportunities
that raise the median income.
Wage and Jobs / Housing Policy 2.7
Establish criteria for the types of businesses that should be actively
recruited to locate and/or expand in Escondido. These criteria should
be monitored and periodically updated to identify evolving markets
and businesses that offer the opportunity to raise Escondido’s median
income. Criteria could include, but not be limited to:
a) Level or rate of wages paid to employees;
b) Benefits provided to employees;                                       Housing units constructed in
                                                                           downtown diversity the
c) Employee density per acre;
                                                                         community’s housing supply
d) Skills required for employment; and,                                  and provide opportunities to
                                                                            work closer to home
e) Full-time and part-time/contract/seasonal employee ratio.
Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                                Page IX-11

           3. Small Business and Entrepreneurialship
           GOAL 3: Economically viable incubators and small businesses
                        that offer the opportunity for long-term diversification
                        and growth.
           Small Business and Entrepreneurialship Policy 3.1
           Provide assistance and information to facilitate the attraction,
           retention, and expansion of small and medium size businesses with
           good growth potential.
           Small Business and Entrepreneurialship Policy 3.2
           Identify and remove obstacles to the formation and expansion of local
           businesses, where appropriate.
           Small Business and Entrepreneurialship Policy 3.3
           Encourage and permit the establishment of home-based and
           entrepreneurial start-up businesses, in locations that are compatible
           with the surrounding neighborhood.
           Small Business and Entrepreneurialship Policy 3.4
           Implement marketing programs to support local businesses and pro-
           mote Escondido as an ideal location for business development and
           growth. Emphasize buying locally, including business-to-business
           transactions.
           Small Business and Entrepreneurialship Policy 3.5
           Encourage and facilitate the development of a diversity of small
           businesses in proximity to one another and avoid redundancy of
           single types of uses within a block, commercial mall, or neighbor-
           hood. However, clusters of mutually supportive businesses such as
           found in a “restaurant row” shall not be precluded.
           4. Twenty-First Century Industries
           GOAL 4: Businesses offering cutting-edge technology that
                        enable Escondido to maintain a competitive position in
                        attracting quality jobs and revenue.
           Twenty-First Century Industries Policy 4.1
           Maintain sufficient land for the long-term development of technology
           industries and corporate headquarter facilities.
           Twenty-First Century Industries Policy 4.2
           Publicize the economic and social benefits of technology-based
           industries, emphasizing the health of the Escondido economy, and the
           community value of well-paying high-benefit industrial employment.
Page IX-12                        Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

Twenty-First Century Industries Policy 4.3
Continue to recruit and promote the establishment of life sciences,
biotech, bio-med, software, telecommunications, and “green” indus-
tries as well as research and development facilities that promote
technologies.
Twenty-First Century Industries Policy 4.4
Work with local service providers to ensure that appropriate and
adequate infrastructure is provided to support high technology and
“green” businesses.
5. Tourism and Recreation
GOAL 5: Viable tourist, recreation, and arts/cultural-based
             businesses.
Tourism and Recreation Policy 5.1
Encourage the development of a mix of hotel, motel, arts-related and
arts-compatible businesses, specialty retail, restaurants and entertain-
ment, as well as family-serving and visitor-serving uses.
Tourism and Recreation Policy 5.2
Promote and protect the diversity of local natural and historic
resources in Escondido to preserve and cultivate tourism, commercial
recreation, and eco-tourism. Such locations include: Daley Ranch,
Lake Wohlford, Lake Dixon, Grape Day Park, Kit Carson Park,
community parks, Old Escondido Neighborhood, and other important
historic resources.
6. Existing Economic Districts
GOAL 6: Vigorous and economically prosperous commercial
             and business districts.
Existing Economic Districts Policy 6.1
Revitalize the Downtown, East Valley Parkway, Center City
Parkway, and Escondido Boulevard commercial areas by upgrading
their appearance and achieving a coordinated land use pattern that
includes retail, office, visitor serving, and residential development of
appropriate density and intensity.
Existing Economic Districts Policy 6.2
Establish incentives, implement improvements, provide funding, and
maintain fees for the revitalization of existing older industrial and      Crusin’ Grand provides
commercial areas, as well as for the purpose of attracting a broad         tourism and recreation
spectrum of new businesses.                                              amenities for the community
Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                                  Page IX-13

                                   Existing Economic Districts Policy 6.3
                                   Coordinate appropriate transportation linkages that facilitate the flow
                                   of vehicular, transit, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic between Escon-
                                   dido’s commercial and business centers.
                                   7. Marketing and Image
                                   GOAL 7: Distinct identities for the City and its centers, districts,
                                               and neighborhoods.
                                   Marketing and Image Policy 7.1
                                   Promote the identity of Escondido and its key districts through a
                                   variety of efforts, including but not limited to: the city’s website,
                                   telecasts, social media, newsletter publications, branding/logo
                                   development, and image enhancement and marketing programs.
                                   Marketing and Image Policy 7.2
                                   Designate and distinguish the location, function, and characteristics of
                                   primary gateways and key corridors through their land uses, urban
                                   form, and streetscape improvements.
                                   Marketing and Image Policy 7.3
                                   Market the City’s economic opportunities to encourage entre-
                                   preneurial investment, attract new businesses, and foster job growth
                                   that contributes to the diversification and stabilization of the local
                                   economy.
                                   Marketing and Image Policy 7.4
                                   Collaborate with local businesses and organizations to promote a
                                   calendar of celebrations, events, and activities such as farmers
                                   markets, parades, 5K/10K races, arts fairs, community picnics, and
                                   similar activities to promote the identity of the City and key districts.
                                   8. Long-Term Economic Wellbeing
                                   GOAL 8: A sustainable economy and businesses.
                                   Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.1
                                   Work with businesses and other stakeholders to identify and imple-
                                   ment programs and measures for the revitalization and/or transition of
                                   underutilized and obsolete employment areas. This may include:
 Unique restaurants are important  a) Developing incentives and other strategies to promote re-
   businesses that instill unique      investment; and,
 character to the community, offer b) Targeting investments in public infrastructure that may be
  employment opportunities, and
                                       catalysts for new private sector investment.
     generate tourist dollars
Page IX-14                                                 Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.2
Encourage redevelopment of underutilized and economically
marginal employment areas to create higher paying new jobs and new
retail businesses and entertainment opportunities.
Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.3
Encourage and support the renovation, lot consolidation, and reuse of
underutilized or vacant land and buildings for uses providing
employment for Escondido’s residents.
Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.4
Develop strategies to minimize impacts on adjoining residential
neighborhoods as a result of the revitalization of an employment area.
Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.5
Facilitate and work with property owners and area residents to
redevelop and reinvigorate older neighborhood shopping centers that
are in decline. In appropriate locations, these centers can be
transformed into high quality, dynamic retail/mixed-use commercial
areas that also provide gathering places and a sense of community for
the neighborhood.
Long-Term Economic Wellbeing Policy 8.6
Facilitate and work with the private sector to evaluate economic
trends, opportunities, and needs of key industries, with the intention
of anticipating issues and taking early action to avoid decline in the
community’s commercial and employment areas.
9. Minimizing Infrastructure Impediments
GOAL 9: Adequate infrastructure to support and maintain the
             economic vitality of Escondido’s businesses.
Minimizing Infrastructure Impediments Policy 9.1
Plan for and coordinate sufficient water, sewer, telecommunication,
and other infrastructure capacity to support new business develop-
ment, while continuing to support the existing business base.
Minimizing Infrastructure Impediments Policy 9.2
Work with regional agencies to develop and implement public
improvements that benefit Escondido and all of San Diego North
County, including, but not limited to: roadways, transit, energy, and  New business construction and
telecommunications infrastructure.                                      existing business expansion
                                                                        provide short- and long-term
                                                                       employment opportunities, and
                                                                       are signs of a healthy economy
Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                                                 Page IX-15

                              Minimizing Infrastructure Impediments Policy 9.3
                              Pursue state and federal grants for the construction of infrastructure
                              improvements for areas accommodating the development of new and
                              expanded businesses.
                              Minimizing Infrastructure Impediments Policy 9.4
                              Periodically review and evaluate the city’s permit fees for new and
                              existing businesses to ensure competitiveness with other communities.
                              10. Strengthening Workforce Qualifications
                              GOAL 10: An educated and skilled workforce.
                              Strengthening Workforce Qualifications Policy 10.1
                              Promote partnerships between businesses and educational institutions
                              that promote continuing education and raise student performance to
                              enhance job skills to remain competitive in the changing job market.
                              Strengthening Workforce Qualifications Policy 10.2
                              Promote an “educational corridor” in the East Valley Parkway Area
                              Plan, in which additional education, job training and vocational
                              instruction facilities are developed.
                              Strengthening Workforce Qualifications Policy 10.3
                              Collaborate with educational institutions, industries, and trade organi-
                              zations in defining criteria for locating educational and job training
                              facilities in the community.
                              Strengthening Workforce Qualifications Policy 10.4
                              Promote and encourage job training programs and support local
                              organizations that work with youth to provide training for life skills,
                              job readiness, and internships in target industries.
                              Strengthening Workforce Qualifications Policy 10.5
                              Facilitate employment of local residents by encouraging transpor-
                              tation, childcare, job training opportunities, and other employment
                              readiness factors.
                              11. City Leadership
                              GOAL 11: Responsive and accessible governmental leadership
                                            that supports a vigorous local economy.
    Business expansion and    City Leadership Policy 11.1
     development relies on    Continue to foster a municipal organizational structure that values and
   adequate infrastructure to
                              rewards quality customer service and promotes a high standard of
      facilitate their needs
                              excellence and professionalism.
Page IX-16                                            Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity

City Leadership Policy 11.2
Maintain ongoing communication with the business community at the
local, regional, national, and international levels to identify opportu-
nities and mitigate economic development constraints.
City Leadership Policy 11.3
Consider the provision of economic development incentives that
leverage resources to support, develop and fund strategic economic
development programs.
12. Economic Development Monitoring
GOAL 12: An up-to-date database to enable the City to respond to
            evolving market demands and opportunities.
Economic Development Monitoring Policy 12.1
Monitor commercial, office and industrial vacancy rates and the
amount of land available for the development of these uses in the
City. Periodically compare these with the vacancy rates and acreages
in the San Diego region to determine the need to adjust the inventory
of designated and zoned properties.
Economic Development Monitoring Policy 12.2
Periodically report on Escondido’s economic performance and
growth in the region based on indicators such as:
a) Job growth over a defined period;
b) Building permit valuation;
c) Sales tax revenues;
d) Average wage in the community;
e) Unemployment rate;
f) Availability of trained workforce residing in Escondido;
g) Number of residents who work in Escondido; and,
h) Composition of employment.
Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperity                               Page IX-17

Page IX-18 Escondido General Plan Economic Prosperit
         VIII. Growth Management
Introduction                                   The Growth Management
                                               Element’s Purpose
The General Plan establishes Escondido’s       The purpose of the Growth Management
vision for the future. The Growth Manage-      Element is to establish policies for balancing
ment Element provides assurance that the       the timing of infrastructure improvements
vision is achieved without sacrificing aspects with current and anticipated demands for
of the community valued by its residents.      service through the adoption of specific imple-
Quality of Life Standards are detailed in      mentation techniques. The Growth Manage-
Chapter I of the General Plan that identify    ment Element integrates General Plan goals
minimum acceptable service thresholds for      and objectives with adopted Quality of Life
critical infrastructure such as traffic and    Standards to facilitate the orderly development
transportation, fire service, police service,  of public and private improvements.
water and wastewater treatment systems.
                                               A goal of growth management is to phase
Thresholds have also been developed to         capital facility improvements concurrent with
address other less critical standards such as  population growth so that new development
library service, parks system, open space      does not compound existing service shortfalls,
system, air quality, public schools, and       or result in critical infrastructure deficiencies.
economic prosperity. Factors associated with   Effective growth management also establishes
the location, type, density, and amount, of    parameters for periodically monitoring the
development are tied to the city’s zoning      impacts that growth has on the community
ordinance (and linked with the General Plan    and defines the methods by which impacts are
Land Use Element) that establishes develop-    addressed, allowing decision makers to ef-
ment parameters for land uses constructed in   ficiently prioritize capital improvements.
the community.

                                 A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
                                      General Plan
                                 The Growth Management Element serves a guide for the city’s build
                                 out and supports the vision, conditions and factors under which
                                 development and redevelopment may occur. A major goal of the
                                 Growth Management Element is to ensure that the planning,
                                 construction, and operation of facilities and infrastructure meet
                                 Escondido’s current and projected needs. While this goal is a high
                                 priority, it must be achieved while maintaining internal consistency
                                 among the other elements of the General Plan as required by state
                                 law. The Growth Management Element achieves internal con-
                                 sistency with the other General Plan elements through the pursuit of
                                 common major goals such as balanced development of land uses and
                                 public facilities.
                                 Although the Growth Management Element does not replace or
                                 supersede any of the other General Plan elements; this Element
                                 addresses, amplifies and supports public facility and development
                                 phasing identified in the General Plan. Consequently there is a certain
                                 amount of overlap among the General Plan elements and the Growth
                                 Management Element is a key resource document for the phasing and
 Early construction phase of the implementation of facility infrastructure.
  Eureka Springs development
Page VIII-2                                          Escondido General Plan Growth Management

B. Quality of Life Standards
Thresholds of services established for eleven areas affecting
residents’ quality of life in Escondido involve traffic, police, fire,
schools, libraries, parks, open space, water, sewer, air quality, and
economic prosperity (refer to the General Plan Vision and Purpose for
details on the Quality of Life Standards). These thresholds have
helped guide the community during periods of substantial develop-
ment. The Growth Management Element integrates quality of life
standards and the General Plan’s goals and objectives with public
improvements and private development to establish a basis upon
which development and growth are measured and phased. As with the
                                                                          Quality of Life Thresholds
General Plan goals and objectives, the quality of life standards are     include providing adequate
subject to periodic review and refinement based on community input      parks and open space, such
reflecting changing priorities, technology and/or conditions that may  as Dixon Lake (above left) to
occur over time.                                                       meet current and future needs
 Escondido General Plan Growth Management                                                  Page VIII-3

                                 C. Public Facility Master Planning
                                 The need for transportation improvements, park and recreation
                                 improvements, police, fire, library and other facilities (water, sewer,
                                 drainage, etc.) are related to the community's growth. Such improve-
                                 ments are required, or need to be maintained or expanded, as the
                                 community reaches identified thresholds. Assuming 300-400 units are
                                 constructed each year, Escondido’s General Plan (city and sur-
                                 rounding unincorporated area) is expected to increase approximately
                                 7,000 – 9,000 units by the planning horizon year of 2035. Master
                                 plans that determine ultimate capital facilities necessary to achieve
                                 and/or maintain the quality of life standards at build out must be
                                 prepared based on adopted growth forecasts in order to adequately
                                 plan for growth.
                                 Master plans typically contain an analysis of existing facilities,
                                 existing and projected demand, and proposed maintenance and capital
  Monitoring Reidy Creek storm   improvement projects. They also identify financing plans to accomp-
  drains (above right) to ensure lish identified improvements. The agencies and departments typically
  proper flow and water quality  use growth projections provided by the city and other jurisdictions
  is a critical component of the within their service boundaries to guide maintenance and capital
  Master Planning effort of this improvement programs that may affect the rate and timing of private
     and other public facilities development.
Page VIII-4                                           Escondido General Plan Growth Management

D. Public Facility Financing
Public facility financing plans provide the estimated cost and timing
of backbone infrastructure and other public facilities needed to serve
development. The financing plan also provides the strategy to match
the timing of costs with the availability of probable funding sources.
Many options are available to accelerate or ensure the timely
provision of infrastructure improvements. Development impact fees,
assessment and maintenance districts, development agreements, and
other financing programs required for completing the identified
infrastructure improvements are key components of the capital
improvement planning process.
E. Public Facility Improvement Phasing
A goal of growth management is to phase capital facility improve-
ments concurrently with population growth so that new develop-
ment does not compound existing service shortfalls, or result in a
critical infrastructure deficiency. Specific timelines for phasing the
installation of public infrastructure, utilities, and the provision of
public services and facilities are established through facility master
plans as part of the city’s approval process.
                                                                        Touring Escondido’s Police
The phasing of infrastructure typically takes place in an incre-        and Fire Central Operations
mental fashion. Public facilities (schools, parks, etc.) are expanded   Facility during construction;
to accommodate private sector growth. Infrastructure phases for          the facility (now open) will
certain facilities may occur ahead, behind or concurrently with        serve the community through
private development based on specific needs or the pace of private     build-out of the General Plan
development. The sequencing of public infrastructure can change          and is financed through a
over time in response to various factors.                                   local bond measure
 Escondido General Plan Growth Management                                                  Page VIII-5

                                 F. Public Facility Deficiencies
                                 The demand for additional and different types of public services and
                                 facilities will increase as the community population grows. Growth
                                 management is intended to ensure appropriate efforts are made to
                                 accommodate the increased demand and avoid deterioration in the
                                 overall quality of life. Because the size and nature of many public
                                 facilities, such as water and sewer treatment facilities, major road-
                                 ways, etc. are complex and costly investments, they are often built in
                                 increments that may not match the rate of development. Conse-
  Local flooding occurs in older quently, all standards cannot be met at all times. Lags in service may
      neighborhoods where
                                 be experienced from time to time during the build out of the General
  inadequate drainage facilities
  exist to properly convey storm Plan. In certain situations development in areas with critical de-
     water during heavy rains    ficiencies may be delayed until adequate facilities are available.
Page VIII-6                                           Escondido General Plan Growth Management
G. Growth Management Monitoring
Monitoring growth management indicators such as critical infra-
structure, population, land capacity, economic factors, natural
resource consumption, and public health and safety improves the
effectiveness of public policy and allows progress in achieving the
General Plan goals and objectives. Use of growth management
indicators assures accountability to the public and demonstrates
how effectively the city is moving toward identified goals. On-
going monitoring allows public resources to be prioritized in order
to meet goals and, if the desired outcome is not achieved, to con-
sider modifying the goals or implementing regulations.
Growth management indicators work well with the public partici-
pation process of the capital improvement planning cycle. Through
the use of growth management indicators, citizens and decision
makers can review growth management policies and make changes
that reflect present-day realities. Periodic review of growth trends
and facility capacities within and surrounding Escondido is impor-
tant to effectively address development impacts, forecast antici-
pated service needs, and provide guidance in capital improvement
programming.
H. Exemptions
On a case-by-case basis the City Council may exempt projects
involving a total of four or fewer dwelling units and/or non-
residential projects determined to have a negligible impact on city
services from requirements contained in this element. It shall       Monitoring growth allows for
demonstrated that such exemptions will not substantially conflict        the timely installation of
with the intent of the growth management element, land use area       infrastructure such as street
plans, master plans, or other General Plan policies.                 improvements and utilities in
                                                                               Mission Road
 Escondido General Plan Growth Management                                                Page VIII-7
            I. Growth Management Goals and Policies
            A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and
            Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to growth management
            provided below are intended to guide facility and infrastructure
            development in an orderly manner to meet present and future needs
            and enhance the character of Escondido.
            1. Quality of Life Thresholds
            GOAL 1: Quality, managed, and sustainable growth that main-
                        tains and provides adequate public facilities for existing
                        and future development.
            GOAL 2: Predictable and fair implementation of the General Plan.
            Quality of Life Threshold Policy 1.1
            Use the General Plan quality of life thresholds (or refinements
            adopted by subsequent master plans, as appropriate) as the standard to
            assess the impact of new facility and service demands created by
            growth, and apply those standards, as appropriate when considering
            discretionary projects.
            Quality of Life Threshold Policy 1.2
            Progress in meeting the General Plan quality of life thresholds shall
            be periodically reviewed and revised by city departments and other
            local government entities to ensure that they reflect appropriate
            service delivery and measurement techniques, and to assure their
            effectiveness at achieving overall community goals and objectives.
            2. Public Facility Master Plans
            Public Facility Master Plan Policy 2.1
            To anticipate the demand for services, prepare, maintain, and
            periodically update public facility master plans that are based on
            adopted growth projections through coordination of appropriate city
            departments and agencies.
            3. Public Facility Financing
            Public Facility Financing Policy 3.1
            Maintain and periodically update development impact fees and major
            infrastructure financing programs to assure that all new and infill
            developments contribute their proportionate share of funding for
            necessary municipal infrastructure and public facilities.
Page VIII-8                      Escondido General Plan Growth Management
Public Facility Financing Policy 3.2
At the discretion of the city, require larger developments to prepare a
fiscal impact analysis and a public facilities financing plan that
articulates infrastructure and public facilities requirements, as well as
costs and funding mechanisms which document the effects upon the
city’s operating budget over time.
Public Facility Financing Policy 3.3
Encourage the use of development agreements and other approp-
riate financing mechanisms to ensure the timely provision of com-
munity facilities at adequate levels to support the demands from
new and existing development.
Public Facility Financing Policy 3.4
Periodically assess ongoing staffing needs to adequately operate
and maintain public facilities and services through the budget
process in order to achieve and maintain quality of life thresholds.
4. Public Facility Phasing
Public Facility Phasing Policy 4.1
Require facility master plans to specify detailed infrastructure
phasing increments.
Public Facility Phasing Policy 4.2
Require phased and interim facilities improvements which promote
community identity and character, preserve and enhance the fiscal
viability of existing and planned infrastructure, and minimize the
disruption to existing residents.
5. Public Facility Deficiencies
Public Facility Deficiencies Policy 5.1
Allow facility service deficiencies that are below acceptable
thresholds on a case by case basis determined through environ-
mental review, periodic monitoring and reporting of quality of life
standards, and/or the service delivery process that relates develop-
ment approvals with remaining facility capacities.
Public Facility Deficiencies Policy 5.2
Monitor and periodically report the performance of development
activity and its conformance with quality of life standards. Identify
areas where there are critical deficiencies. Establish criteria for and
implement moratoria or other strategies to address shortfalls.
 Escondido General Plan Growth Management                                 Page VIII-9

             Public Facility Deficiencies Policy 5.3
             Specify the rate and/or amount of development that may occur for
             areas that are deficient in meeting service thresholds.
             Public Facility Deficiencies Policy 5.4
             Withhold discretionary approvals and subsequent building permits
             from projects demonstrated to be out of compliance with appli-
             cable service standards and deficiency thresholds as established in
             Public Facility Deficiencies Policy 5.1.
             6. Growth Management Monitoring
             Growth Management Monitoring Policy 6.1
             Comprehensively monitor building permits and development
             entitlements in order to determine and forecast the rate of future
             development and service requirements to be used in updating
             facility master plans and guiding capital improvement planning
             efforts.
             Growth Management Monitoring Policy 6.2
             Solicit comments from applicable service providers and city
             departments to evaluate current quality of life threshold com-
             pliance, growth impacts, facility improvements, maintenance
             issues, and funding opportunities.
             Growth Management Monitoring Policy 6.3
             Review and comment on development proposals in adjacent com-
             munities to minimize potential environmental, service, and
             economic impacts to Escondido.
Page VIII-10                       Escondido General Plan Growth Management
     VII. Resource Conservation
Introduction                                      The Resource Conservation
                                                  Element’s Purpose
Escondido‟s topography, vegetation, open          Escondido‟s Resource Conservation Element
space, cultural, and agricultural assets impart a satisfies state requirements for the Open Space
unique character that is highly valued by the     and Conservation Elements as stated in the
community. Residents consider these impor-        Government Code. Community Goals and
tant resources for conserving because of their    Objectives call for creating an aesthetically
significant contribution to Escondido‟s overall   pleasing environment, as well as conserving
quality of life. Conserving and sustaining        Escondido‟s natural and scenic recourses.
Escondido‟s important resources are vital keys
for maintaining a healthy and vibrant com-        The Element‟s purpose is to identify biologi-
munity.                                           cally important open space areas and establish
                                                  polices for developing a comprehensive sys-
Residents have made a strong commitment to        tem that includes natural areas in concert with
expanding the city‟s trail and open space         the Natural Communities Conservation Plan
system, preserving ridgelines and hillsides,      (NCCP) as well as existing and planned park
and improving air and water resources to          and trail recreational amenities.
enrich the quality of life for all citizens of
Escondido. By providing constructive leisure      A related purpose is to establish policies for
opportunities, recreational experiences, and      conserving other important resources inclu-
programs, the General Plan hopes to con-          ding air and water quality, cultural, agricul-
tribute to the total health of the individual     tural, mineral and energy resources, as well as
while meeting the overall needs and desires of    protecting hillside and ridgeline view corri-
the community.                                    dors with particular emphasis on ridgelines,
                                                  unique landforms and visual gateways.

                          A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
                               General Plan
                          Successful implementation of the Resource Conservation Element‟s
                          goals and policies requires consistency with several General Plan
                          elements. The Resource Conservation Element is closely related to
                          the Land Use, Mobility and Infrastructure, Community Protection,
                          and Community Health and Services Elements. The Land Use Ele-
                          ment includes a “Public Land” category for public recreation and
                          habitat conservation purposes. General Plan land uses also include
                          culturally and agriculturally significant sites, and policies for con-
                          serving these resources to maintain community character.
                          The Mobility Element identifies key streets and trails ensuring access
                          to open space. The Resource Conservation Element‟s relation to
                          Community Protection Element is essential in linking key resources
                          such as water and agriculture and threats such as flooding, wildfire
                          and erosion. Finally, in response to promoting a healthier environ-
    Lake Dixon Open Space
                          ment, the Resource Conservation Element relates to the Community
     Preserve overlooking
      eastern Escondido
                          Services Element by promoting air quality, opportunities for outdoor
                          activities and a more active lifestyle.
Page VII-2                                  Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

B. Coordinated Resource Conservation                                                     Figure VII-1-
                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
Escondido‟s many natural resources have been identified by residents        QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD # 8
as among the community‟s most important assets, and call for a
coordinated conservation approach. Open space and air quality have                OPEN SPACE SYSTEM
been included as two of the General Plan‟s Quality of Life Standards        A system of open space corridors,
(Figure VII-1 and Figure VII-10). Escondido‟s character is derived           easements, acquisition programs
from its varied lakes and natural habitat areas, visually distinctive      and trails shall be established in the
historic and cultural resources, views of hillsides and ridgelines, and      Resource Conservation Element.
                                                                           Sensitive lands including permanent
agricultural groves that that surround the valley. These dramatic
                                                                              bodies of water, floodways, wet-
features are characteristics that distinguish Escondido from other         lands, riparian and woodland areas,
areas in the region. The General Plan‟s vision is also to ensure that       and slopes over 35 percent inclina-
conservation effectively serves as a catalyst for recreation, education,    tion shall be preserved. Significant
tourism, ecological, and economic enhancement for the community.               habitat for rare or endangered
By coordinating resource conservation efforts residents will benefit        species shall be protected in coor-
from a more aesthetically pleasing, sustainable community, thus               dination with state and/or federal
promoting a healthier lifestyle.                                              agencies having jurisdiction over
                                                                                         such areas.
The General Plan includes Resource Conservation Overlays (Figures
VII-2, VII-4, VII-5, VII-6) to guide the establishment of a compre-
hensive system containing sensitive habitat, steep hillsides, ridgelines,
cultural and agricultural resources, and opportunities for trail linkages.
Large blocks of publicly owned land such as Daley Ranch, Lake
Wohlford and San Dieguito River Park establish the foundation from
which habitat linkages can be prioritized and potential property
acquisitions can be identified.                                                   Escondido’s Lake Dixon
  Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                             VII-3

                              C. Sustainable Biological Open Space
                              A principle of „smart growth‟ involves preserving open space, natural
                              beauty, and critically biologically sensitive areas. A key strategy in
                              sustainable habitat preservation is to avoid fragmentation where
                              isolated “islands” of habitat areas are created by poorly planned
                              development patterns and urban sprawl. Isolated habitat areas can be
                              prevented by planning for natural corridors between pockets of
                              habitat and between different types of habitat. Corridors allow
                              wildlife room to roam for access to food, territory and mating. A
                              broad range of habitat is necessary for the dispersal of plants and
                              animals to ensure their viability. Figure VII-2 identifies the major
                              habitat types in the General Plan that is also used for resource conser-
                              vation planning purposes.
                              The Natural Community Conservation Planning (NCCP) program is
                              an effort initiated by the California Department of Fish and Game to
                              develop a broad-based approach for sustaining biological diversity.
                              The primary objective of the NCCP program is to identify and
                              provide for the regional protection of plants, animals, and their
                              habitats, while allowing compatible and appropriate economic
                              activity. Escondido is one of seven cities in northwestern San Diego
      Lake Dixon Fishing      County comprising an NCCP subregion involved in the subregional
             (above)          Multiple Habitat Conservation Program (MHCP), which addresses
                              the NCCP objectives. A draft habitat Focus Planning Area has been
                              prepared and Escondido is working with other MHCP cities on a
                              management and financing model to ensure the plan‟s sustainability.
   Escondido’s Daley Ranch
 Open Space Preserve supports Escondido‟s habitat preservation efforts also involve coordination
    several types of habitats
         (above right)
                              with other agencies including the US Fish and Wildlife Service, Army
                              Corps of Engineers, and California Department of Fish and Game.
Page VII-4                                       Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

                                             Figure VII-2
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation      VII-5
             Figure VII-3
Threatened & Endangered
   Species in Escondido
            (partial list)
          Least Bell’s vireo       1. U.S. Fish and Wildlife
  (Federal and State Endangered)
                                   The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is a federal bureau within the
                                   Department of the Interior, whose mission is working with com-
                                   munities to conserve, protect and enhance fish, wildlife and plants in
                                   their habitats. In addition to managing millions of acres in the national
                                   wildlife refuge system the Service enforces federal wildlife laws,
                                   protects endangered species, manages migratory birds, and restores
                                   wildlife habitat. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife‟s lists of “endangered”
                                   and “threatened” species include several plants, animals and insects
                                   native to Escondido (FigureVII-3).
         Quino Checkerspot         2. California Department of Fish and Game
       (Federal Endangered)
                                   The California Department of Fish and Game works with the city to
                                   maintain native plant and animal communities for their intrinsic and
                                   ecological value and their benefits to mankind. For their part of the
                                   environmental review and permitting process, the Department of Fish
                                   and Game is responsible for administering the California Endangered
                                   Species Act to ensure regulatory compliance and statewide consis-
                                   tency. The agency is also responsible for the Lake and Streambed
                                   Alteration program and determines whether an agreement is needed
                                   for an activity that will substantially modify a river, stream or land
                                   area and establishes conditions to protect those resources.
   Coastal California gnatcatcher
        (Federal Threatened)
                                   3. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
 Southern coastal sage scrub is a  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is a federal agency focused on
 habitat located in Escondido that providing engineering services to reduce risks from disaster. For
 supports a large number of rare
                                   Escondido‟s habitat preservation efforts, the Corps serves as a contact
     and endangered species
            (above right)          and permitting agency for projects involving work in stream courses,
                                   flood control channels and major drainage systems.
Page VII-6                                             Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

D. Trail Network
Trails are an important aspect of the General Plan because they
provide opportunities for recreation, exploration, instruction, commu-
nity involvement, economic benefits, and alternative transportation.
Extending convenient trail access to open space areas provides an
opportunity for educating the community on the importance of preser-
vation and proper maintenance of the community‟s sensitive bio-
logical resources. Economic benefits can be realized by promoting the
qualities of local trails to tourists seeking the unique experience of
Escondido‟s trails and the opportunities provided by their connection
to open space and other recreational amenities.
A coordinated system of urban, suburban and rural hiking trails
identified in Figure VII-4 link the city‟s park system, schools, open
spaces, businesses, and community facilities in the developed valley
areas to rural and open space lands including Daley Ranch, San
Dieguito River Park and Elfin Forest Recreational Preserve on the
perimeter. Escondido Creek, which flows through the central valley
                                                                        Trail Head and cyclist on
area of Escondido in a primarily east-west direction forms the “spine”     Daley Ranch trails
of the trail system and also serves as an alternative non-motorized
access route linking residents to employment, shopping and services.
The trail system also links to the Bicycle Master Plan, which further
enhances the community‟s recreational and alternative transportation      Daley Ranch trails as
opportunities.                                                         viewed from Stanley Peak
                                                                               (above left)
  Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                  VII-7

                                                     Figure VII-4
Page VII-8 Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation
E. Visual Resources
Hillsides and ridgelines provide a visual resource and aesthetic value
to Escondido that contributes to the community’s sense of identity.
The natural setting of the area provides many opportunities for views
from surrounding higher elevations. A primary objective of viewshed
policies is to preserve and protect existing internal and external view
corridors in Escondido, with particular emphasis on ridgelines, unique
landforms, visual gateways and edges of the community. Protecting
these areas also serves a dual purpose in promoting safety, as develop-
ment in hillside areas can generate erosion concerns from grading and
habitat removal.
While many of the surrounding areas are privately owned there are
opportunities to conserve important features while still allowing
property owners the ability to responsibly develop their land. Much of
Escondido‟s planning area that contains steeper terrain at higher
elevations has been designated for very low density residential and/or
agricultural purposes. This allows limited development opportunities
while protecting community character.
                                                                             Northern Escondido’s
The community‟s steep slopes, primary and secondary ridgelines, and
                                                                            Valley Center Road and
prominent natural landforms have been identified in Figure VII-5.         Bear Ridge Mountain Range
This serves as a tool for resource conservation planning purposes to
guide open space and viewshed preservation. By maintaining policies
that limit development in these sensitive areas, the General Plan can
ensure the primary objectives of preserving and protecting key
viewsheds. In addition, open space and habitat preservation efforts     Escondido looking east towards
will be carried out so that the unique character of Escondido will be    the Paradise Mountain Range
enjoyed by current and future generations.                                        (above left)
  Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                    VII-9

                                                     Figure VII-5
Page VII-10 Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation
F. Agricultural Resources
Escondido‟s founding is tied to agriculture, which sustained the com-
munity and grew its economy for decades. Agriculture remains an
important component in the local economy and its operation provides
an important visual amenity that gives Escondido its unique character.
Consequently its role as a land use is important in retaining com-
munity character.
The community‟s Local Register of Historic Places, agricultural land
contracts, and other culturally and agriculturally significantly sites
have been identified in Figure VII-6 for resource conservation plan-
ning purposes as a guide for preserving important open space and
viewsheds.
                                                                       Citrus Groves on Hubbard Hill
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                  VII-11

                              G. Historic and Cultural Resources
                              Escondido is a city with a unique history that gives the community its
                              distinctively authentic quality. Rich and varied historical and cultural
                              resources include buildings, structures, objects, sites, landscapes,
                              archaeological sites, as well as traditional cultural properties that
                              possess historical, scientific, architectural, aesthetic, cultural, or ethnic
                              significance. The highest concentration of Escondido‟s historic
                              buildings is in downtown and the Old Escondido Neighborhood His-
                              toric District (Figure VII-6). Preserving and interpreting the com-
                              munity‟s past was cited as an important consideration by many
                              residents during General Plan public workshops.
                              Conserving archaeological, cultural and agricultural resources helps
                              foster an appreciation of Escondido‟s past and provides an important
                              perspective and economic opportunity for future planning efforts.
                              Increased awareness of the economic benefits of preservation has also
                              been recognized in the visitor and tourism industry. Interest in
                              statewide heritage tourism and Escondido‟s ordinances offering
    Examples of Local and     economic incentives for preservation have benefited owners of
   National Historic Register historical, archeological and architecturally significant properties.
   Homes in Old Escondido
Page VII-12                                       Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

                                             Figure VII-6
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation    VII-13
                                   H. Water Resources
                                   Escondido’s planning area is located within three watershed areas:
   Water diverted from the San     Escondido Creek, San Dieguito River, and San Luis Rey Creek
   Luis Rey River gravity flows    (Figure VII-7). Escondido manages two fresh water lakes (Dixon and
     through a 14-mile canal
                                   Wohlford) that provide approximately 15% of the city‟s supply and
 excavated by hand in the 1890s
 through the Paradise Mountains
                                   constitute the city‟s primary storage facilities for local potable water.
    to Lake Wohlford (above).      A reliable clean water supply is essential for public health, environ-
                                   mental sustainability, and economic prosperity, and is a resource that
                                   must be preserved. Threats to a clean water supply come from a
                                   variety of sources including industrial activities, improper chemical
    At the headwaters of one of    storage, pollution runoff, improper disposal of wastes and other
   several creeks that flow to the activities that result in contaminating water resources. Also refer to
   San Luis Rey River supplying    Stormwater Management in the Mobility and Infrastructure Element,
 water to Escondido (above right). and Floods in the Community Protection Element.
Page VII-14                                            Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

                                             Figure VII-7
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation    VII-15
                Figure VII-8
 Low Impact Development
Definition:
Low Impact Development (LID):
A stormwater management approach
modeled after nature that manages
rainfall at the source by using uni-
formly distributed and decentralized
micro-scale controls.
LID's Goal:
Mimic a site's predevelopment hydrol-
ogy with design techniques that
infiltrate, evaporate, detain, filter, and
store runoff close to its source.
LID Principles:
  Incorporate site topography
  Reduce impervious surfaces
  Maximize infiltration
  Capture water for future use
Components in LID Design:
  Vegetated Swales
  Vegetated “Green” Roofs
  Detention / Retention Ponds
  Bio-Retention System
  Rain Barrels
Benefits of LID Design:
  Effective Stormwater Management
  Aesthetically Pleasing
  Recharges Groundwater                   1. Surface and Groundwater Quality
  Enhances Water Quality
  Reduced “Heat Island” Effect
                                           An important strategy in protecting the city‟s surface and ground-
  Increased Property Values
  Cost Effective                          water quality against erosion and pollutants includes incorporating
                                           Low Impact Development (LID) design principles and prohibiting
                                           construction in and near natural drainages and waterways including
                                           the filling of tributaries, dry washes, and arroyos (Figures VII-8 and
                                           VII-9). Promoting sustainable development that does not encroach on
       An example of a vegetated           important native landscapes while also dedicating land for adequate
     swale incorporating LID design        buffers will aid in species‟ survival and ensure the quality of
        principles to treat on-site        Escondido‟s water resources are maintained. Also refer to Stormwater
         drainage and recharge             Management in the Mobility and Infrastructure Element, and Floods
          groundwater supplies             in the Community Protection Element.
 Page VII-16                                                   Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

                                                                                    Figure VII-9
                                                                       Low Impact Development
                                                                                  Examples
                                                                       Directing runoff to vegetated
                                                                       areas with absorbent soils
                                                                       effectively filters pollutants
                                                                       and reduces off-site flows
2. Urban Runoff
Urbanization increases the variety and amount of pollutants that
threaten clean water supplies. Sediment from development and new
construction such as oils and toxic chemicals from automobiles,
nutrients and pesticides from landscaping, and viruses and bacteria
from failing septic systems are examples of pollutants generated in
urban areas. These pollutants can have a negative effect on drinking
water supplies, recreation, and wildlife.
                                                                             Urbanized southeastern
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)               Escondido drains into Hodges
permit for areas within Escondido’s watershed areas requires that all     Reservoir via streams that flow
runoff be tested and treated so that pollutant levels are minimized to      through Kit Carson Park.
                                                                          Minimizing pollutants in these
the maximum extent possible. Also refer to Stormwater Management
                                                                        and all waterways is important for
in the Mobility and Infrastructure Element, and Floods in the Com-       ensuring a healthy environment
munity Protection Element.
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                        VII-17

                Figure VII-10
        GENERAL PLAN
 QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD # 9
              AIR QUALITY
    The city shall establish a Climate
 Action Plan with feasible and appro-
   priate local policies and measures
   aimed at reducing regional green-
house gas emissions. Measures shall
    include, but not be limited to, re-
ducing the number of vehicular miles
 traveled, supporting public transpor-
  tation, participating in the develop-
     ment of park-and-ride facilities,
    coordinating land-use approvals,
   accommodating facilities for alter-
 native fuel vehicles, maintaining and  I. Air and Climate
     updating the city’s traffic signal
synchronization plan, Promoting local   Escondido and surrounding areas are located in the San Diego Air
  agriculture, increasing landscaping   Basin (SDAB). The climate of the SDAB is dominated by a semi-
   standards, promoting landscaping     permanent high pressure cell located over the Pacific Ocean. This cell
   programs, and encouraging non-       influences the direction of prevailing winds (westerly to north-
polluting alternative energy systems.   westerly) and maintains clear skies for much of the year. Escondido
                                        residents recognize healthy air as a quality of life. The city is commit-
                                        ted to providing a more livable, equitable, and economically vibrant
                                        community through the incorporation of sustainability features and
                                        reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in concert with state
                                        mandates (Figure VII-10).
                                        Climate and local meteorological conditions influence ambient air
                                        quality creating two types of temperature inversions that may act to
                                        degrade local air quality. Subsidence inversions occur during the
                                        warmer months as descending air associated with the Pacific high
      An aerial view of Escondido       pressure cell comes into contact with cool marine air. The boundary
     looking southwest; the city’s      between the two layers of air creates a temperature inversion that
       air quality is influenced by     traps pollutants. The other type of inversion, a radiation inversion,
     local and regional emissions       develops on winter nights when air near the ground cools through
    including pollutants generated      radiation and the air aloft remains warm. The shallow inversion layer
      as far away as Los Angeles        formed between these two air masses also can trap pollutants.
Page VII-18                                                Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

1. Air Quality
Air quality reports generated by the San Diego County Air Pollution
Control District use the Air Quality Index (AQI), which represents the
higher of three pollutants – Ground-level Particulate Matter (PM)
with a diameter less than 2.5 microns or 10 microns (PM 2.5 or PM
10 respectively), or ozone (Figure VII-11). For ground-level ozone,
these values are based upon an 8-hour running average. Ground-level
PM 2.5 and PM 10 are based upon a 24-hour daily average.
                                Figure VII-11
                 Air Quality Index (AQI) Color Codes
      (AQI) Values          Health Concern              Colors
     When the AQI is           ...air quality     ...as symbolized
      in this range:         conditions are:        by this color:
           0 to 50                  Good                 Green
          51 to 100               Moderate              Yellow
                          Unhealthy for Sensitive
         101 to 150                                     Orange
                              Groups (U.S.G)
         151 to 200              Unhealthy                Red
         201 to 300           Very Unhealthy            Purple
         301 to 500              Hazardous              Maroon
2. Climate Protection
The amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) in the atmosphere affects
climate. Human activity generates GHG emissions through transpor-
tation, development and other actions. Reducing GHG emissions is
mandated by state law as a cornerstone for protecting the climate. The
Escondido Climate Action Plan (E-CAP) establishes goals and
policies that incorporate environmental responsibility into the city‟s
daily management of growth and development, education, energy and
water use, air quality, transportation, waste reduction, economic
development, open space and natural habitats.
The E-CAP involves using energy more efficiently, harnessing re-
newable energy to power buildings, recycling waste, conserving and
recycling water, and enhancing access to sustainable transportation
modes. These conservation and development efforts will keep dollars
in Escondido‟s local economy, create new green jobs and improve the
community‟s quality of life. The efforts toward reducing GHG emis-
sions described in the E-CAP would be done in coordination with the
city‟s land use decisions.
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                           VII-19

                              J. Resource Conservation Goals and
                                    Policies
                              A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and
                              Purpose. Specific goals related to resource conservation policies pro-
                              vided below are intended to guide development to meet the present
                              and future needs, achieve a vibrant community, and enhance the
                              character of Escondido.
                              1. Biological and Open Space Resources
                              GOAL 1: Preservation and enhancement of Escondido’s open
                                           spaces and significant biological resources as com-
                                           ponents of a sustainable community.
                              Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.1
                              Establish and maintain an interconnected system of open space
                              corridors, easements, trails, public/quasi-public land, and natural areas
                              that preserves sensitive lands, permanent bodies of water, floodways,
                              and slopes over 35 percent, and provides for wildlife movement.
                              Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.2
                              Maintain open space and rural residential uses around the perimeter of
                              the city to serve as a buffer from the surrounding urbanizing areas.
                              Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.3
                              Protect land areas with steep topography (generally over 25%) from
                              intensive urban development, regulate development in areas with
                              topographic constraints such as steep slopes, and include these areas
                              within the overall open space system.
                              Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.4
                              Coordinate the planning and development of the overall open space
                              system with other public facilities and services within Escondido.
                              Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.5
                              Participate in the planning and preservation of an interconnected
                              biological resources and open space plan with appropriate federal,
                              state, and local agencies that enhances the viability of the regional
                              ecosystem.
    Scenes from trails in the
   Daley Ranch open space
      conservation area
Page VII-20                                       Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.6
Preserve and protect significant wetlands, riparian, and woodland
habitats as well as rare, threatened or endangered plants and animals
and their habitats through avoidance. If avoidance is not possible,
require mitigation of resources either on- or off-site at ratios
consistent with State and federal regulations, and in coordination with
those agencies having jurisdiction over such resources.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.7
Require that a qualified professional conduct a survey for proposed
development projects located in areas potentially containing
significant biological resources to determine their presence and
significance. This shall address any flora or fauna of rare and/or
endangered status, declining species, species and habitat types of
unique or limited distribution, and/or visually prominent vegetation.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.8
Require that proposed development projects implement appropriate
measures to minimize potential adverse impacts on sensitive habitat
areas, such as buffering and setbacks. In the event that significant
biological resources are adversely affected, consult with appropriate
state and federal agencies to determine adequate mitigation or
replacement of the resource.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.9
Encourage proposed development projects to minimize the removal
of significant stands of trees unless needed to protect public safety
and to limit tree removal to the minimum amount necessary to assure
continuity and functionality of building spaces.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.10
Prohibit any activities in riparian areas other than those permitted by
appropriate agencies to protect those resources.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.11
Construct appropriate barriers to be maintained by property owners or
homeowners’ associations that restrict access to areas containing
sensitive biological resources.
Biological and Open Space Resources Policy 1.12
Promote the use of native plants for public and private landscaping     Lake Dixon at Sunset (above)
purposes within the city.
                                                                            Guided walking tours
                                                                               in Daley Ranch
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                   VII-21

                          2. Trail Network
                          GOAL 2: A network of trails that connect the community and
                                       provide opportunities for recreation and alternative
                                       transportation use.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.1
                          Maintain and periodically update a master plan of trails in coor-
                          dination with the County, City of San Diego, City of San Marcos, and
                          San Dieguito River Valley Regional Open Space Park that addresses
                          specific trail alignments, standards, types of trails, signage, imple-
                          mentation strategies and other factors as determined by the City
                          Council.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.2
                          Expand and improve the Escondido Creek trail within the city‟s trail
                          network that links urban areas with rural and open space areas to
                          promote opportunities for recreation, education, interpretation, and
                          alternative transportation.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.3
                          Integrate trails into new and existing developments, and ensure that
                          trails safely interface with neighborhoods.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.4
                          Establish a continuous network of landscaped pedestrian and bicycle
                          paths within urbanized areas that provides internal circulation and
                          links Escondido‟s districts and neighborhoods.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.5
                          Ensure safe and efficient maintenance of trails that minimize impacts
                          to the environment.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.6
                          Work with various agencies within and adjacent to Escondido‟s
                          Planning Area to pursue appropriate joint use of right-of-way and
                          easement areas for trail extension and development.
                          Trail Network Policy 2.7
                          Involve seniors and the disabled in trail planning to determine special
                          improvements for consideration in trail construction to increase
                          enjoyment and accessibility for all users.
     Hiking at Lake Dixon
Page VII-22                                    Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

Trail Network Policy 2.8
Consider special facilities and activities such as exercise stations and
water fountains that would expand trail usage and increase com-
munity activity.
Trail Network Policy 2.9
Employ sustainable practices for landscaping, use pervious paving
materials to minimize stormwater runoff, and employ other tech-
niques for the construction and improvement of the trail network.
3. Visual Resources
GOAL 3: Preservation of significant visual resources such as
             ridgelines, hillsides, and viewsheds that serve as a
             scenic amenity and contribute to the quality of life for
             residents.
Visual Resources Policy 3.1
Preserve significant visual resources that include unique landforms
(e.g., skyline ridges, intermediate ridges, hilltops, and rock outcrop-
pings), creeks, lakes, and open space areas in a natural state, to the
extent possible.
Visual Resources Policy 3.2
Require new development to avoid obstructing views of, and to
minimize impacts to, significant visual resources through the
following: creative site planning; integration of natural features into
the project; appropriate scale, materials, and design to complement
the surrounding natural landscape; clustering of development to
preserve open space vistas and natural features; minimal disturbance
of topography; and creation of contiguous open space networks.
Visual Resources Policy 3.3
Maintain density and development standards designed to protect
significant visual resources such as existing terrain, steep slopes,
floodways, habitat areas, and ridgelines, and to minimize visual
impacts of grading and structures.
Visual Resources Policy 3.4
Prohibit development on skyline ridges and seek to obtain scenic
easement dedications for these areas from property owners in con-
junction with development on other suitable locations of the property.
Require property owners of such scenic easements to retain, maintain,     Mountains and hillsides that
preserve, and protect the public view of these areas in their natural        surround Escondido are
state, without obstruction by structures, and prohibit clearing of brush   prominent visual resource
or planting of vegetation except as necessary to reduce fire hazards.    visible from many local streets
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                      VII-23
            Visual Resources Policy 3.5
            Regulate development on intermediate ridges, hilltops, and hillsides
            to preserve the natural appearance and landform, and minimize
            impacts on terrain with a slope greater than 15 percent subject to the
            following requirements:
            1. Intermediate Ridges and Hilltops
            a) Prepare landscaping plans that minimize the visual impact of the
                development from adjoining properties and the valley floor;
            b) Concentrate development in subordinate or hidden locations,
                which shall not project above the natural landform;
            c) Prepare grading plans that minimize disruption of the natural
                landform and vegetation; and
            d) Allow development on intermediate ridges only in association
                with the preservation of significant open space, habitat, cultural
                resources or agricultural uses within the same project.
            2. Slopes Greater than 15 Percent
            a) Locate development to avoid potentially hazardous areas and
                environmentally sensitive areas, as well as to avoid dislocation of
                any unusual rock formations or any other unique or unusual
                geographic features.
            b) Design development to minimize grading requirements by
                incorporating terracing, padding, and cut-and-fill grading that
                conforms to the natural contours of the site and protects the visual
                continuity of the hillsides.
            c) Cluster the overall development pattern in accordance with
                General Plan provisions to preserve the maximum amount of
                open spaces and natural setting and to reduce grading, erosion,
                and runoff potential.
            d) Landscape the site with existing trees and other natural vege-
                tation, as much as possible, to stabilize slopes, reduce erosion, and
                enhance the visual appearance of the development.
            e) Minimize the visual impact of development on adjoining resi-
                dential areas to the extent feasible.
            Visual Resources Policy 3.6
            Require that development within the Interstate 15 corridor be located
            and designed in consideration of its potential visual impacts and
            preservation of prominent views along the corridor that include:
            outstanding continuous, panoramic views of the valley floor, sur-
            rounding ridges and Lake Hodges, and focal views where the eye is
            channeled toward a visually dominant feature such as an undisturbed
Page VII-24                     Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation
hillside or steep slopes with rock outcroppings. Require development
proposals within the I-15 scenic corridor (defined as the area within
1,750 feet of the freeway) to include a visual assessment and conform
to the community design policies which address:
a) The siting of new structures outside of significant viewshed
     corridors;
b) The protection of hillsides and ridgelines; and
c) The need to blend developments with their setting in terms of
     height and scale.
4. Agricultural Resources
GOAL 4: Preservation of agricultural resources and continu-
             ation of agricultural production in appropriate areas
             within Escondido.
Agricultural Resources Policy 4.1
Maintain large-lot residential land uses with appropriate zoning
designations in agricultural areas that are compatible with preserving
agricultural productivity.
Agricultural Resources Policy 4.2
Require agricultural lands to be physically separated from more
intensive urban development with intermediate land uses that are
mutually compatible, and use landscape screening methods to
minimize urban and agricultural conflicts.
Agricultural Resources Policy 4.3
Explore a variety of techniques to preserve existing agricultural lands
including:
a) Agricultural Land Trusts designed as nonprofit corporations
     organized according to the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation
     Law of California and Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
     Code.
b) Transfer development rights from existing agricultural lands to
     other portions of the project or City-approved receiver sites,
     thereby preserving the agricultural lands in permanent open space,
     consistent with clustering policies.
c) The “right to farm” in open space areas.
Agricultural Resources Policy 4.4
Encourage the use of water conservation techniques in agricultural      Avocado groves surround
enterprises including the use of reclaimed water for irrigation.        Escondido’s Planning Area
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                  VII-25

                               Agricultural Resources Policy 4.5
                               Support the operation of, and provide venues for, “Certified Farmer’s
                               Markets” to allow farmers in the area to sell their products on-site or
                               off-site as designated locations.
                               Agricultural Resources Policy 4.6
                               Permit the development of community gardens on vacant properties
                               in commercial and industrial areas and multi-family neighborhoods,
                               provided that they are managed and operated to prevent adverse
                               impacts on adjoining uses.
                               5. Historic and Cultural Resources
                               GOAL 5: Preservation of important cultural and paleontological
                                            resources that contribute to the unique identity and
                                            character of Escondido.
                               Cultural Resources Policy 5.1
                               Maintain and update the Escondido Historic Sites Survey to include
                               significant resources that meet local, state, or federal criteria.
                               Cultural Resources Policy 5.2
                               Preserve significant cultural and paleontological resources listed on
                               the national, State, or local registers through: maintenance or
                               development of appropriate ordinances that protect, enhance, and
                               perpetuate resources; incentive programs; and/or the development
                               review process.
                               Cultural Resources Policy 5.3
                               Consult with appropriate organizations and individuals (e.g., South
                               Coastal Information Center of the California Historical Resources
                               Information System, Native American Heritage Commission, Native
                               American groups and individuals, and San Diego Natural History
                               Museum) early in the development process to minimize potential
                               impacts to cultural and paleontological resources.
                               Cultural Resources Policy 5.4
                               Recognize the sensitivity of locally significant cultural resources and
                               the need for more detailed assessments through the environmental
                               review process.
                               Cultural Resources Policy 5.5
    The community’s highest    Preserve historic buildings, landscapes, and districts with special and
     concentration of historic recognized historic or architectural value in their original locations
   resources is within the Old through preservation, rehabilitation (including adaptive reuse), and
    Escondido Neighborhood     restoration where the use is compatible with the surrounding area.
Page VII-26                                        Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

Cultural Resources Policy 5.6
Review proposed new development and/or remodels for compatibility
with the surrounding historic context.
Cultural Resources Policy 5.7
Comply with appropriate local, State, or federal regulations governing
historical resources.
Cultural Resources Policy 5.8
Consider providing financial incentives, and educational information
on existing incentives provided by the federal government to private
owners and development in order to maintain, rehabilitate, and
preserve historic resources.
Cultural Resources Policy 5.9
Educate the public on the City’s important historic resources in
increase awareness for protection.
6. Water Resources and Quality
GOAL 6: Preservation and protection of the City’s surface water
              and groundwater quality and resources.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.1
Integrate water management programs that emphasize multiple
benefits and balance the needs of urban, rural, and agricultural users.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.2
Protect the surface water resources in the city including Lake
Wohlford, Dixon Lake, Lake Hodges, Escondido Creek, and other
waterways.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.3
Protect the sustainability of groundwater resources.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.4
Require new development to preserve areas that provide opportunities
for groundwater recharge (i.e., areas where substantial surface water
infiltrates into the groundwater), stormwater management, and water
quality benefits.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.5
Maintain natural and improved drainages as permanent open space.             Victorian and stone
                                                                        Craftsman style homes in Old
                                                                          Escondido Neighborhood
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                     VII-27

                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.6
                                Control encroachments into wetlands and designated floodways to
                                protect the community’s water resources.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.7
                                Prohibit development in the areas around Lake Wohlford, Dixon
                                Lake, or Lake Hodges that would detract from their use as watershed
                                areas or as visual and recreational amenities.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.8
                                Maintain Escondido’s natural creek system in an undisturbed state
                                with a minimum of a 50-foot buffer and setback for development, or
                                as established by appropriate wildlife agencies, unless stream course
                                alteration, channelization, and/or improvements are approved by
                                necessary state and federal agencies and the City.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.9
                                Conserve and restore creeks to their natural states whenever possible,
                                and allow areas where channelization has occurred for flood control
                                purposes to serve as urban open space.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.10
                                Require that drainage channels be designed to accommodate riparian
                                vegetation growth.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.11
                                Allow public access to the creeks with that will not impact habitat
                                areas, consistent with sound resource management practices.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.12
                                Regulate construction and operational activities through the use of
                                stormwater protection measures in accordance with the City‟s
                                National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.13
                                Regulate discharge from industrial users and use of agricultural
                                chemicals (pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, etc.) in accordance with
                                local and State regulations to protect the city’s natural water bodies.
                                Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.14
                                Require new development to protect the quality of water resources
                                and natural drainage systems through site design and use of source
                                controls, stormwater treatment, runoff reduction measures, best
    Urban runoff water quality  management practices, and Low Impact Development measures.
  testing in one of Escondido’s
     channelized waterways
Page VII-28                                         Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.15
Protect Escondido‟s shallow groundwater basin from contamination
by regulating stormwater collection and conveyance to ensure
pollutants in runoff have been reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
Water Resources and Quality Policy 6.16
Monitor underground storage tanks containing hazardous materials
and septic tank systems on a regular basis in accordance with all
federal, state, and local regulations.
7. Air Quality and Climate Protection
GOAL 7: Improved air quality in the city and the region to main-
             tain the community’s health and reduce green-house
             gas emissions that contribute to climate change.
Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.1
Participate in regional planning efforts and coordinate with the San
Diego Air Pollution Control District and San Diego Association of
Governments in their efforts to reduce air quality impacts and attain
state and federal air quality standards.
Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.2
Reduce regional greenhouse gas emissions through the following
measures including, but not limited to:
a) Implementing land use patterns that reduce automobile depen-
    dence (compact, mixed-use, pedestrian, and transit-oriented
    development, etc.);
b) Reducing the number of vehicular miles traveled through imple-
    mentation of Transportation Demand Management programs,
    jobs-housing balance, and similar techniques;
c) Supporting public transportation improvements;
d) Encouraging the use of alternative modes of transportation by
    expanding public transit, bicycle, and pedestrian networks and
    facilities;
e) Participating in the development of park-and-ride facilities;
f) Maintaining and updating the city‟s traffic signal synchronization
    plan;
g) Promoting local agriculture;
                                                                      Air quality in urban environments
h) Promoting the use of drought-tolerant landscaping; and               can be improved by planting
i) Encouraging the use of non-polluting alternative energy systems.     vegetation in the right of way
Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation                                                      VII-29

                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.3
                                  Require that new development projects incorporate feasible measures
                                  that reduce construction and operational emissions.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.4
                                  Locate uses and facilities/operations that may produce toxic or
                                  hazardous air pollutants an adequate distance from each other and
                                  from sensitive uses such as housing and schools as consistent with
                                  California Air Resources Board recommendations.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.5
                                  Consider the development of park and ride facilities within the city in
                                  coordination with Caltrans.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.6
                                  Restrict the number and location of drive-through facilities in the city
                                  and require site layouts that reduce the amount of time vehicles wait
                                  for service.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.7
                                  Encourage businesses to alter local truck delivery schedules to occur
                                  during non-peak hours, when feasible.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.8
                                  Require that government contractors minimize greenhouse gas
                                  emissions in building construction and operations, which can be
                                  accomplished through the use of low or zero-emission vehicles and
                                  equipment.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.9
                                  Encourage city employees to use public transit, carpool, and use
                                  alternate modes of transportation for their home to work commutes.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.10
                                  Purchase low-emission vehicles for the city‟s fleet and use clean fuel
                                  sources for trucks and heavy equipment, when feasible.
                                  Air Quality and Climate Protection Policy 7.11
                                  Educate the public about air quality, its effect on health, and efforts
                                  the public can make to improve air quality and reduce greenhouse gas
                                  emissions.
 Ride sharing promotes better air
  quality, improves efficiencies,
    and conserves resources
Page VII-30                                           Escondido General Plan Resource Conservation

          VI. Community Protection
Introduction                                     The Community Protection
                                                 Element’s Purpose
An important role of local government is the     California State General Plan Guidelines
protection of people and property from natural   direct agencies to incorporate a number of ele-
and man-made hazards. The challenge of           ments into their General Plans including
protecting the community in times of emer-       Safety. Escondido’s Community Protection
gency requires a highly trained, organized, and  Element addresses such issues as flood and
dedicated staff that is able to respond to inci- fire hazards, geologic and seismic activity, and
dents at a moment’s notice. Additionally, in an  hazardous materials. Sections regarding Emer-
environment that values efficiency and a         gency Preparedness, Police and Fire service
proactive approach to problem solving, the       are also included. The Element also includes a
ability to properly prepare for emergencies is   section addressing Noise, which is a required
also critical for minimizing losses to life and  component for General Plans.
property.
                                                 The purpose of the Community Protection
Maintaining a safe environment for Escondido     Element is to identify and address the most
with high quality emergency services is          relevant public safety issues affecting the
critical to ensuring the community’s quality of  community. In addition, the Element offers
life. As Escondido continues to grow and         possible solutions and establishes standards
urban areas continue to intensify with taller    and policies for proactively addressing threats
buildings, new employment centers, and           to life and property. The goals and policies
additional traffic, the city’s emergency person- established to minimize dangers set forth the
nel will need to adapt to changing conditions    framework that will regulate existing and
within the community.                            proposed development in hazard prone areas.

                               A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
                                    General Plan
                               Integrating the goals and policies of the Community Protection
                               Element requires coordination with other related components of the
                               General Plan as well as companion master plans, codes and ordi-
                               nances. Other General Plan Elements that are affected by community
                               protection include Land Use and Urban Form, Mobility and Infra-
                               structure, as well as Natural Resources and Open Space. Policies
                               established in the Community Protection Element affect how land
                               uses and infrastructure are developed in areas prone to natural
                               hazards. Recommendations for evacuation and emergency access
                               routes overlap with the city’s Circulation Plan. The proper coordi-
                               nation, development and maintenance of drainage infrastructure are
                               essential for ensuring against flooding. Community protection is
   Escondido’s Police and Fire linked with natural resource and open space areas due to threats of
   Central Operations Facility erosion and wild fires that must be addressed.
Page VI-2                                        Escondido General Plan Community Protection

B. Emergency Preparedness, Disaster
      Response, and Recovery
An emergency includes any unplanned event that can cause deaths or
significant injuries, disrupt operations, cause physical or environ-
mental damage, or threaten the community’s reputation or revenue.
Preparing for an emergency can reduce the fear, anxiety and losses
that can occur. An integrated approach to the management of emer-
gency programs and activities promotes a sense of order and control
when responding to emergencies. The General Plan includes an emer-
gency evacuation route to aid in the orderly and rapid movement of
people away from a threat or actual occurrence of a hazard (Figure
VI-1). Policies that minimize threats to public safety by preparing the
city to address potential emergencies with a coordinated response are
included at the end of this element.
The ongoing effort to lessen the impact emergencies may have on
people and property is critical to avoiding certain disasters. This
includes such precautions as avoiding construction in high-risk areas,
proper landscaping in fire prone areas, and designing development to
withstand earthquakes and flooding. A critical component of pre-
paring for emergencies involves being in a state of readiness to pro-
vide a rapid emergency response, including training exercises and
logistics. Minimizing loss of life, injury and damage to property is
vital in appropriately responding to emergencies. After the emergency
                                                                        Escondido fire fighters responding
is over, the recovery process of resuming normal operations is impor-
                                                                          to the 2008 Witch Creek fire
tant for ensuring community safety and stability.
  Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                  Page VI-3

                                                    Figure VI-1
Page VI-4 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
                                                                                          Figure VI-2
                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                            QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #3
                                                                                      FIRE SERIVCE
                                                                        In urbanized areas of the city, an initial
                                                                          response time of seven and one-half
                                                                          (7½) minutes for all structure fire and
                                                                           emergency Paramedic Assessment
                                                                           Unit (PAU) calls and a maximum re-
                                                                            sponse time of ten (10) minutes for
                                                                          supporting companies shall be main-
                                                                           tained. A minimum of seven (7) total
                                                                          fire stations each staffed with a PAU
                                                                        engine company shall be in place prior
                                                                        to General Plan build-out. For outlying
                                                                          areas beyond a five (5) minute travel
                                                                       time or further than three (3) miles from
                                                                          the nearest fire station, all new struc-
                                                                         tures shall be protected by fire sprink-
                                                                       ler systems or an equivalent system as
                                                                                approved by the Fire Chief.
C. Fire Protection                                                       Travel time is the elapsed time from a
                                                                          verbal or computerized acknowledg-
The Escondido Fire Department’s central operations are co-located
                                                                       ment of the dispatch by the responding
with the Police Department in the city’s Police and Fire Headquarters     unit at the moment of departure from
located at 1163 North Centre City Parkway. The department also has         the station to its arrival at the scene.
fire stations with paramedic units located throughout the community.        Response time is the elapsed time
The mission of the Escondido Fire Department is to protect the health,   from receiving a call for service to the
safety, and welfare of the community. This is accomplished by identi-    responding unit’s arrival at the scene.
fying and mitigating hazards and by preparing for, responding to,       In the case of single family residences
resolving, and recovering from emergencies.                             “arrival at the scene” shall mean at the
                                                                          front door of the residence; for multi-
The Fire Department is the city’s lead agency responding to natural    family residences “arrival at the scene”
disasters such as earthquakes, floods, and storms, and for other emer-   shall mean at the street access to the
                                                                       involved building. The Fire Department
gencies related to fire, explosion, hazardous materials, rescue, and
                                                                       intends to meet these times for no less
medical problems. The General Plan Fire Service Quality of Life              than 90 percent of all emergency
Standard establishes thresholds for response times and staffing              responses by engine companies.
(Figure VI-2). The city maintains mutual aid agreements with fire de-
partments in surrounding agencies in order to promote a more ef-
ficient and thorough emergency coverage (Figure VI-3). Additional
Fire Department definitions are located in Figure VI-18.
  Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                          Page VI-5

                                                    Figure VI-3
Page VI-6 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
                                                                                         Figure VI-4
                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                          QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #4
                                                                                    POLICE SERIVCE
                                                                            The city shall maintain personnel
                                                                          staffing levels based on community-
                                                                             generated workloads and officer
                                                                       availability. Resources will be adjusted
                                                                        to maintain an initial response time for
                                                                       Priority 1 calls (crimes in progress or
                                                                       life threatening) of no more than five
                                                                         (5) minutes and an initial response
                                                                        time for Priority 2 calls (serious calls
                                                                        requiring rapid response but not life
                                                                     threatening incidents) of no more than
                                                                             six and one-half (6½) minutes.
                                                                             The Escondido Police standard
                                                                     includes the measurement of elapsed
                                                                          times from when the call is initially
D. Police Services                                                         processed by the communication
                                                                           operator, the transfer of call infor-
The Escondido Police Department’s central operations are co-located      mation to the police officer, and the
with the Fire Department in the city’s Police and Fire Headquarters    time of the field officer’s arrival at the
located at 1163 North Centre City Parkway. The department main-          service call location. Resources will
tains police officer patrol areas to provide law enforcement for the   be allocated to organize patrol areas
community. The County Sheriff provides law enforcement for areas           and involve community members
                                                                         when appropriate to achieve Com-
outside Escondido’s corporate boundaries (Figure VI-5). While main-
                                                                     munity Oriented Policing and Problem
taining law and order, the Police and Sheriff Departments are also           Solving (COPPS) efforts. To the
active in sponsoring and participating in community programs that    maximum economic extent feasible, the
promote a safe environment.                                            Police Department will take aggressive
                                                                            enforcement action against crime
Demographic and economic conditions, as well as intensification of         trends, including maintenance pro-
General Plan land uses will have tremendous influence on the demand     cedures and incorporating community
for police services. Changes in population, additional recreational   involvement and education as a means
facilities, increased traffic volumes, expanded city limits, and new            to deter potential incidents.
businesses all increase the importance of maintaining and supporting
law enforcement services. The General Plan Police Service Quality of
Life Standard establishes thresholds for response times and staffing
(Figure VI-4).
  Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                        Page VI-7

                                                    Figure VI-5
Page VI-8 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
                                                                          “Providing excellent police services
1. Strategic Planning                                                        at every opportunity through
                                                                           professional conduct, community
The Escondido Police Department’s Management Team regularly                 outreach and crime reduction”
engages in an ongoing strategic planning process to produce goals,
objectives and strategies that are utilized to create an implementation          Escondido Police Department
                                                                                               Mission Statement
plan which guides budgetary, operational and organizational
decisions. Components of the strategic planning process directly
support the Mission Statement defining the department’s pillars of
Professional Conduct, Community Outreach, and Crime Reduction.
The department’s strategic plan is implemented, evaluated and up-
dated regularly. Every position on the management team has key
responsibilities for the planning, implementation, monitoring and
updating of the specific action items involved in the goals and
objectives identified in the strategic planning process.
2. Strategic Priorities
The Police Department’s strategic priorities are of equal importance
and are dependently interrelated. The following is a list of the Police
Department’s strategic priorities.
   Community Outreach, Trust and Partnership                                     The Escondido Police
   Crime Reduction                                                             Department K-9 Unit was
   Employee and Organizational Professional Development and                  established in 1985 with the
    Conduct                                                                       goal of enhancing the
   Fiscal Efficiency and Support Resources                                  effectiveness of police officers
                                                                               in searching for and appre-
   Growth Management                                                           hending violent criminals,
   Regional Partnerships                                                     locating evidence, narcotics
   Professional Service                                                      and explosive devices. The
   Safety Equipment and Technology                                              police service dogs also
The Management Team is tasked with performance measurements to                  provide an important com-
                                                                              munity outreach function as
systematically evaluate their assigned strategic initiatives (referred to
                                                                              the K-9 teams demonstrate
as “Project Updates”). Within the review process, the department im-        their professionalism to schools
plements both qualitative and quantitative measures with outcome                 and community groups.
indicators or program results evaluated to gauge overall effectiveness.
  Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                      Page VI-9

                                E. Code Enforcement
                                During the General Plan public workshops residents expressed a
                                strong desire for improved community aesthetics through property
                                maintenance. The appearance and maintenance of property affects
                                community image and perception. Poorly maintained properties can
                                lead to blighted conditions that can create a hazardous and unsafe
                                situation. Code enforcement services provide a proactive opportunity
                                for ensuring property maintenance. Additionally, code enforcement
                                helps ensure the preservation of existing housing stock, health and
                                safety code response, safe and fair business operations, vehicle
                                abatement, and ensuring well-maintained properties.
                                Escondido’s Code Enforcement Division protects life, safety, and
                                property through the enforcement of codes and standards for the
                                maintenance and regulation of property, buildings and structures in
                                the city. In addition the Division enforces business licensing, conducts
                                mobile home park inspections, and participates in the statewide
                                Abandoned Vehicle Abatement (AVA) Program.
                                General Plan policies focus on enforcing code requirements and
                                providing adequate code department facilities, services, and staffing.
                                Properties with public nuisance violations and blighted or deteriorated
                                conditions will not be permitted, and substandard or dangerous
                                buildings must be either repaired or demolished. Effective code en-
  Graffiti removal and property forcement also involves communication with residents and businesses
 maintenance code enforcement   including a public outreach and educational program that facilitates
       abatement actions
                                voluntary compliance with city ordinances.
Page VI-10                                           Escondido General Plan Community Protection

F. Community Safety
Minimizing property damage, disaster costs, injury and deaths during
emergencies is important for Escondido to enhance residents’ sense of
security, reduce expenditures and maintain a high quality of life.
Community safety is threatened by climate change projections indi-
cating that Escondido could experience future climatic extremes in-
cluding more intense rainfall events with associated flooding and
erosion, and greater fire risk from increased temperatures and evap-
oration. Climate change is expected to exacerbate existing natural
hazard risks such as floods, wild fires, and erosion events and ap-
propriate safeguards must be considered to increase community
resilience to natural hazards.
1. Fire Hazards
Escondido is an established community with a developed urban
center that is surrounded by large areas of rural land and open space.
This land use pattern exposes residents to dangers from both urban
and wildland fire risks (Figure VI-6). The community’s varied
building ages, construction styles, and intensities lead to different
urban fire profiles, depending on a variety of factors that create the
potential to cause significant loss of life and property. These fires
damage and destroy homes, schools, commercial buildings, and
vehicles. Improvements in architecture, building design, and con-
struction materials over the years have aided in emergency response    Brush clearance for fire
                                                                       suppression purposes
efforts and reduced the likelihood of disasters.
                                                                            (above left)
Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                          Page VI-11

                                                    Figure VI-6
Page VI-12 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
Major wildfires pose a significant risk in the large open space hill-
sides bordering Escondido. The Fire Department’s Fire Hazard
Severity Zone (Figure VI-4) highlights areas of the community with
the greatest risk for wildfire incidents. A wildland fire differs from
other fires by its extensive size, the speed at which it can spread out
from its original source, its potential to change direction unexpec-
tedly, and its ability to jump gaps such as roads, rivers and fire breaks.
Wildfires are of particular concern in communities that are located in
the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI), which includes areas where
development is edged by undeveloped wildland areas and/or highly
flammable vegetation such as California chaparral, sage scrub and
woodland areas.
2. Floods
Flood hazards related to storm events are typically expressed as a
“100-year flood,” which describes the largest flood event that may be
expected within a 100-year period. The event is considered a severe
flood, but one that can be reasonably forecasted and therefore reason-
ably mitigated. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
maps indicate that the drainage areas along Escondido Creek and
Reidy Creek are subject to flooding by the 100-year flood event
(Figure VI-7). Escondido participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program, which provides coverage for properties affected by the 100-
year flood. Participating agencies must recognize FEMA’s official
flood boundaries and establish appropriate land use policies for flood
zone areas in order to receive insurance benefits in the event of a
flood. To control flooding and surface runoff, prevention methods
such as detention basins and on-site storm water features are required
in development projects. Also refer to Stormwater Management in the
Mobility and Infrastructure Element, and Water Resources in the
Resource Conservation Element.
Lakes Wohlford and Dixon are located in Escondido’s northeastern
planning area totaling approximately 266 surface acres of water. A
catastrophic dam failure at either of these facilities would likely result
in extensive downstream flooding along Escondido Creek (Figure VI-
8). The areas below the dams are zoned for flood hazard on the
FEMA maps. If one of these facilities fails, properties along Escon-
dido Creek, and a significant portion of the valley floor area including   Wildland Fire on Escondido’s
downtown, could be inundated. Flood waters may move at rates that          northern boundary in 2008.
prohibit a significant number of persons to be evacuated in the wake                   (above)
of the initial flows, and significant property damage would likely
result. Escondido staff, state and federal officials regularly inspect
these facilities to ensure that risks are minimized.                               Local flooding
                                                                                 after rains in 2011
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                    Page VI-13

                                                   Figure VI-7
Page VI-14 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
3. Seismicity and Soils
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act identifies no active
faults within Escondido; consequently, the risk of surface rupture is
low. Several earthquake faults exist in Escondido’s vicinity, and the
nearest is the Rose Canyon Fault, located approximately 20 miles
west under the Pacific Ocean. This fault is not considered a serious
threat due to the distance and magnitude of past seismic activity.
However, an earthquake large enough to result in moderate ground
shaking is possible. Seismic risks are significantly higher in areas
closer to the region’s major faults, and a moderate or major earth-
quake could result in potentially damaging ground shaking. The state
continues to update its Earthquake Fault Zoning Maps. Given the
proximity to fault lines in the Southern California region an active
fault near Escondido could be identified in the future.
Escondido’s topography includes a level valley at 650 Mean Sea
Level (MSL) surrounded by hills and mountains ranging up to 2,200
MSL and has the potential for slope instability and landslides (Figure
VI-9). Certain soil types in Escondido’s Planning Area present
difficulties for development because they cannot support roadways or
foundations, are unacceptable for septic systems, and can easily
erode. Regulating development in steep slope areas relates to public
health and safety by protecting against floods, erosion, landslides, and
fire hazards. Slope instability is particularly acute in areas steeper than
25 percent that may be prone to surficial failures, mudflows, debris        Repairing Lake Wohlford Road
flows, rock falls, soil creep and erosion. Additionally, failures of man-    after a landslide caused by
made slopes pose a threat under the certain conditions such as                   heavy rains in 2011
saturation caused by over irrigating or excessive rainfall.
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                    Page VI-15

                                                   Figure VI-8
Page VI-16 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
4. Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials represent a potential threat to those affected by
its misuse, improper or accidental disposal. Establishments within
Escondido involved with hazardous materials are regulated by the
Hazardous Materials Division (HMD) of the San Diego County
Department of Environment Health. The HMD regulates hazardous
materials business plans and chemical inventories, hazardous waste
permitting, underground storage tanks, risk management plans, and a
listing of permitted hazardous materials users within the city. Risks
associated with the cleanup of hazardous wastes and the handling and
disposal of newly generated wastes have long-lasting effects. Site
contamination may impair the city’s ability to implement the General
Plan by increasing the costs of development, requiring certain land   Hazardous material inspection
use restrictions, and causing delays while necessary cleanups are     photo taken at an Escondido’s
implemented.                                                          business in the Industrial Zone
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                              Page VI-17

                                                   Figure VI-9
Page VI-18 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
G. Noise
Noise is unwanted sound that impacts quality of life by interfering
with living, working, and enjoying daily life. Noise can threaten com-
munity safety and comfort, affect the general well-being of residents
and contributes to annoyance and undue stress. The State of Califor-
nia recognizes the relationship between noise and noise-sensitive land
uses. Noise measurement terminology is defined in Figure VI-11 and
policies for addressing noise-related issues are included in this
General Plan. Noise sources that impact the community are identified
with the intent of minimizing the exposure to excessive noise levels
through the application of policies and programs.
1. Noise Sensitive Land Uses
Land uses are located throughout the city in areas where the impact of
noise could affect their operation or activity. Locations of certain
noise-sensitive receptors and noise generators are identified in Figure
VI-10 and also include:
   Residential Development and care facilities
   Schools, churches and transient lodging
   Hospitals and health care facilities
   Libraries, museums, cultural facilities
   Golf courses and passive recreational sites
Noise exposure levels for a variety of land uses are identified in
Figure VI-12. Minimizing noise exposure to sensitive areas is
important to ensure the proper function of land uses and to maintain     Monitoring equipment measuring
quality of life.                                                        traffic noise along a local roadway
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                   Page VI-19

                                                  Figure VI-10
Page VI-20 Escondido General Plan Community Protection
Under certain conditions, the city may require acoustical studies to                       Figure VI-11
accompany development proposals in order to establish appropriate             NOISE TERMINOLOGY
noise mitigation measures. Guidelines for conducting noise measure-
ments are included in Figure VI-13.                                        Community Noise Equivalent
                                                                           Level (CNEL):
2. Community Noise Sources                                                 A measurement of ambient noise that in-
                                                                           cludes an Ldn with an additional 5 dBA
Typical noise levels associated with common indoor and outdoor             “penalty” for the evening hours between
                                                                           7:00 P.M. and 10:00 P.M.
noise sources and are depicted in Figure VI-16. There are a variety of
noise sources in the community that affect land uses in the com-           dBA:
munity including:                                                          Measurement unit for “A-weighted deci-
                                                                           bels,” for assessing environmental and
a. Roadway Network                                                         industrial noise and the potential hearing
Escondido’s existing noise environment is dominated by traffic             damage associated noise health effects.
related noise along the city’s roadway network, including Interstate
                                                                           Equivalent Energy Noise Level
15 and State Highway 78. Variables that affect noise emission include
speed, volume and inclusion of heavy truck traffic. The Land Use and       (Leq):
                                                                           Constant noise level delivering the same
Community Form Element identifies mixed-use overlays and new
                                                                           acoustic energy to the ear of a listener
employment areas where additional growth will be accommodated.             as the actual time-varying noise would
Increased traffic volumes in these areas represent where major antici-     deliver over the same exposure. No
pated measurable new noise sources will be generated.                      “penalties” are added to any noise levels
                                                                           during the exposure time; Leq would be
b. NCTD Rail Line                                                          the same regard-less of the time of day
The North County Transit District (NCTD) began operating its               during which the noise occurs.
Sprinter commuter rail service in 2008 along an existing rail
                                                                           Day-Night Average Noise Level
alignment previously used exclusively for periodic freight operations.
The rail line parallels the State Highway 78 through Escondido with a
                                                                           (Ldn):
                                                                           A 24-hour average Leq with a 10 dBA
station at the southwestern corner of Mission Road and Auto Park           “penalty” added to noise levels during
Way (Nordahl Station) and terminates at the Escondido Transit              the hours of 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. to
Station on the northern side of Escondido Creek, east of Interstate 15.    account for increased sensitivity for night
                                                                           time noise. Due to the penalty, Ldn is
Land uses adjacent to the rail line through Escondido comprise non-        higher than its corresponding 24-hour
noise sensitive commercial and industrial businesses. The nearest          Leq (for example, a constant 60 dBA
existing residential land use is approximately one-eighth mile south of    noise over 24 hours would have a 60
the Escondido Transit Station, on the south side of Valley Parkway.        dBA Leq, but a 66.4 dBA Ldn).
Consequently, rail noise is not a significant issue for current residents.
Opportunities for additional residential are within one-quarter mile
                                                                           Sound Exposure Level or Single
east of the Escondido Transit Station in downtown and / or near the        Event Level (SEL):
                                                                           Assesses the severity of short duration
Transit Station Regional Attraction Target Area (see Land Use and
                                                                           sound events. SEL is a time averaged,
Community Form Element).                                                   constant intensity, A-weighted sound
                                                                           level over a one-second reference time
Future plans for extending the NCTD Sprinter line from the Escon-          that would produce the same sound ex-
dido Transit Station along Centre City Parkway to Westfield Shop-          posure as the actual time-varying sound
ping Town have been included in NCTD’s Master Planning efforts.            over the actual exposure time. SEL is
This extension would be in close proximity to existing residential         usually applied in situations with multiple
neighborhoods.                                                             sound events, each one having its own
                                                                           characteristic SEL.
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                         Page VI-21

                                          c. Firing Ranges
                                          Two firing ranges operate within the Planning Area. The city’s muni-
                                          cipal firing range on Valley Center Road provides training opportu-
                                          nities for law enforcement personnel from a variety of local, state and
              Figure VI-12                federal organizations. A private recreational firing range east of Lake
                                          Wohlford operated by The Escondido Fish and Game Association is
      LAND USE NOISE                      available for members on a daily basis and with limited public use.
     EXPOSURE LEVELS
                                                    LAND USE                 COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
             NORMALLY                                                                 Ldn or CNEL, dBa
           ACCEPTABLE                              CATEGORY                  55    60    65     70     75  80   85
  Specified land use is satisfactory,
   based upon the assumption that          Residential-Single family,
   buildings involved are of normal        Duplex, Mobile Home
  conventional construction, without
                                           Residential-Multi-Family,
      any special noise insulation
                                           Residential Mixed Use
             requirements.
                                           Transient Lodging, Motels,
          CONDITIONALLY                    Hotels
           ACCEPTABLE
  New construction or development          Schools, Libraries, Churches,
  should be undertaken only after a        Hospitals, Nursing Homes
   detailed analysis of the noise re-
  duction requirements is made and         Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
   needed noise insulation features        Amphitheaters
included in the design. Conventional
  construction, but with closed win-       Sports Arena, Outdoor
 dows and fresh air supply systems         Spectator Sports
or air conditioning will usually suffice.
                                           Playgrounds, Parks
             NORMALLY
          UNACCEPTABLE
  New construction or development          Golf Courses, Riding Stables,
 should generally be discouraged. If       Water Recreation, Cemeteries
  new construction or development
                                           Office Buildings, Business
does proceed, a detailed analysis of
                                           Commercial, Professional
  the noise reduction requirements
 must be made with noise insulation
                                           Industrial, Manufacturing,
    features included in the design.
                                           Utilities, Agriculture
              CLEARLY
          UNACCEPTABLE                    d. Commercial and Industrial Land Uses
  New construction or development         Escondido’s development pattern primarily distributes commercial
should generally not be undertaken.       and industrial land uses in a north-south and east-west alignment
                                          along major transportation corridors in the urban core. Residential
                                          areas generally surround these commercial and industrial areas and
                                          establish potential noise conflicts dependent on factors including: type
                                          of activity, hours of operation, building orientation and the site’s
                                          location relative to other land uses.
Page VI-22                                                        Escondido General Plan Community Protection

e. Flight Operations
The County of San Diego is owner and operator of McClellan-
Palomar Airport, a public facility that accommodates smaller civil
aircraft located approximately 12 miles west of Escondido. An
Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) was adopted that
identifies issues and provides guidance regarding land uses                                                 Figure VI-13
surrounding the facility (also refer to Mobility and Infrastructure                                Noise Measurement
Element). A noise evaluation in the ALUCP indicates that the facility                                     Guidelines:
generates less than 60 dBA CNEL within Escondido’s airspace.
However, because of Escondido’s proximity to the airport real estate                       1) Noise measurements in residential
professionals are required to provide a disclosure statement notifying                        areas should generally be applied at
prospective property owners of the airport’s flight patterns and                              ten feet from the backyard property
potential noise impacts.                                                                      line. However, in certain cases such
                                                                                              as on estate lots where backyards
Air ambulances transport unscheduled emergency patient deliveries                             are typically very large, the 60 dBA
via helicopter to Palomar-Pomerado Hospital. While there are noise                            goal could be applied approximately
                                                                                              one half the distance between the
implications regarding these flights there are no laws or regulations
                                                                                              back of the main residential structure
regarding the specific flight patterns of air ambulances because they                         and the rear property line.
are non-scheduled, fly in various directions transporting patients to
and from hospitals, and must vary their path to adjust for other air                       2) The outdoor standard should not
traffic, tall buildings and weather conditions.                                               normally be applied to balconies or
                                                                                              patios associated with residential
                                                                                              uses.
                                        Figure VI-14
 Exterior Incremental Environmental Noise Impact Standards for                             3) *Noise impacts of proposed projects
                          Noise-Sensitive Uses (dBA)                                          on existing land uses should be
                                                                                              evaluated in terms of potential for
   Residences and Buildings Where                     Institutional Land Uses with            adverse community response, based
         People Normally Sleepa                  Primarily Daytime and Evening Usesb          on a significant increase in existing
   Existing Ldn          Allowable Noise           Existing Peak        Allowable Noise       noise levels. For example, if an area
                             Increment               Hour Leq              Increment          currently is below the maximum nor-
         45                       8                      45                     12            mally acceptable level, an increase
         50                       5                      50                      9            in noise up to the maximum should
                                                                                              not necessarily be allowed. Projects
         55                       3                      55                      6            increasing noise levels by 5 dB or
         60                       2                      60                      5            greater should be considered as
         65                       1                      65                      3            generating a signify-cant impact and
                                                                                              should require mitigation.
         70                       1                      70                      3
         75                       0                      75                      1
         80                       0                      80                      0
Noise levels are measured at the property line of the noise-sensitive use.
a. This category includes homes, hospitals, and hotels where a nighttime sensitivity to
   noise is assumed to be of utmost importance.
b. This category includes schools, libraries, theaters, and churches where it is important
   to avoid interference with such activities as speech, meditation, and concentration on
   reading material.
SOURCE: Federal Transit Administration, Transit Noise Impact and Vibration
f. OtherAssessment,       May 2006
               Noise Sources
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                                          Page VI-23

                                        Both stationary and periodic noise levels within the community have
                                        a potential to disrupt quality of life, including but not limited to
                                        construction activity, schools, parks, playgrounds, churches, land-
                Figure VI-15
                                        scaping maintenance equipment, barking dogs and loud music, etc.
 Noise Reduction Strategies:
1) Site planning responsive to          3. Community Noise Environment
   topography.
   Strategies:                          Residential development densities in Escondido’s suburban areas that
                                        surround downtown are not proposed for intensification. Noise levels
    Increase distances between
     noise sources and receivers;
                                        in these areas are not anticipated to change significantly. Develop-
                                        ment in mixed-use target areas includes establishing residential units
    Place non-noise-sensitive          along busy streets and/or in close proximity to non-residential uses
     land uses such as utility areas,
                                        where noise may be a factor. Future residential growth focused in the
     parking lots, and maintenance
     facilities between the source and  downtown, urban core, and mixed use areas may need to incorporate
     the receiver;                      noise reduction strategies as depicted in Figure VI-15 in order to
                                        reduce interior noise to acceptable levels as depicted in Figures VI-12.
    Use non-noise-sensitive
     structures such as garages to
     shield noise-sensitive areas;                                         Figure VI-16
    Orient buildings to shield outdoor                Typical Noise Levels of Common Activities
     spaces from a noise source.
                                                                          Noise Level
2) Architecture responsive to            Common Outdoor Activities
                                                                              (dBA)
                                                                                        Common Indoor Activities
   noise sensitive spaces.                                                     110               Rock Band
   Strategies:
                                             Jet Fly-over at 1,000 feet        100
    Orient bedrooms away from                                                  90
     noise sources.
                                              Diesel Truck at 50 feet,
                                                                                            Food Blender at 3 feet
    Limit openings and penetrations                 at 50 mph
     on portions of buildings impacted                                          80       Garbage Disposal at 3 feet
     by noise                               Noisy Urban Area, Daytime
3) Barriers responsive to reduce            Gas Lawn Mower at 3 feet            70       Vacuum Cleaner at 10 feet
   noise levels.                                  Commercial Area                          Normal speech at 3 feet
   Strategies:                                Heavy Traffic at 300 feet         60
    Ensure that line of sight is                                                           Large Business Office
     interrupted between noise                 Quiet Urban Daytime              50         Dishwasher Next Room
     source and the receptor when                                                        Theater, Large Conference
     constructing noise walls                  Quiet Urban Nighttime            40           Room (background)
    Apply noise insulation to walls,        Quiet Suburban Nighttime
     roofs, doors windows and other                                             30                 Library
     penetrations.                                                                            Bedroom at Night,
                                               Quiet Rural Nighttime
                                                                                          Concert Hall (background)
                                                                                20
                                                                                         Broadcast/Recording Studio
                                                                                10
                                                Lowest Threshold of                          Lowest Threshold of
                                                   Human Hearing
                                                                                0              Human Hearing
                                         Source: CALTRANS
 Page VI-24                                                      Escondido General Plan Community Protection

                                             Figure VI-17
Escondido General Plan Community Protection Page VI-25
           The community noise environment can be described using contours
           derived from monitoring major sources of noise. Future noise
           contours have been estimated by incorporating information about
           both current and anticipated future land use development and traffic
           volumes that will be a basis for identifying potential noise issue areas
           (Figure VI-17). A unique challenge will be the ability to achieve state
           mandated interior noise requirements for residential uses that are
           located within activity centers and high intensity environments.
           Escondido will implement policies, guidelines, and standards to
           minimize the community’s exposure to excessive noise, with special
           emphasis on protecting residential areas.
Page VI-26                    Escondido General Plan Community Protection

H. Community Protection Goals and                                                           Figure VI-18
                                                                                      Fire Department
     Policies                                                                             Definitions:
A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and      Travel Time:
Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to community protection        The elapsed time from a verbal or
provided below are intended to guide development to meet the pre-           computerized acknowledgment of the
sent and future needs, achieve a vibrant community, and enhance the         dispatch by the responding unit at the
safety of Escondido.                                                        moment of departure from the station
                                                                            to its arrival at the scene.
1. Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Response                             Response Time:
                                                                            The elapsed time from receiving a call
GOAL 1: A prepared and responsive community in the event of                 for service to the responding unit’s
             disasters and emergencies.                                     arrival at the scene.
                                                                            Arrival at the Scene:
Emergency Services Policy 1.1                                               1) Single family residences: at the
Provide for emergency response during and after catastrophic events.           front door of the residence;
                                                                            2) Multi-family & non-residential: at the
Emergency Services Policy 1.2                                                  street access of the involved building.
Maintain and upgrade the city’s disaster response plans and continue
to participate in appropriate Mutual Aid Agreements that enhance            Needed Fire Flow:
disaster preparedness and emergency response.                               The water flow rate needed to control
                                                                            a fire in a building or structure. Fac-
Emergency Services Policy 1.3                                               tors determining the Needed Fire
Conduct periodic emergency exercises to test and improve juris-             Flow are size of the building or struc-
dictional and inter-department coordination and response to emer-           ture, type of construction according to
                                                                            the California Building Code, use or
gencies brought about by catastrophes such as fire, flood, earth-
                                                                            occupancy of the building or structure,
quakes, and hazardous spills.                                               and proximity to property lines, other
                                                                            structures and/or hazards.
Emergency Services Policy 1.4
Plan for the continued function of essential facilities such as hospitals,  Standards of Response
fire stations, and emergency command centers following a major              Coverage (SORC):
disaster to facilitate post-disaster recovery.                              Written policies and procedures
                                                                            establishing the distribution and
Emergency Services Policy 1.5                                               concentration of the Department’s
Identify locations and facilities in the city to be used as shelters by the fixed and mobile resources that
community during emergency situations and establish programs to             includes an analysis of risks and
quickly enable operation of these shelters and communicate access           expectations to assist in making
                                                                            decisions on deployment issues.
information for residents.
                                                                            Strategic Plan:
Emergency Services Policy 1.6                                               Written priorities and goals addres-
Require minimum road and driveway widths and clearances around              sing Planning Budgets, Life Safety,
structures consistent with local and State requirements to ensure           Incident Stabilization, and Property
emergency access.                                                           Conservation.
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                           Page VI-27

           Emergency Services Policy 1.7
           Provide for adequate water storage and flow to meet current and
           future service needs as defined in the city’s Water Master Plan.
           Emergency Services Policy 1.8
           Regularly review and revise identified evacuation routes for the
           public’s use in the event of an emergency to ensure adequacy (Figure
           VI-1).
           Emergency Services Policy 1.9
           Promote public awareness through the Community Emergency
           Response Team (CERT) of possible natural and man-made hazards
           and measures which can be taken to protect lives and property during
           and immediately after emergencies.
           Emergency Services Policy 1.10
           Maintain and periodically update a data base documenting wildfire,
           flooding, and seismic hazard areas and risks as input for the city’s
           Emergency Preparedness and Response programs. The data base shall
           include debris management operations and landfill diversion require-
           ments for the safe and responsible removal and disposal of debris
           after an emergency that maximizes recycling and minimizes materials
           disposed in landfills.
           Emergency Services Policy 1.11
           Monitor pertinent studies and research regarding changes in wildland
           and flooding risks that may accrue with climate change and consider
           their implications in updating the city’s Emergency Response and
           Preparedness programs.
           Emergency Services Policy 1.12
           Protect the opportunities for use of the existing shooting range and
           other sites for public safety training.
           2. Fire Protection
           GOAL 2: Protection of life and property through adequate fire
                        protection and emergency medical services.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.1
           Regularly review and maintain the Standards of Response Coverage
           and the Fire Department Strategic Plan to address staffing, facility
           needs, and service goals.
Page VI-28                      Escondido General Plan Community Protection

Fire Protection Policy 2.2
Provide Fire Department response times for no less than 90 percent of
all emergency responses with engine companies by achieving the
following service standard:
 Provide an initial response time of seven and one-half (7½) minutes
   for all structure fire and emergency Advanced Life Support (ALS)
   calls and a maximum response time of ten (10) minutes for
   supporting companies in urbanized areas of the city.
Fire Protection Policy 2.3
Provide a minimum total of seven (7) fire stations each sized and
staffed with facilities, services and equipment to meet current and
anticipated needs including, but not limited to, engine and truck units
and crews and Advanced Life Support (ALS) staff prior to General
Plan build out to the extent economically feasible.
Fire Protection Policy 2.4
Require new residential and non-residential development to be
constructed consistent with the California Fire Code and the require-
ments set by the State.
Fire Protection Policy 2.5
Commit to the use of state-of-the-art equipment, technologies, and
management techniques for fire prevention and suppression.
Fire Protection Policy 2.6
Require new development to contribute fees to maintain fire pro-
tection service levels without adversely affecting service levels for
existing development.
Fire Protection Policy 2.7
Continue to include the Fire Department in the review of develop-
ment proposals to ensure that projects adequately address safe design
and on-site fire protection.
Fire Protection Policy 2.8
Consider provisions for adequate emergency access, driveway widths,
turning radii, fire hydrant locations, and Needed Fire Flow require-
ments in the review of all development applications to minimize fire
hazards.
Fire Protection Policy 2.9
Require mid- and high-rise development to include sprinkler systems
and on-site fire suppression equipment and materials, and be served
by fire stations containing specialized equipment for fire and/or
emergency incidents.
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                            Page VI-29

           Fire Protection Policy 2.10
           Establish and maintain an adequate fire flow in relation to structure,
           size, design, and requirements for construction and/or built-in fire
           protection.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.11
           Maintain and enhance an emergency vehicle traffic signal activation
           system to improve fire station service area coverage in conjunction
           with planned improvements to the city’s major circulation system.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.12
           Maintain close coordination between planned roadway and other
           circulation improvements in the city to assure adequate levels of
           service and response times to all areas of the community.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.13
           Utilize Mutual Aid and Automatic Aid Agreements with other
           jurisdictions when appropriate to supplement fire station service area
           coverage and response times to all portions of the community.
           WILDLAND FIRE HAZARDS
           Fire Protection Policy 2.14
           Require new development in high wildfire risk areas to incorporate
           site design, maintenance practices, and fire resistant landscaping to
           protect properties and reduce risks.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.15
           Continue to remove excessive/overgrown vegetation from city-owned
           properties, and require private property owners to remove exces-
           sive/overgrown vegetation to the satisfaction of the Fire Department,
           to prevent and minimize fire risks to surrounding properties.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.16
           Require fire protection plans for mitigation of potential grass and
           wildland fires within designated high fire hazard areas and other areas
           required by the Fire Department, that address the need for fire
           systems, water availability, secondary emergency access routes, con-
           struction requirements, and fire resistant landscaping and appropriate
           defensible space around structures.
           Fire Protection Policy 2.17
           Maintain programs to minimize impacts on sensitive biological
           habitat and species when suppressing wildland fires, when feasible.
Page VI-30                      Escondido General Plan Community Protection

Fire Protection Policy 2.18
Educate the public about wildland fire prevention techniques to
minimize the potential hazards of wildland fires.
3. Police Services
GOAL 3: Protection of life and property, and enforcement of law
             that enhances personal safety in the community.
Police Services Policy 3.1
Regularly review and implement appropriate plans for police pro-
tection and services that address staffing, facility needs, and service
goals to ensure that the community’s needs are met.
Police Services Policy 3.2
Maintain an initial response time for Priority 1 calls of no more than
five (5) minutes and an initial response time for Priority 2 calls of no
more than six and one-half (6½) minutes. Constantly review these
standards to ensure their adequacy and appropriateness in con-
sideration of resource availability.
Police Services Policy 3.3
Maintain adequate levels of sworn officers and civilian personnel to
support law enforcement operations based on community needs in
order to meet response time standards.
Police Services Policy 3.4
Commit to the use of state-of-the-art equipment, technologies, and
management techniques to assure adequate levels of police protection.
Police Services Policy 3.5
Require new development to contribute fees to maintain police
facilities and equipment that meet the needs of the community.
Police Services Policy 3.6
Allocate resources to organize patrol areas, and regularly commu-
nicate with and involve community, school, and civic organizations to
encourage community-based crime prevention efforts such as imple-
menting Community Oriented Policing and Problem Solving
(COPPS) strategies.                                                        Cleanup operations after
                                                                              firefighting incident
                                                                                     (above)
Police Services Policy 3.7
Require that defensible space practices that contribute to personal and
property safety and crime prevention be incorporated into develop-
ment projects, such as security and design features (e.g., site and      Escondido Police Department
building lighting, visual observation of areas, secured areas).               K-9 demonstration
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                 Page VI-31

                                 Police Services Policy 3.8
                                 Enhance crime prevention by working with human care agencies,
                                 recreational agencies, educational services and community groups to:
                                 a) Reduce victimization;
                                 b) Encourage recreational and educational opportunities for youth
                                     and other community members; and
                                 c) Maintain awareness of potential problem areas.
                                 Police Services Policy 3.9
                                 Educate the public about crime prevention techniques through
                                 programs such as the Neighborhood Watch Program in residential
                                 neighborhoods and the Business Watch Program in commercial and
                                 industrial areas.
                                 Police Services Policy 3.10
                                 Coordinate with other federal, State, County, and local law enforce-
                                 ment agencies to provide assistance during emergency situations that
                                 require outside help as part of the State’s Mutual Aid Agreement.
                                 4. Code Enforcement Policies
                                 GOAL 4: A safe and healthy environment through an aggressive
                                              code enforcement program.
                                 Code Enforcement Policy 4.1
                                 Provide facilities and staffing to maintain an aggressive and visible
                                 code enforcement program to ensure that existing properties meet
                                 health and safety standards.
                                 Code Enforcement Policy 4.2
                                 Enforce State and local health and safety statues and codes for safe
                                 business operations to ensure the health and safety of the general
                                 public.
                                 Code Enforcement Policy 4.3
                                 Require properties with identified public nuisance violations, such as
                                 graffiti, abandoned and inoperative vehicles, and abandoned shopping
                                 carts, to eliminate or correct the violations.
                                 Code Enforcement Policy 4.4
                                 Require that structures be maintained to ensure a safe and healthy
                                 environment, preventing blight and deterioration resulting from
 Property maintenance violations
  found at a code enforcement
                                 deferred maintenance.
          investigation
Page VI-32                                            Escondido General Plan Community Protection

Code Enforcement Policy 4.5
Require buildings that are identified as substandard or dangerous to
be either repaired or demolished.
Code Enforcement Policy 4.6
Conduct public outreach and educational programs with residents,
businesses, and community organizations to promote voluntary com-
pliance with city ordinances.
5. Noise
GOAL 5: Protection of the community from excessive noise
             exposure.
Noise Policy 5.1
Require development to meet acceptable exterior noise level stan-
dards as established in Figure VI-2, and use the future noise contour
map (FigureVI-17) as a guide for evaluating the compatibility of new
noise sensitive uses with projected noise levels.
Noise Policy 5.2
Apply a CNEL of 60 dB or less for single family and 65 dB or less
for multi-family as goals where outdoor use is a major consideration
(back yards and single family housing developments, and recreation
areas in multifamily housing developments) as discussed in Figure
VI-13, and recognize that such levels may not necessarily be
achievable in all residential areas.
Noise Policy 5.3
Require noise attenuation for outdoor spaces in all developments
where projected incremental exterior noise levels exceed those shown
in Figure VI-14.
Noise Policy 5.4
Require noise attenuation for new noise-sensitive uses which include
residential, daycare facilities, schools, churches, transient lodging,
hotels, motels, hospitals, health care facilities, and libraries if the
projected interior noise standard of 45 dBA CNEL is exceeded.
Noise Policy 5.5
Require construction projects and new development to ensure
acceptable vibration levels at nearby noise-sensitive uses based on
Federal Transit Administrator criteria.
                                                                        Monitoring equipment measuring
                                                                             construction activities
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                                Page VI-33
                               Noise Policy 5.6
                               Require the preparation of noise studies, as deemed necessary by the
                               Planning Department, to analyze potential noise impacts associated
                               with new development which could significantly alter existing noise
                               levels in accordance with provisions outlined in Figure VI-14.
                               Noise Policy 5.7
                               Encourage use of site and building design, noise barriers, and con-
                               struction methods as outlined in Figure VI-15 to minimize impacts on
                               and from new development.
                               Noise Policy 5.8
                               Require that mixed use and multi-family residential developments
                               demonstrate that the design of the structure will adequately isolate
                               noise between adjacent uses (orientation, window insulation, separa-
                               tion of common walls, floors, and ceilings, etc.).
                               Noise Policy 5.9
                               Require new mixed use developments to locate loading areas, parking
                               lots, driveways, trash enclosures, mechanical equipment, and other
                               noise sources away from the residential portion of the development,
                               when physically feasible. Use construction standards to reduce noise
                               between uses.
                               Noise Policy 5.10
                               Require development projects that are subject to discretionary
                               approval to assess potential construction noise impacts on nearby
                               sensitive uses and to minimize impacts on these uses, to the extent
                               feasible.
                               Noise Policy 5.11
                               Limit direct access from individual properties along Major Roads and
                               Prime Arterials in residential areas in order to minimize gaps in nose
                               barrier sound walls.
                               Noise Policy 5.12
                               Limit “through truck traffic” to designated routes to minimize noise
                               impacts to residential neighborhoods and other noise-sensitive uses
                               (see Mobility and Infrastructure Element).
                               Noise Policy 5.13
                               Limit the hours of operation for parks and active recreation uses in
                               residential areas to minimize disturbance to residents.
  Constructing masonry sound
                               Noise Policy 5.14
   attenuation wall to replace
      wooden fences along      Coordinate among city, county, State and other agencies involved in
      Washington Avenue        noise abatement to reduce noise generated from outside the city.
Page VI-34                                          Escondido General Plan Community Protection

Noise Policy 5.15
Coordinate with McClellan-Palomar Airport to distribute property
disclosure statements for areas within the Airport Land Use Compati-
bility Plan.
Noise Policy 5.16
Work with McClellan-Palomar Airport to monitor aircraft noise,
implement noise-reducing operation measures, as necessary, and pro-
mote pilot awareness of noise sensitive land uses.
Noise Policy 5.17
Periodically review the adopted noise ordinance to address changing
conditions.
6. Flood Protection
GOAL 6: A safe community that is protected from potential flood
             hazards.
Flood Protection Policy 6.1
Continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) to maintain the city’s eligibility for flood insurance.
Flood Protection Policy 6.2
Require new and substantial improvements or upgrades of existing
development within a flood hazard zone as defined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (100 and 500-year floodplains) to
be constructed in accordance with city, state, and federal regulations
(NFIP). These may include implementing construction or other
methods to minimize flood damage.
Flood Protection Policy 6.3
Avoid or minimize flooding risks by limiting the type and intensity of
new development within the 100-year flood plain to uses that do not
involve habitable structures such as agriculture, outdoor recreation,
and natural resource areas.
Flood Protection Policy 6.4
Maintain flood control channels, storm drains, and detention basins
through periodic dredging, repair, desilting, and clearing subject to
approval from appropriate state and federal agencies to ensure they
are operating efficiently.                                             Slope erosion in a residential
                                                                        neighborhood after heavy
                                                                               winter rains
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                             Page VI-35

                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.5
                                 Require that all facilities within flood hazard zones storing, using, or
                                 otherwise involved with substantial quantities of on-site hazardous
                                 materials comply with applicable standards of elevation, anchoring,
                                 and flood proofing, and that hazardous materials be stored in
                                 watertight containers.
                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.6
                                 Inspect the dams at Lakes Dixon and Wohlford periodically to ensure
                                 safe operation and maintenance to minimize the risk of failure.
                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.7
                                 Require new development located in identified dam inundation areas
                                 to be designed to minimize potential flood damage from dam failure.
                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.8
                                 Locate new critical facilities such as hospitals, emergency shelters,
                                 fire stations, police stations, civil defense headquarters, and emer-
                                 gency communication centers outside of flood hazard zones, as
                                 defined by FEMA. If no other alternative site is available or feasible,
                                 require that critical facilities be designed to minimize potential flood
                                 damage if located within flood hazard zones.
                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.9
                                 Maintain the structural and operational integrity of critical facilities
                                 during flooding events.
                                 Flood Protection Policy 6.10
                                 Coordinate efforts with local, regional, state, and federal agencies to
                                 minimize flood hazards and improve flood protection.
                                 7. Soils and Seismicity
                                 GOAL 7: Minimization of adverse effects to residents, property,
                                              and critical facilities caused by geologic and seismic
                                              hazards.
                                 Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.1
                                 Regularly review, adopt, and enforce seismic and geologic safety
                                 standards, including the Uniform Building Code, in site design and
       Detention basin in the
                                 building construction methods to protect public health and safety.
    Escondido Research Tech-
  nology Center to manage peak
 period water flows during heavy Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.2
  rainfall events and to enhance Minimize development of public utilities in areas where geologic and
     groundwater recharging      seismic hazards exist to avoid additional costs associated with
            opportunities        installation, maintenance, and replacement.
Page VI-36                                            Escondido General Plan Community Protection
Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.3
Require that development applications in areas where the potential for
geologic and seismic hazards exist, such as slopes of 25 percent or
greater, submit a site-specific geotechnical analysis prepared by a
certified geotechnical engineer to identify potential hazards and
recommend measures to avoid or mitigate said hazards (see Resource
Conservation Element).
Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.4
Approve new development in areas identified with geologic or
seismic hazards only after completion of a city-approved geotechnical
report with appropriate mitigation of such hazards
Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.5
Avoid developing in areas that are susceptible to erosion and sedi-
ment loss. Where avoidance is not feasible, require the restoration of
natural patterns of surface water runoff after grading to minimize
erosion.
Soils and Seismicity Policy 7.6
Encourage the upgrade, retrofitting, and/or relocation of existing
critical facilities (hospitals, fire stations, police stations, etc.) that do
not meet current building code standards and are within susceptible to
seismic or geologic hazards.
8.     Hazardous Materials
GOAL 8       A safe and healthy community and environment that is
             protected from the use, storage, and transport of
             hazardous materials.
Hazardous Materials Policy 8.1
Maintain and update Escondido’s Household Hazardous Waste
management Plan and coordinate with the County of San Diego on
periodic reviews and updates of the County’s Hazardous Waste
Management Plan.
Hazardous Materials Policy 8.2
Coordinate with relevant agencies to enforce applicable laws
regulating the handling, use, production, storage, disposal, and
transportation of hazardous materials, and notify the appropriate city,
county, state, and federal agency in the event of a violation.
Hazardous Materials Policy 8.3
Maintain regulations requiring proper handling, storage and disposal
of hazardous materials to prevent leakage, potential explosion, fire, or
the escape of harmful gases, and to prevent individually innocuous
materials from combining to form hazardous substances.
 Escondido General Plan Community Protection                                  Page VI-37

           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.4
           Encourage businesses and residents to utilize practices and
           technologies that will reduce the use of hazardous materials and
           generation of hazardous wastes.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.5
           Continue to provide frequent and convenient household hazardous
           waste collection options.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.6
           Cooperate with appropriate regional, state and federal agencies to
           mitigate impacts associated with hazardous contaminants discovered
           in the groundwater.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.7
           Maintain the City’s Fire Department’s programs to safely and
           effectively respond to hazardous materials incidents and releases.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.8
           Participate in the Hazardous Materials Incident Response Team
           Program, which is a countywide effort to address hazardous materials
           incidents.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.9
           Continue the public education efforts regarding proper use, storage,
           and disposal of household hazardous wastes, including universal
           wastes.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.10
           Require proponents of projects in known contamination areas to
           perform comprehensive soil and groundwater contamination assess-
           ments, in accordance with applicable regulations. If contamination
           exceeds regulatory levels, require the proponent to undertake
           remediation procedures consistent with county, regional, and state
           regulations prior to grading and development of the site.
           Hazardous Materials Policy 8.11
           Maintain strict land use controls, performance standards, and structure
           design standards for uses that generate, use, or store hazardous
           materials, including setbacks from sensitive uses (schools, residential
           homes, daycare facilities, etc.) to protect and health and safety of the
           community in concert with regional, state and federal requirements
           for existing and proposed uses.
Page VI-38                     Escondido General Plan Community Protection

V. Community Health and Services
 Introduction                                      The Community Health and
                                                   Services Element’s Purpose
 A healthy community provides opportunities        It is widely understood that the quality, con-
 for citizens to make sound choices and work       ditions, and design of the built environment
 together to improve their environment for         directly affect and influence public health. The
 themselves and others. In an era of stream-       purpose of the Community Health and Ser-
 lining government operations and enhancing        vices Element is to establish policies that in-
 efficiencies, a healthy community promotes        fluence good land use planning in order to
 individual responsibility and shared values to    enhance community health and welfare. Poli-
 forge stronger private-sector partnerships that   cies supporting access to healthy foods, availa-
 assess and respond to residents’ needs. This      bility of parks, recreational opportunities,
 serves to promote leadership opportunities,       libraries and cultural services, as well as pro-
 embrace diversity, and fosters a “sense of        moting educational advancement and civic
 place” to ensure sustainability and a more        engagement all aim to improve economic,
 livable community.                                physical, and social conditions.
 A healthy community provides opportunities        The Community Health and Services Element
 for people of all ages and abilities to engage in promotes a community-based and private
 routine and safe daily physical activity, to      sector approach for establishing a sustainable
 access basic needs, and to promote self im-       and healthy community. The Element sup-
 provement and intellectual development for        ports partnerships with neighborhood groups,
 personal and economic growth. Through stra-       private enterprise, and philanthropic and
 tegic planning, community collaboration, and      service agencies relying on limited govern-
 individual accountability, a healthy commu-       ment involvement to identify, assist, and
 nity connects people and resources resulting in   enhance the health and wellbeing for all
 an improved quality of life.                      residents.

                                        A. Relationship to Other Elements in the
                                             General Plan
                                        The Community Health and Services Element is closely related to the
“Healthy citizens are the greatest
asset any country can have.”            Land Use and Urban Form, Community Protection, Mobility and
                                        Circulation, and Economic Prosperity Elements. How Escondido
                   Winston Churchill    plans and develops land uses that accommodate facilities and services
          Former British Prime Minister to promote public health and welfare will have a significant impact on
                                        residents. Community health is related to the Mobility Element
                                        because a developing a multi-modal transportation system will
                                        expand opportunities for access, lower dependence on automobile-
                                        oriented trips and reduce greenhouse gasses to enhance air quality.
                                        The Community Protection Element is related to Community Health
                                        and Services by ensuring a safe environment for citizens thus
                                        allowing opportunities to socialize, volunteer, and participate in
                                        activities, which will strengthen a sense of community. The Economic
                                        Prosperity Element is related to Community Health by promoting
       Escondido Street Fair            educational and career-enhancement policies to raise median income
          on Grand Avenue               which improves the general welfare.
 Page V-2                                       Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                                                           Figure V-1
                                                                             COMPONENTS OF A
                                                                            HEALTHY COMMUNITY
                                                                            Meets Basic Needs of All:
                                                                           High quality, livable neighborhoods,
                                                                            parks, libraries, child care, financial
                                                                            services and other daily needs
                                                                           Safe housing options for all incomes
                                                                           Convenient transportation options
B. Comprehensive Health and Wellness                                       Affordable, accessible nutritious foods
                                                                           First-rate, affordable health care
Successful and appropriate land use development, distinctive ameni-        Opportunities for physical activity
ties, convenient transportation, robust economic development, pre-
served natural resources, efficient governmental services, and an           Economic & Social Development:
involved citizenry will have a long-lasting beneficial effect on the       High quality, accessible education
                                                                           Healthy development of youth
community. Escondido’s General Plan policies aim to improve
                                                                           Wages sufficient to support needs
livability, enhance access to public amenities, promote physical           Job opportunities for all
activity, boost economic opportunities, and engage community
involvement to improve public health and wellness. Because there are        Sustainable Environment:
a variety of components that establish a healthy community a com-          Open spaces and agricultural lands
prehensive approach must be considered in order to ensure its success      Affordable, sustainable energy
(Figure V-1).                                                              Clean air, soil, water
                                                                           No excessive noise
Ensuring an adequate number and placement of recreational facilities        Respectful Social Relationships:
and programs for the community will enhance opportunities involving        Cohesive families and neighborhoods
healthy physical activities. Encouraging community gardens, farmers        Robust social and civic engagement
markets and grocery stores with wholesome grocery choices enhances         Safe crime-free communities
access to healthy foods. Promoting venues for intellectual growth
including libraries, cultural facilities, educational institutions, tech-     -California Strategic Growth Council
nical schools and career development centers enhances the com-
munity’s overall desirability as a place to establish and grow busi-
nesses that are seeking a more educated and informed workforce.
Collaborating with health care providers and agencies involved in
identifying health and wellness issues will solidify a community-
based comprehensive approach that promotes a healthy lifestyle for
all and aids residents most at risk, including the elderly and disabled                Kit Carson Park
while minimizing government intervention.                                                Family Play
  Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                                 Page V-3

                 Figure V-2
         GENERAL PLAN
  QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #6
             PARKS SYSTEM
  The city shall provide a minimum of
     11.8 acres of active and passive
    parkland per 1,000 dwelling units.
 This parkland acreage shall involve a
  minimum of 5.9 acres of developed
  active neighborhood and community
     parks in addition to 5.9 acres of
 passive park land and/or open space
    for habitat preservation per 1,000
    dwelling units. Urban recreational
  amenities such as exercise courses,
      urban trails, tree-lined shaded
   walkways and plazas, etc. shall be
   focused in high intensity downtown
    and urban areas. Priority shall be
    given to acquiring land to expand
  Grape Day Park north of Woodward
    Avenue and developing neighbor-
   hood parks in urban areas with the       C. Parks and Recreation
    greatest need. School playground
      areas may be included as park         Historically, parks have been focal points for community activities
 acreage, provided that neighborhood        and will continue to provide residents with abundant recreational
     park amenities and facilities are      options. The General Plan includes Quality of Life thresholds
    accessible, approval is granted by      (FigureV-2) and policies to guide Escondido’s commitment to
the school district(s), and the facility is provide parks and recreation opportunities by establishing stan-
  open to the public as determined by
                                            dards and the overall character of these facilities.
 the City Council. Prior to buildout, the
   city shall provide a minimum of two
       (2) community centers. Other         A Master Plan for Parks, Trails and Open Space was adopted in re-
  specialized recreation facilities shall   sponse to the previous General Plan’s directive to prepare a long-
 be incorporated into the city’s Master     range planning tool to serve as the basis for decisions regarding future
     Plan for Parks, Trails and Open        parks, trails, and open space implementation efforts. Figure V-3
                   Space.                   identifies the location of public parks that provide recreational
                                            opportunities within Escondido’s Planning area. The Resource
                                            Conservation Element contains information regarding Escondido’s
                                            open space and trails facilities.
      Escondido Creek Linear Park
Page V-4                                            Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                      Figure V-3
Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services Page V-5
                            1. Parks Facilities
                            The following park classifications and facilities are intended to
                            guide decision makers in the placement and development of parks
                            in the community as well as inform residents of the types of
                            activities and services provided at city parks. Figure V-5 provides
                            a list of features appropriate for the various park classifications in
                            the General Plan Area. Prior to park development the city will
                            conduct workshops to solicit community input regarding specific
                            improvements for each site.
                            a. Regional Parks
                            Regional Parks (75+ acres) are distinguished by their expansive size
                            and comprise the largest recreational facilities in the city’s inventory
   Kit Carson Regional Park of parks with ample vehicle parking. Regional Parks are designed
                            with the widest variety of activities incorporating unique and distinc-
                            tive facilities large enough to serve areas beyond the planning boun-
                            daries. These may include large sports complexes, multiple lighted
                            ball fields and sports courts to accommodate league competitions, as
                            well as an array of passive uses including walking trails, playgrounds,
                            picnic areas and open turf.
                            b. Community Parks
                            Community Parks (10-75 acres) are designed with features that serve
                            all or portions of the community including lighted sports fields to
                            accommodate evening play with sufficient parking to serve the
                            intended on-site activities. Community Parks include ball fields and
  Grape Day Community Park  sports courts in fewer numbers than Regional Parks and smaller-scale
                            Neighborhood Parks.
                            c. Neighborhood Parks
                            Neighborhood Parks (2-10 acres) are designed to accommodate the
                            daily recreation needs of residents in the immediate area. Typical
                            facilities may include landscaped open turf areas, tot lots, sports
                            fields, multipurpose ball fields with no lighting, and limited parking
                            to facilitate access by pedestrians and bicyclists.
                            d. Urban Parks
                            Urban Parks (<2 acres and Linear Parks) respond to their surrounding
   Grove Neighborhood Park  urban environment by incorporating features that provide a sense of
                            open space in a compact setting (Figure V-4). Urban Parks include a
                            high percentage of solid surface areas to compensate for a higher
                            frequency of use. Features include a mix of active and passive
                            features for all ages such as raised landscaping, water features,
                            seating, picnic areas, tot lots, exercise courses, and areas for small-
                            scale sports activities (e.g. horseshoes, volley ball, shuffleboard, etc.).
Page V-6                             Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                                                        Figure V-4
e. Community Centers                                                       URBAN PARK EXAMPLES
The General Plan Quality of Life standard calls for two Community
Centers to be established prior to build out. Community Centers are
intended to provide enclosed spaces for a variety of activities,
(meeting rooms, indoor sports, etc.) and are recommended for clus-
tering with other civic uses such as libraries, museums, and/or cultural
facilities.
2. Parks Acquisition and Development
Escondido’s status as an established, primarily built out community
leaves limited opportunity for acquiring significant properties in the
urban core for large-scale parkland development. In recognition of
this constraint, the General Plan focuses on developing recreational
amenities in urban and smart growth areas that are more responsive to
their established settings. These include Urban Parks, plazas, exercise
courses, shaded urban trails and other places that provide recreational
opportunities in more densely established areas.
During the General Plan workshops residents expressed a desire to
focus the development of parkland in the urban core area and to
expand Grape Day Park north of Woodward Avenue. The General
Plan also proposes enhancing Escondido Creek as a linear park with
features that promote passive and active recreation. Schools and their
recreational facilities can serve as a focal point of neighborhood
identity and activity. The General Plan supports joint use agreements
between the city and school districts to cooperatively share athletic
and playground improvements to enhance recreational opportunities.
Figure V-6 contains a roster of the city’s park and open space areas.    PURPOSE AND INTENT:
                                                                          Creates a “sense of place” with
3. Recreational Programming                                                interesting and aesthetic design
                                                                          Enhances residents’ mental,
Ensuring a healthy community requires that appropriate activities be       physical and spiritual health
available for residents of all ages to satisfy their physical activity    Improves social connections
requirements. Polling residents on recreational preferences provides      Provides safe / accessible oppor-
information that will match programs with interests. Coordinating          tunities for community interaction
                                                                          Responds to the needs of users in
recreational programming between city and private/non-profit sector
                                                                           the immediate area
entities ensures the efficient use of both public parkland and private
commercial space to fulfill community needs while offering potential     DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES:
economic opportunities for private sector programs.                       Reduced turf area, high percentage
                                                                           of trees / shrubs / hardscape
4. Open Space, Trail and Bicycle Facilities                               Small and compact, no off street
                                                                           parking; strong pedestrian access
Refer to the Resource Conservation Element information for the            Plenty of shade and seating
city’s open space and trails facilities. The Mobility and Infrastructure  Decorative water / art features
Element contains information on Escondido’s bicycle facilities.           Opportunities for exercise, play
                                                                           and interpretive displays
  Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                              Page V-7

                                                                                                                                                                               Figure V-6
                                                                                                                                        CITY PARK, OPEN SPACE,                    Developed       Undeveloped         Total
                                                                                                                                        AND FACILITY ROSTER                        Acreage          Acreage          Acreage
                                                                                                                                        A. URBAN PARKS
                Figure V-5
                                                                                                                                         1. Escondido Blvd. Mini Park                0.2              --                0.2
        PARK FEATURES                                                                                                                    2. Escondido Creek Linear Park             10.0            10.0               20.0
                                                                                                                                        Urban Park Total                            10.2            10.0               20.2
Typical features                                                                                                                        B. NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
associated with
                                                      Neighborhood (2 - 10 acres)
                                                                                                                                         1. El Norte Park                            2.5              --                2.5
                        Urban (<2 acres, or linear)                                 Community (10 - 75 acres)
various parks.                                                                                                                           2. Grove Park                               4.5              --                4.5
Individual Park
                                                                                                                Regional (75 + acres)
                                                                                                                                         3. Avenida del Diablo Park                   --             2.5                2.5
Master Plans will                                                                                                                        4. Westside Park                            2.3              --                2.3
determine specific                                                                                                                       5. 11th Avenue Park                          --             2.0                2.0
facilities.                                                                                                                              6. Lake Wohlford Picnic Area Park           2.5              --                2.5
                                                                                                                                        Neighborhood Park Total                     11.8             4.5               16.3
●= Appropriate Use
                                                                                                                                        C. COMMUNITY PARKS
○= Provisional Use                                                                                                                       1. Jesmond Dene Park                       10.0            31.8               41.8
                                                                                                                                         2. Rod McLeod Park                         18.0              --               18.0
Adjacent to Public
Schools
                              ●                             ●                            ●                           ●                   3. Washington Park                         11.0              --               11.0
                                                                                                                                         4. Mountain View Park                      11.0            12.0               23.0
Access Point on
Collector Street
                              ○                             ●                            ●                                               5. Grape Day Park                          23.5              --               23.5
                                                                                                                                         6. Francis Ryan Park                       28.0            29.0               57.0
Off-Street Parking            ○                             ●                            ●                           ●                   7. Dixon Lake Picnic / Play Area           10.0              --               10.0
Lighted Sports                                                                                                                           8. Kit Carson Active Rec Area             100.0            10.0              110.0
Fields / Facilities
                                                            ●                            ●                           ●                   9. Eagle Crest Park                        32.0              --               32.0
                                                                                                                                        10. Reidy Creek Community Garden            20.0              --               20.0
Bike Paths                    ○                             ●                            ●                           ●                  11. Mayflower Dog Park                       6.4              0                 6.4
Jogging Paths,                                                                                                                          12. Felicita County Park                    52.0              --               52.0
Exercise Courses
                              ●                             ●                            ●                           ●
                                                                                                                                        Community Park Total                       321.9            82.8              404.7
Hiking Trails                                                                            ○                           ●                  D. SCHOOL PLAYGROUND
                                                                                                                                         1. Elementary Schools (12)                 60.0              --               60.0
Passive Recreation            ●                             ●                            ●                           ●                   2. Middle Schools (3)                      30.0              --               30.0
                                                                                                                                         3. High Schools (3)                        30.0              --               30.0
Child-Friendly Play
Equipment
                              ●                             ●                            ●                           ●                  School Playground Total                    120.0              --              120.0
Multi-Purpose Turf
                                                                                                                                        Park/School Playground Total               463.9            97.3              561.2
Areas
                              ○                             ●                            ●                           ●                  E. REGIONAL OPEN SPACE AREAS
Multi-Use Court &                                                                                                                        1. Daley Ranch (wilderness)              3,201.0             --             3,201.0
Athletic Areas
                              ○                             ○                            ●                           ●                   2. Lake Wohlford (wilderness)             912.0              --              912.0
Restrooms,                                                                                                                               3. Dixon Lake (wilderness)                328.5              --              328.5
Drinking Fountains
                              ○                             ●                            ●                           ●                   4. Kit Carson (wilderness)                190.0              --              190.0
Off-Leash Dog                                                                                                                            5. Bernardo Mt. (SDRVP wilderness)        330.6              --              330.6
Facilities
                                                            ○                            ●                                               6. SD County (wilderness)                 344.5              --              344.5
Wildlife Sanctuaries,                                                                                                                   Regional Open Space Total                 5,306.6             --             5,306.6
Interpretive Centers
                                                                                                                     ●                  F. OTHER CITY OWNED OPEN SPACE
Equestrian Centers,                                                                                                                       1. Palos Vista                            63.5              --               63.5
Riding Trails
                                                                                                                     ●                    2. Valley Center Rd Watershed            560.0              --              560.0
Camping Areas,                                                                                                                            3. Various Misc. / Utility Areas          45.0              --               45.0
                                                                                                                     ●
Youth Camps                                                                                                                             City Owned Open Space Total                688.5              --              688.5
Multi-Use Recreation
                                                                                         ●                           ●                  TOTAL PARK & OPEN SPACE                   6,459.0           97.3            6,556.3
Buildings, Pools                                                                                                                        G. COMMUNITY CENTERS AND GOLF COURSES*
Retreat Centers                                                                                                      ●                   1. California Center for the Arts          4 Joslyn Senior Center
                                                                                                                                         2. Mathes Community Center                 5 Oak Hill Activity Center
Community Garden              ○                             ●                            ●                                               3. East Valley Community Center            6 West Side Community Center
                                                                                                                                         * Community Center Master Plans identify specific recreation features for each facility
                                                                                                                                         7. Reidy Creek Municipal Executive Golf Course
                                                                                                                                         8. Vineyard Municipal Championship Golf Course
 Page V-8                                                                                                                                           Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                                       “A library is not a luxury but one of
                                                                       the necessities of life.”
                                                                                          Henry Ward Beecher
                                                                                         19th Century Clergyman
                                                                                        Figure V-7
D. Library Services                                                            GENERAL PLAN
                                                                         QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #7
Library facilities promote an informed, engaged, connected, literate
                                                                                   LIBRARY SERVICE
and employable community, and have enhanced information, cultural,
                                                                           The public library system shall
and education services that foster healthy life-styles for the          maintain a stock and staffing of two
community. The city’s library facilities have served as a community      (2) collection items per capita and
focal point and gathering place for over a century. Escondido              three (3) public library staff per
maintains a centrally located downtown main library. A General Plan          8,000 residents of the city of
Quality of Life standard (FigureV-7) and policies guide Escondido’s       Escondido. The city shall provide
commitment to provide library services.                                   appropriate library facilities with a
                                                                       minimum of 1.6 square feet of library
The library offers a wide variety of print, media and online resources  facility floor area per dwelling unit of
as well as public computers, community programs, and meeting               the city prior to build out of the
space. Proposed improvements are geared towards expanding                General Plan where feasible. The
                                                                       city shall continue to expand the role
collection stock and staffing; providing additional space for             of technology in providing library
computers; group study and parking; and continuing to expand the               services and resources to
role of technology in providing library services and resources. To                Escondido residents.
accommodate anticipated growth, the General Plan recommends
expanding the city’s existing library facilities to meet the needs of
Escondido’s expanding population.                                              Escondido Public Library
                                                                                    Reading Program
  Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                              Page V-9

                                      E. Schools and Education
                                      Although the city is not responsible for providing public and private
                                      education, residents recognize that successful schools are important
               Figure V-8
                                      for ensuring that Escondido remains a desirable place to live. A core
       GENERAL PLAN                   focus of every school is to establish and maintain a safe learning
 QUALITY OF LIFE STANDARD #2          environment with academic standards that provide options for
                                      students in their pursuit of higher education or a chosen profession.
          PUBLIC SCHOOLS              This is echoed in the General Plan Quality of Life Standard (Figure
The community shall have sufficient   V-8). Our increasingly competitive world requires a responsibility to
   classroom space to meet state-
                                      provide a safe and healthy environment with adequate space that
 mandated space requirements and
 teacher/student ratios, with student allows students to focus on their future endeavors.
attendance calculated on prescribed
    state and/or local school board   Public school districts serving the community include the Escondido
  standards. Implementation of this   Union Elementary (K-8); Escondido Union High School (9-12); San
 standard shall be the responsibility Pasqual Union (K-8); and portions of Valley Center-Pauma Unified
   of the school districts and other  (K-12) and San Marcos Unified (K-12) school districts (Figure V-9).
         appropriate agencies.        In addition, several charter and private schools serve the community.
                                      Palomar Community College maintains a local campus on East
                                      Valley Parkway, and California State University, San Marcos is
                                      located five miles east of Escondido.
                                      By virtue of their size and facility improvements, school sites also
                                      provide an opportunity for enhancing the community’s health and
                                      wellness. Through joint use agreements the city and school districts
                                      can mutually share their combined active recreational infrastructure in
                                      a manner that benefits the entire community. Strong partnerships
                                      between the city, school districts, and businesses create trust and
                                      accountability. These agreements work to stabilize the community by
   Escondido Charter High School      providing recreational benefits, opportunities for increasing job skills,
  located on East Valley Parkway      and raising residents’ earning potential.
Page V-10                                      Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                       Figure V-9
Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services Page V-11
                                 F. Cultural Enrichment
                                 Cultural enrichment plays an important role in fostering a healthy
                                 community by offering forms of expression that embody a com-
                                 munity’s spirit through public art displays and the performing arts.
                                 Cultural enrichment helps shape the community’s quality of life by
                                 promoting a sense of pride and bringing people together. Public art
                                 enhances and complements the built environment; performing art
                                 offers social and educational opportunities.
                                 Cultural enrichment’s role in enhancing community health pro-
                                 vides additional financial benefits by promoting tourism and
                                 economic revitalization. Escondido recognizes the benefits of
                                 public art and is home to the California Center for the Arts, Escon-
                                 dido, as well as several world-renowned sculptures and public art
  Queen Califia's Magical Circle displays. General Plan policies support cultural enrichment in the
         Kit Carson Park         community and the opportunity for artists to contribute their
   Artist: Niki de Saint Phalle  theatrical, conceptual and practical skills.
Page V-12                                 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

                                                                                      Figure V-10
                                                                        COMMUNITY GARDENS
                                                                       Definition:
                                                                       A Community Garden can be urban,
                                                                       suburban, or rural. It can grow flowers
                                                                       and / or, vegetables. It can be one
                                                                       community plot, or many individual
                                                                       plots. It can be at a school, hospital,
                                                                       or in a neighborhood. It can also be
                                                                       a series of plots dedicated to "urban
                                                                       agriculture" where the produce is
                                                                       grown for a market.
                                                                       Community Garden Benefits:
                                                                        Improves the quality of life for
                                                                          people in the garden
                                                                        Provides a catalyst for neighbor-
                                                                          hood and community development
                                                                         Stimulates social Interaction
                                                                         Encourages self-reliance
                                                                         Beautifies neighborhoods
                                                                         Produces nutritious food
                                                                         Reduces family food budgets
                                                                         Conserves resources
                                                                         Creates opportunity for recreation,
                                                                          exercise, therapy, and education
                                                                         Reduces crime
                                                                         Preserves green space
                                                                         Creates income opportunities
                                                                          and economic development
G. Healthy Lifestyles                                                    Reduces city heat from streets
                                                                          and parking lots
Key to establishing and maintaining a healthy community is the           Provides opportunities for inter-
proper arrangement of land uses, facilities, and programs that promote    generational and cross-cultural
                                                                          connections
sound decisions for residents to live healthy lifestyles. The General
Plan supports the health and well-being of its residents with policies            American Community Garden
that foster an active, inclusive community with responsive city                                     Association
leadership where healthy habits are encouraged by the built environ-
ment. By incorporating health considerations into Escondido’s
policies, such as promoting community gardens (Figure 10) and
Certified Farmers’ Markets (Figure 11) that enhance access to healthy
foods, and implementing a more balanced transportation system that
reduces reliance on the automobile, the General Plan promotes             Escondido Community Garden
healthy lifestyles. These policies will enhance residents’ quality of      on Centre City Parkway near
life, reduce costs, and promote personal responsibility.                             Decatur Way
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                            Page V-13

          H. Healthcare Services
          Local employers understand the economic benefit of hiring and
          retaining healthy employees in order to ensure worker productivity.
          Schools recognize the connection between healthy lifestyles and
          absentee rates, which impact the learning process as well as operating
          budgets that rely on attendance for revenue. Although the city is not
          responsible for providing healthcare, encouraging the efforts of local
          health care providers, employers and schools to promote wellness
          programs will convey support for a healthy community.
          Many private and non-profit healthcare providers serve local
          residents. Palomar Pomerado Health district serves the North San
          Diego and South Riverside County areas with its primary hospital and
          trauma facility located in Escondido (photo above). In addition,
          Kaiser Permanente maintains a branch medical facility in the com-
          munity. Ensuring that healthcare facilities can be accessed in an
          expedient manner is important for maintaining a healthy community.
          Fire stations throughout the community have trained staff to perform
          basic EMT (Emergency Medical Technician) services when respon-
          ding to fire or injury response calls. Private ambulance companies
          have contracts to provide transportation services to local medical
          facilities. In cases of major emergencies, the Mercy Air Emergency
          Helicopter life flight program provides service to Palomar Hospital.
Page V-14           Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services
I. Residents’ Health and Wellbeing
Community participation in the planning and sustaining of a healthy
environment for residents builds trust and confidence in government.
Engaging residents, agencies and organizations in identifying and
prioritizing healthy development opportunities and constraints will
contribute to a more robust and sustainable plan. Collaborating with
health agencies and service organizations in assessing community
needs will allow the city opportunity to quickly respond, if needed,
thereby maintaining order and stability.
1. Civic Engagement
Civic engagement and volunteerism allow residents to take an active
role in addressing local challenges which are important facets of a
healthy community. Citizens involved in local decision making are
more likely to understand and appreciate the needs of all members of
the community. Civic engagement includes volunteering in the
community, and participating on committees, boards, or com-                     Joslyn Senior Center
missions. Without volunteers the city would not be able to provide the   Volunteer Appreciation Luncheon
level of service required to reach all its citizens who are in need. The
General Plan promotes civic engagement and encourages residents to
actively participate in Escondido’s future.                              Participants at the city-sponsored
                                                                          youth camp in Kit Carson Park
                                                                                     (above left)
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                            Page V-15

                                  2. Childcare Services
                                  Quality child care services are an important facet of a healthy com-
                                  munity that also drives economic growth and establishes a foundation
                                  for success in school, life and work. Having available child care
                                  supports work/life balance, increases job loyalty and satisfaction and
                                  reduces absenteeism in the workplace. Strategically locating child
                                  care facilities near transit increases transit ridership, reduces the
                                  number of vehicle trips in the community, and attracts other quality
                                  land uses. Privately owned and operated child care facilities also
                                  generate revenue and employment opportunities. Figure V-13
                                  provides a summary description of child care facilities.
                                  3. Older Adults, Disabled and Disadvantaged
                                      Services
                                  The city acknowledges that the older adult population of ages 50 and
                                  over is increasing faster than other age groups. Disabled and disad-
                                  vantaged residents face challenges that require unique solutions. In
                                  recognition of the number and diversity of needs, the General Plan
                                  includes policies addressing the need for accommodating adequate
                                  services and programs to ensure the health and wellness, safety and
                                  protection of older adults, as well as disabled and disadvantaged
                                  residents. Figure V-14 provides a summary description of facilities
Pet Therapy for Elderly Residents that serve older adults, disable and disadvantaged residents.
    at Jocelyn Senior Center
Page V-16                                  Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services
J. Community Health And Services Goals
      and Policies                                                                           Figure V-11
                                                                                 CERTFIED FARMERS’
A complete list of the General Plan Goals is located in the Vision and                     MARKETS
Purpose. Specific goals and policies related to community health and
services policies provided below are intended to guide development            Definition:
to meet present and future needs, and enhance the health and welfare          Certified Farmers Markets are
of residents in Escondido.                                                    licensed by the County Agricultural
                                                                              Commissioner, ensuring that the
1. Health and Wellness Policies                                               produce is being sold by the grower,
                                                                              is grown in California and meets all
                                                                              California quality standards. These
GOAL 1: A healthy and livable Escondido complete with                         criteria ensure that all consumers re-
             adequate and convenient access to community                      ceive the freshest produce for the
             services and fresh food for all residents.                       right price. Farmers' Markets provide
                                                                              venues for farmers to sell directly to
                                                                              consumers and supports small
Health and Wellness Policy 1.1
                                                                              farming operations.
Ensure adequate and convenient physical access to healthcare, parks,
libraries, cultural arts, schools, childcare facilities, and services for all Farmers’ Markets Benefits:
residents.                                                                     Local produce is fresher, healthier
                                                                               Supports local farmers and locally
Health and Wellness Policy 1.2                                                   grown produce
                                                                               Conserves resources by reducing
Encourage and promote public and private sector education, training              transportation and storage impacts
and wellness programs designed to improve health and wellness for              Preserves food diversity by providing
all residents.                                                                   heirloom and “niche” products not
                                                                                 widely grown
Health and Wellness Policy 1.3                                                 Creates income opportunities and
                                                                                 economic development
Pursue sources of federal, state, regional, and/or private resources that      Fosters community interaction
provide funding for education, training, preventative treatment, and           Reduces family food budgets
other programs for enhancing community health and wellness.
                                                                                       San Diego County Farm Bureau
Health and Wellness Policy 1.4
Ensure that health and human services facilities are easily accessible,
distributed equitably throughout the city and are compatible with
adjoining uses.
Health and Wellness Policy 1.5
Collaborate with health care providers and other community partners
in identifying health and wellness issues and developing and imple-
menting a community-based private sector approach for improving
and maintaining healthy lifestyles.
                                                                                    Escondido’s Farmers’ Market
Health and Wellness Policy 1.6
Encourage school districts to create opportunities for children to be
active to promote health and wellness, as well as to curb obesity.
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                                    Page V-17

                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.7
                             Continue to provide city parks and recreation programs and support
                             private recreational programs that provide opportunities for residents
                             of all age groups to participate in activities as a means to promote a
                             healthy lifestyle.
                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.8
                             Allow the creation and operation of community gardens, urban farms,
                             and farmers’ markets that enhance the community’s access to healthy
                             foods.
                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.9
                             Encourage private sector efforts that prioritize new sources of healthy
                             and fresh food in underserved areas.
                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.10
                             Encourage school districts to establish and maintain nutritional
                             standards for school lunches and to serve healthy foods.
                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.11
                             Encourage the revitalization of existing urban areas to achieve
                             improvements in overall public health by promoting a healthier living
                             environment that includes walkable neighborhoods and access to re-
                             creation and open space, healthy foods, medical services, and transit.
                             Health and Wellness Policy 1.12
                             Coordinate with appropriate agencies to support pest/vector manage-
                             ment strategies (e.g., mosquito control) and public education.
                             2. Parks and Recreation Policies
                             GOAL 2: A complete system of park and recreational facilities
                                         and programs to serve all users.
                             PARK STANDARDS POLICIES:
                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.1
                             Regularly review and update park standards, facility plans and
                             improvements, recreation services, funding programs, and other
                             pertinent components of the Parks Master Plan.
   Escondido Grand Avenue
       Farmers’ Market
                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.2
           (above)
                             Provide an adequate system of neighborhood, community, urban, and
                             regional parks and related recreational facilities/services for incor-
    Escondido Rotary Club    poration into the open space system.
  Meals-on-Wheels Volunteers
Page V-18                             Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

Parks and Recreation Policy 2.3
Provide a minimum of 5.9 acres of developed active Neighborhood,
Community, and Urban parks in addition to 5.9 acres of passive park
land/open space for habitat preservation and additional recreational
opportunities totaling 11.8 active and passive acres per 1,000
dwelling units. School playground areas can be included as park
acreage if these facilities are approved by the school district(s) and
open to the public as determined by the City Council.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.4
Require new residential development to contribute fees to finance
acquisition and development of park and recreational facilities in
compliance with the standards stipulated by Parks and Recreation
Policy 2.3. Allow credit for the on-site dedication of land or facilities
to be used for public park purposes, consistent with city standards.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.5
Design and construct Urban, Neighborhood, Community, and
Regional Parks consistent with the standards and guidelines in
Figures V-4 and V-5.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.6
Maintain a minimum of two (2) community centers and consider
opportunities for additional centers commensurate with population
growth to accommodate specialized recreational functions, the
recreational needs of special populations, and/or indoor recreational
activities that include, but are not limited to:
a) Swimming pools;
b) Lighted or unlighted athletic facilities;
c) Classrooms, meeting rooms, etc.;
d) Facilities for child care, teens, and seniors;
e) Branch libraries;
h) Golf courses;
i) Community gardens; and
j) Equestrian centers.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.7
Consider the provision of development incentives for private com-
mercial, office, and other non-residential developments to provide
onsite usable open space that is accessible to the public such as green    Escondido Aquatics Program
rooftop parks, public plazas, and pedestrian trails.                                (above)
                                                                          Jesmond Dene Community Park
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                        Page V-19
                           ACQUISITION AND FUNDING POLICIES:
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.8
                           Require no net loss of total park acreage or facilities for property
                           purchased for use as a public park that is subsequently redeveloped
                           for another use. Require that all revenues generated from the sale of
                           the park land be used for park development.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.9
                           Consider the development of vacant and underutilized city lands as
                           potential sites for parks and recreational facilities.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.10
                           Prioritize park acquisition in areas with the greatest need, including
                           the northern expansion of Grape Day Park, and in urban areas within
                           a reasonable walking distance from transit.
                           PARKS AND RECREATION IMPLEMENTATION POLICIES:
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.11
                           Undertake a parks acquisition and improvement program to accom-
                           modate future growth needs.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.12
                           Maintain existing and pursue additional agreements with Escondido
                           school districts that enable city residents to jointly use school facilities
                           for recreational purposes.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.13
                           Periodically review and revise park development fees to assure that
                           they adequately cover acquisition and development costs.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.14
                           Consider requiring new non-residential uses to contribute park
                           development fees, as permitted and consistent with State nexus
                           legislation.
                           Parks and Recreation Policy 2.15
                           Periodically review and modify funding sources to assure their
    Escondido’s Dixon Lake adequacy to cover the maintenance of parks.
           (above)
    Escondido Floor Hockey
      Recreation Program
Page V-20                            Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

REGIONAL FACILITIES POLICIES:
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.16
Assist in the coordinated planning, development, and maintenance of
unique regional amenities within and adjacent to the community,
including Kit Carson Park, Daley Ranch, Lake Wohlford Regional
Park, Lake Dixon Regional Park, San Dieguito River Valley Park and
Felicita County Park.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.17
Improve Escondido Creek Trail as a linear park with amenities
including but not limited to: shade and turf areas, community gardens,
seating areas, exercise courses, and access to adjacent park and
recreation facilities.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.18
Provide opportunities in Regional Parks for active and passive
recreation offered in smaller Urban, Neighborhood and Commu-
nity Parks as appropriate.
RECREATIONAL PROGRAMING POLICIES:
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.19
Consult with residents to obtain input on park and recreational facility
and program needs.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.20
Provide public and support private recreational programs that serve
residents of all ages, backgrounds, and interests.
NEW PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT POLICIES:
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.21
Evaluate all development proposals larger than 5 acres for appro-
priateness of public park land dedication.
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.22
Consider private dedication of land for use as a public park as part of
a planned development, if the proposed site meets city criteria.
                                                                         Escondido Recreation Program
                                                                                   (above)
Parks and Recreation Policy 2.23
Permit the redistribution and clustering of development that would
otherwise have been built on a proposed park site within a planned       Escondido’s Farmers’ Market
development contingent on city standards.                                     on Grand Avenue
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                       Page V-21

                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.24
                             Consolidate new development onsite to accommodate parkland that is
                             accessible to the public.
                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.25
                             Require park or recreation facilities constructed as part of a private
                             development and intended solely for use by its residents to be
                             considered a private park.
                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.26
                             Consider alternate uses of public and private golf courses.
                             SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES:
                             Parks and Recreation Policy 2.27
                             Incorporate energy and water efficient land development and
                             maintenance practices, including the use of drought tolerant
                             landscaping and reclaimed irrigation, in the design, development and
                             operation of public parks and open space areas as appropriate.
                             3. Library Services Policies
                             GOAL 3: An educated and informed citizenry through life-
                                          long learning opportunities and dissemination of
                                          information.
                             Library Services Policy 3.1
                             Regularly review and update, as necessary, a library master plan and
                             implement the plan to the extent economically feasible.
                             Library Services Policy 3.2
                             Provide and maintain the following library facilities and services
                             standards, where feasible:
                             a) A floor area of 1.6 square feet of library facilities per dwelling
                                 unit or 0.6 square feet per capita of the City of Escondido;
                             b) A ratio of three (3) public library staff per 8,000 residents or 2,300
                                 dwelling units of the City of Escondido, including one librarian
                                 plus two paraprofessional staff within this staffing ratio;
                             c) A ratio of total items in the Escondido library inventory of 2.0
                                 items per capita of Escondido; and
                             d) A ratio of one public access computer per 1,500 residents, or
                                 sufficient public access computers to meet an average wait time
    Escondido Public Library     of no more than 15 minutes, whichever is less.
    Downtown Main Facility
Page V-22                             Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services
Library Services Policy 3.3
Concentrate resources on improving and maintaining adequate                           Figure V-12
staffing; inventory of print; media and computer resources; and                Library Definitions:
community library services and programs for all residents. Review
periodically to ensure adequacy.                                        Unduplicated Hours:
                                                                        Facility hours open to the public that
Library Services Policy 3.4                                             do not overlap, whether in one or
Strive to keep libraries open at least 60 unduplicated hours per week,  more locations.
supplemented by virtual accessibility to library collections and
resources at all times where technically feasible (Figure V-12).        Virtual Accessibility:
                                                                        Information resources accessed via
Library Services Policy 3.5                                             the library web site available on-line
Maintain libraries to be conveniently accessible to pedestrians, public 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
transit, and other modes of transportation.
Library Services Policy 3.6
Provide library facilities and programs appropriate for all members of
the community and include services for those who cannot con-
veniently physically access a library.
Library Services Policy 3.7
Consider incorporating other uses such as parks, schools, business
districts, and coffee shops with library facilities.
4. Cultural Enrichment Policies
GOAL 4: Enhanced quality of life for all residents through
             the cultural arts.
Cultural Arts Policy 4.1
Promote a wide range of styles, materials, and types of public art in
municipal locations accessible to the public, as well as at key
entrances to the city and downtown area to serve as suitable
landmarks and entry features, and to reinforce municipal locations as
focal points of social interaction and visual interest.
Cultural Arts Policy 4.2
Encourage the use of publicly owned facilities and spaces for the
display of local art and for other artistic and cultural events.
                                                                                    Student Recital
Cultural Arts Policy 4.3                                                       Escondido Main Library
Maintain guidelines for the placement of art works that considers                      (above)
public visibility, public safety, and community enjoyment.
                                                                             Escondido Museum Gallery
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                            Page V-23
                                 Cultural Arts Policy 4.4
                                 Require developers to provide art pieces or pay fees that can
                                 embellish/maintain an individual project as well as contribute to the
                                 appearance and vitality of the community.
                                 5. Schools and Education Policies
                                 GOAL 5: An educated and informed citizenry through qual-
                                              ity education and lifelong learning opportunities.
                                 Schools and Education Policy 5.1
                                 Encourage school districts’ efforts to accommodate sufficient teacher
                                 to student ratios with student attendance calculated on traditional
                                 school schedules.
                                 Schools and Education Policy 5.2
                                 Include school districts in review of residential development appli-
                                 cations to determine if there will be changes in enrollment, and if
                                 these changes are consistent with districts’ long-range master plans.
                                 Schools and Education Policy 5.3
                                 Include school districts in the review of development proposals larger
                                 than 10 acres to determine the potential suitability of school sites.
                                 Work with school districts in their efforts to acquire potential sites for
                                 school development.
                                 Schools and Education Policy 5.4
                                 Work with school districts to locate facilities based on each school
                                 district’s criteria, school siting guidelines of the State, and the city’s
                                 following location guidelines:
                                 a) Centrally located within or adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
                                 b) Located an appropriate distance from potential natural and man-
                                     made hazards such as in floodplains and electric facilities.
                                 c) Conveniently and safely accessible by pedestrians, bicyclists, and
                                     transit users.
                                 d) Located away from heavy traffic, excessive noise, and incom-
                                     patible uses.
                                 e) School drop off locations that are compatible with existing
    San Pasqual High School          residential neighborhoods.
  Escondido High School District
              (above)
                                 Schools and Education Policy 5.5
                                 Work with school districts to explore the use of existing smaller sites
                                 in urban areas to accommodate lower enrollments and/or higher
    California State University, intensity facilities (multi-story buildings, underground parking, and
            San Marcos           playgrounds on roofs, etc.).
Page V-24                                  Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

Schools and Education Policy 5.6
Promote joint use of playgrounds, ball fields, and other recreational
facilities at school sites, and provide open space and trail linkages
between schools and residential neighborhoods to promote joint use.
Schools and Education Policy 5.7
Inform school districts of growth plans and capital improvement
projects when feasible to enable districts to accordingly plan for
future growth.
Schools and Education Policy 5.8
Periodically provide city demographic data to school districts to assist
in their master planning efforts.
Schools and Education Policy 5.9
Work with school districts and participate in programs that promote
student safety.
Schools and Education Policy 5.10
Promote energy and water efficient land development practices,
including the use of drought tolerant landscaping and reclaimed
irrigation, in the design, development, and operation of school
facilities as appropriate.
Schools and Education Policy 5.11
Promote East Valley Parkway as an area to locate higher education,
career development, and vocational training facilities that provide
additional opportunities for residents to enhance their job skills.
Schools and Education Policy 5.12
Promote partnerships and programs between the city, school districts
and business community aimed at enhancing students’ options for
seeking a college/university education or vocational training.
Schools and Education Policy 5.13
Encourage higher education institutions to strengthen their links with
local K–12 school districts to facilitate the transfer of students into
these institutions.
Schools and Education Policy 5.14
Cooperate with systems of higher education to explore the future
possibility of a multi-university campus.
Schools and Education Policy 5.15
Encourage and support the development, expansion, and upgrade of
                                                                          Palomar College,
higher education facilities such as the Palomar Colleges, California
                                                                         Escondido campus
State University San Marcos, and private universities.
 Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                 Page V-25

                              Schools and Education Policy 5.16
                              Support the growth of research and development businesses and
                              organizations associated with universities that enhance the education
                              and diversity of Escondido.
                              6. Civic Engagement Policies
                              GOAL 6: An engaged and informed citizenry with influence
                                           on policies and decisions at the local, state, and
                                           federal levels.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.1
                              Provide for the full inclusion of people of diverse cultures,
                              backgrounds, age, gender, interests, languages, lifestyles, abilities,
                              and socioeconomic status in programs at city facilities.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.2
                              Promote recreation and library programming, special events and
                              venues, and educational opportunities which honor, interpret, and
                              celebrate the diversity, history, cultural heritage, and traditions of
                              Escondido.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.3
                              Encourage citizen volunteerism and participation in city events,
                              commissions, boards and committees.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.4
                              Support developers’ efforts to initiate early and frequent communi-
                              cation with the community regarding project proposals.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.5
                              Collaborate with neighborhood associations and other similar organ-
                              izations to address issues of concern in neighborhoods.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.6
                              Promote efforts that increase rates of participation in community
                              events such as voting, youth activities, adult education, senior
                              activities and family-oriented programs.
                              Civic Engagement Policy 6.7
                              Distribute information about community events to a wide range of
                              community organizations such as churches, senior facilities, and
                              schools using existing city-sponsored platforms (e.g., city website and
    Escondido General Plan    public access television).
  Citizens’ Committee Meeting
Page V-26                               Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

7. Childcare Policies
                                                                                           Figure V-13
GOAL 7: Convenient and accessible childcare facilities for                         Family Day Care
            all residents.                                                             Definitions:*
Childcare Policy 7.1                                                       Family Day Care:
Allow small family day care facilities in all residential zones as a       Regularly provides care, protection
                                                                           and supervision of fourteen (14) or
permitted use consistent with state law and local provisions.
                                                                           fewer children in the provider’s home,
                                                                           for periods of less than twenty-four
Childcare Policy 7.2                                                       (24) hours per day, while the parents
Allow large family day care facilities in all residential, commercial      or guardians are away.
and professional zoning districts as a conditional use except where
permitted by right pursuant to state law.                                  Small Family Day Care:
                                                                           A home that provides family day care
Childcare Policy 7.3                                                       for eight (8) or fewer children, including
Prohibit family day care facilities in industrial zones due to potentially children who reside at the home
hazardous conditions.                                                      Large Family Day Care:
                                                                           A home that provides family day care
Childcare Policy 7.4                                                       for nine (9) to fourteen (14) children,
Allow conveniently accessible childcare facilities near transit stops,     inclusive, including children who reside
schools, and parks, and within master-planned developments.                at the home
Childcare Policy 7.5                                                       *Note: All family day care facilities
Support the use of public facilities, schools, churches, and space         require a state license to operate.
within other organizations to accommodate childcare facilities.            Definitions are based on state law and
                                                                           are subject to change.
Childcare Policy 7.6
Encourage large employers to include childcare facilities on-site as
appropriate.
8. Older Adult, Disabled and Disadvantaged Services
    Policies
GOAL 8: Adequate facilities and accessible services to meet
            the needs of older adults, disabled, and disadvan-
            taged persons.
Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.1
Allow adult care facilities in all residential zones as a permitted use
consistent with state law and local provisions.
Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.2
Prohibit adult care facilities in industrial zones due to potentially
hazardous conditions.
Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services                                                  Page V-27

                                          Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.3
                Figure V-14               Support the use of public facilities, schools, churches, and space
     Adult Residential Care               within other organizations to accommodate services for older,
             Definitions:*                disabled and/or disadvantaged residents.
Adult Residential Facility:               Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.4
Facilities that provide 24-hour non-      Encourage owners and operators of public, non-profit, and private
medical care for physically handicap-     facilities, particularly those related to health and human services, to
ped, developmentally disabled, and /      develop or incorporate facilities and services for older adults,
or mentally disabled adults ages 18       disabled, and disadvantaged residents.
through 59, who are unable to pro-
vide for their own daily needs.           Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.5
Community Care Facility:                  Work with the County Health and Human Services Department to site
Provides 24-hour non-medical resi-        facilities that meet basic needs of the city’s senior, disabled, and
dential care to children and adults       disadvantaged resident population such as access to healthcare,
with developmental disabilities in        transit, housing, and also supportive services such as volunteer
need of personal services, super-         opportunities, mentorship, outreach, legal advice, advocacy, and case
vision, and/or assistance essential       management.
for self-protection or sustaining the
activities of daily living.               Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.6
                                          Work with appropriate agencies to address the community safety and
Elderly Residential Care Facility:
                                          personal protection of older adults, disabled and disadvantaged
Provides services to persons 60
years of age and over (and persons        residents.
under 60 with compatible needs).
May also be known as “assisted            Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.7
living facilities,” “retirement homes,”   Encourage the use of older adults as volunteer resources and partner
and “board and care homes.”               with other agencies to provide mutually beneficial educational and
                                          volunteer opportunities.
Small Care Facility:
A home that provides care for six (6)     Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.8
or fewer adults.                          Encourage the coordination and monitoring of the community’s
Large Care Facility:                      progress in identifying and meeting the needs of older, disabled, and
A home that provides care for seven       disadvantaged residents based on possible risk factors such as, but not
(7) or more adults.                       limited to: living status, income level, health status, ethnicity, and
                                          level of mobility.
*Note: There are several types of
residential care facilities, all of which Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.9
are not defined above. Definitions are
                                          Cooperate with appropriate institutions and agencies who provide job
based on state law and subject to
change. All residential care facilities
                                          opportunities for the economically, physically, and socially dis-
require a state license to operate.       advantaged.
                                          Older Adult, Disabled, Disadvantaged Services Policy 8.10
                                          Support institutions and agencies that assist and provide necessary
                                          services for older adults who desire to “age in place.”
 Page V-28                                          Escondido General Plan Community Health and Services

